Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume IX, International Development and Economic Defense Policy; Commodities (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1997)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1964-68v09).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

International Development and Economic Defense Policy; Commodities (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume IX)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968

Volume IX

International Development and Economic Defense Policy; Commodities

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

International Development and Economic Defense Policy; Commodities (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume IX)Contents

Preface

Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

International Development and Economic Defense Policy; CommoditiesForeign Assistance Policy (Documents 1-84)

International Investment and Development Policy (Documents 85-147)

Economic Defense Policy (Documents 148-196)

Commodities and Strategic Materials (Documents 197-379)

Index

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series. This documentary editing proceeds in full accord with the generally accepted standards of historical scholarship. Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.

A new statutory charter for the preparation of the series was established by Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by President George Bush on October 28, 1991. Section 198 of P.L. 102–138 added a new Title IV to the Department of State's Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 USC 4351, et seq.).

The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity. The volumes of the series should include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation of major foreign policy decisions and actions of the United States Government. The statute also confirms the editing principles established by Secretary Kellogg: the Foreign Relations series is guided by the principles of historical objectivity and accuracy; records should not be altered or deletions made without indicating in the published text that a deletion has been made; the published record should omit no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision; and nothing should be omitted for the purposes of concealing a defect in policy. The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded. The editor is convinced that this volume, which was compiled in 1993, meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing.

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series

This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the 5 years (1964–1968) of the administration of Lyndon B. Johnson. The subseries presents in 34 volumes a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of President Johnson's administration. This volume presents the documentary record of U.S. policies toward foreign assistance, international investment and development, economic defense, and strategic materials and commodities.

This volume is one of two documenting the foreign economic policies of the Johnson administration. The other, volume VIII, covers financial and monetary policy as well as trade and commercial policy.

Principles of Document Selection for the Foreign Relations Series

In preparing each volume of the Foreign Relations series, the editors are guided by some general principles for the selection of documents. Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary.

The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series. Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation. The editors also tend to apply these selection criteria in accordance with their own interpretation of the generally accepted standards of scholarship. In selecting documentation for publication, the editors gave priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records (which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes).

Selection Criteria (in general order of priority): 1. Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States;

2. Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted;

3. The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy;

4. The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members;

5. The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies;

6. Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between U.S. representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues;

7. Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State;

8. Major foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community or other branches of government made without the involvement (or even knowledge) of the White House or the Department of State;

9. The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of U.S. foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major U.S. policies, including relevant National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates as may be declassified;

10. The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions;

11. Economic aspects of foreign policy;

12. The main policy lines of U.S. military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance;

13. The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major U.S. foreign policies;

14. Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes.

Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, Volume IX

The editors of this volume have attempted to provide comprehensive documentary coverage of several major issues of foreign economic policy confronting the Johnson administration. A “major issue“ is a foreign economic policy or problem that received high-level attention within the U.S. Government, in particular, from the President, key White House aides, or Cabinet-level officials, and/or had long-range repercussions for U.S. foreign policy and interests. Although it was impossible to include the details of U.S. policy on every foreign economic issue, documentation has been included that delineates the basic U.S. policies toward the subjects in question.

The primary focus of the documents in this volume is on the foreign policymaking process of the U.S. Government, including documentation illuminating policy formulation and major aspects and repercussions of its execution. Emphasis is placed on official memoranda that reveal policy positions, show differences within the U.S. Government over policy formulation, summarize developments and positions regarding an issue, and describe actions taken at the National Security Council and decisions by the President.

The editors selected only the most important reports from diplomatic posts, particularly those containing records of multilateral international conferences on economic subjects and significant conversations held with foreign leaders and their diplomatic representatives on economic issues. Details of military and economic assistance programs for specific nations or their implementation are not included.

The major topics and issues the editors sought to cover in volume IX are as follows: 1. Struggle for foreign economic and military assistance funding with Congress.

2. Initiatives on private investment in international development.

3. Promotion of U.S. international development goals in multilateral forums.

4. Growing attention given to the world food crisis.

5. Disposal of the surplus of the U.S. stockpile of strategic materials.

6. Efforts to negotiate multilateral agreements regarding international trade in agricultural commodities.

7. Interagency debate over liberalization of U.S. trade control criteria vis-á-vis the Sino-Soviet bloc.

Documentation on petroleum is scheduled for publication in volume XXXIV.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings. Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography. A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume. Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected. Other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Words or phrases underlined in the source text are printed in italics. Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.

Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate omitted text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place. The amount of material omitted from this volume because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated. All brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The first footnote to each document indicates the document's source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and, if so, this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.

Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation

The Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation, established under the Foreign Relations statute, reviews records, advises, and makes recommendations concerning the Foreign Relations series. The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series. Although the Advisory Committee does not attempt to review the contents of individual volumes in the series, it does monitor the overall process and makes recommendations on particular problems that come to its attention.

The Advisory Committee did not review this volume.

Declassification Review

The final declassification review of this volume, which was completed in 1996, resulted in the decision to withhold small portions of 2 of the 379 documents originally selected for publication. No documents were denied in full. The remaining documentation provides an account of the international development and economic defense policy and policy toward strategic resources and commodities of the U.S. Government during this period.

The former Division of Historical Documents Review of the Office of Freedom of Information, Privacy, and Classification Review, Bureau of Administration, Department of State, conducted the declassification review of the documents published in this volume. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information and applicable laws, which was superseded by Executive Order 12958 on April 20, 1995.

Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the following categories, and the disclosure of which reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security, requires classification: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; or

9) a confidential source.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and the appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments.

Acknowledgments

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the Lyndon B. Johnson Library of the National Archives and Records Administration, in particular David C. Humphrey and Regina Greenwell, and other officials of specialized repositories who assisted in the collection of documents for this volume.

David S. Patterson, Evan Duncan, and Carolyn B. Yee, with the assistance of Jeffrey A. Soukup, collected, selected, and edited the volume, under the general supervision of former General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie. Bruce Duncombe performed additional research and review under the guidance of David S. Patterson. The editors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Francis M. Bator, President Johnson's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs, who reviewed this volume before publication. Rita M. Baker and Vicki E. Futscher did the copy and technical editing. Paul Zohav prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian Bureau of Public Affairs

September 1997

Sources Sources

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The Foreign Relations statute requires that the published record in the Foreign Relations series include all records needed to provide comprehensive documentation on major foreign policy decisions and actions of the U.S. Government. It further requires that government agencies, departments, and other entities of the U.S. Government cooperate with the Department of State Historian by providing full and complete access to records pertinent to foreign policy decisions and actions and by providing copies of selected records. The editors believe that in terms of access this volume was prepared in accordance with the standards and mandates of this statute.

The editors had complete access to all the retired records and papers of the Department of State: the central files of the Department; the special decentralized files (“ lot files”) of the Department at the bureau, office, and division levels; the files of the Department's Executive Secretariat, which contain the records of international conferences and high-level official visits, correspondence with foreign leaders by the President and Secretary of State, and memoranda of conversations between the President and Secretary of State and foreign officials; and the files of overseas diplomatic posts. When this volume was compiled, all Department of State records consulted were still under the custody of the Department, and the footnotes citing Department of State files suggest that the Department is the repository. By the time of publication, however, all the Department's indexed central (or decimal) files for these years were permanently transferred to the National Archives and Records Administration (Archives II) at College Park, Maryland. Many of the Department's decentralized office (or lot) files covering this period, which the National Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, will also be transferred from the Department's custody to Archives II over the next several years.

The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of President Johnson and other White House foreign policy records. Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from the Department of State and other Federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The Department of State arranged for access to the many audiotapes of President Johnson's telephone conversations that are held at the Johnson Library. The first audiotapes became available to the editors in late 1994, with most audiotapes following during 1995 and 1996. Although compilation of the volume had already been completed, the editors added references to and summaries of selected transcripts of the President's relevant telephone conversations to this volume in the final stages of review. The summaries, including quoted extracts from the audiotapes, were prepared in the Office of the Historian specifically for this volume.

Department of State historians also have access to records of the Department of Defense, particularly the records of the Secretaries of Defense and their major assistants.

All of this documentation has been made available for use in the Foreign Relations series thanks to the consent of these agencies, the assistance of their staffs, and especially the cooperation and support of the National Archives and Records Administration.

Unpublished Sources

Department of State Central Files: A major source of documentation for this volume was the Central Files of the Department of State. Many of the documents were selected from the following files: AGR: Agriculture (General)

AGR 1: General Policy, Plans

AGR 1 US: General U.S. Policy, Plans

AGR 1 EEC: General EEC Policy, Plans

AGR 3: Organizations and Conferences

AGR 3 FAO: Foreign Agriculture Organization

AID 1: General Policy, Plans

AID 1–1: Presidential Determinations

AID 2: General Reports and Statistics

AID 4: Agreements

AID 5: Laws and Regulations

AID 15: P.L. 480; Food for Peace program

AID 15–1: P.L. 480; Food for Peace program; policy, plans

AID (IDA): International Development Association

AID (OECD) 8: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; grants and technical assistance

AID (US): General U.S. aid policy

AID (US) 15–10: Voluntary agencies; Title III

AV 12–2 S AFR: Aviation (civil); purchase by, sale, or transfer to South Africa

DEF 1–2 US: U.S. stockpiling of strategic and critical materials

DEF 6–8 US/NATO: Defense affairs between the U.S. and NATO; mobilization of armed forces

DEF 19–3: Military assistance

DEF 19–4: Agreements

DEF 19–6: Communist bloc assistance

FT EUR E US: Foreign trade between Eastern Europe and the U.S.

INCO 10 UN,: UN resources and development

INCO–COCOA 3: Cocoa organizations and conferences

INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD: UNCTAD cocoa organizations and conferences

INCO–COCOA 4: Cocoa agreements

INCO–COFFEE: Coffee organizations and commodities

INCO–COFFEE 3: Coffee organizations and conferences

INCO–COFFEE 4: Coffee agreements

INCO–COTTON: Cotton industry and commodities

INCO–COTTON EEC: EEC cotton industry and commodities

INCO–COTTON GATT: GATT cotton industry and commodities

INCO–COTTON PERU: Peru cotton industry and commodities

INCO–COTTON 3 GATT: GATT cotton organizations and conferences

INCO–COTTON 4 GATT: GATT cotton agreements

INCO–COTTON 17 UAR-US: Trade of cotton between the UAR and the U.S.

INCO–COTTON 17 US: U.S. cotton trade

INCO–COTTON US–INDIA: Trade of cotton between India and the U.S.

INCO–FATS EEC: EEC fats and oils industry and commodities

INCO–FRUITS EEC: EEC fruits industry and commodities

INCO–GRAINS EEC: EEC grains industry and commodities

INCO–GRAINS GATT: GATT grains industry and commodities

INCO–GRAINS UK: U.K. grains industry and commodities

INCO–GRAINS UK-US: Grains industry and commodities between the U.K. and the U.S.

INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US: Grains agreements between the U.K. and the U.S.

INCO–GRAINS 17 UK-US: Trade of grains between the U.K. and the U.S.

INCO POULTRY: Poultry industry and commodities

INCO POULTRY US: U.S. poultry industry and commodities

INCO POULTRY EEC: EEC poultry industry and commodities

INCO POULTRY GATT: GATT poultry industry and commodities

INCO–POULTRY 17 EEC: EEC poultry trade

INCO–SUGAR 3: Sugar organizations and conferences

INCO–SUGAR 4: Sugar agreements

INCO–SUGAR 4 US: U.S. sugar agreements

INCO–WHEAT GATT: GATT wheat

INCO–WHEAT 3: Wheat organizations and conferences

INCO–WHEAT 4: Wheat agreements

INCO–WOOL: Wool industry and commodities

INCO–WOOL IT: Wool industry and commodities of Italy

INCO–WOOL UK: Wool industry and commodities of the U.K.

INCO–WOOL US: Wool industry and commodities of the U.S.

INCO–WOOL 3: Wool organizations and conferences

INCO–WOOL 4: Wool trade agreements

INCO–WOOL 4 GATT: Wool GATT agreements

INCO–WOOL 17: Wool trade

INCO–WOOL 17 US: U.S. wool trade

INCO–WOOL 17 US–IT: Wool trade between the U.S. and Italy

INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN: Wool trade between the U.S. and Japan

INCO–WOOL 17 US–UK: Wool trade between the U.S. and the U.K.

OECD 3: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

OECD 8–4: OECD agreements and treaties; economic conditions

STR 1: General strategic trade control policy

STR 1 US: U.S. strategic trade control policy

STR 1: General strategic trade control policy

STR 4: Economic Defense Advisory Committee

STR 5: Export control regulations and procedures

STR 6–3: Presidential Determinations

STR 7: Shipments of U.S. goods

STR 7–1: Transaction checks

STR 7–1 UK: Transaction checks with the U.K.

STR 7–1 IT: Transaction checks with Italy

STR 7–2: Technical data controls

STR 12–3: Swedish shipment of non-U.S. origin goods

STR 13–1: Consultative Group operations, meetings, and actions

STR 14–1: International List I exceptions

STR 14–2: International List I reports

TEL 9: Television

TEL 9 USSR: Soviet television

TP 7–1: Visits by U.S. citizens

Lot Files: Documents from the central files have been supplemented by materials from decentralized office files, the lot files of the Department of State. A list of the lot files used or consulted follows: Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272 Files of Under Secretary of State George Ball, 1961–1967

Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110 Collection of documentation on international conferences abroad attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, May 1961–December 1964

Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347 Collection of documentation on international conferences abroad attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, 1967

Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305 Collection of documentation on international conferences abroad attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, January–October 1966

Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586 Collection of documentation on international conferences abroad attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, October 1966–May 1967

Conference Files: Lot 68 D 453 Collection of documentation on international conferences abroad attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, May 1967–January 1968

EB/ICD/FTD Files: Lot 73 D 183 Files of the Fibers and Textiles Division, Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs, 1964–1972

EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462 Files of the Tropical Products Division, Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs, pertaining to sugar, 1961–1968

EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 78 D 52 Files of the Tropical Products Division, Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs, pertaining to cocoa, 1963–1974

EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 79 D 354 Files of the Tropical Products Division, Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs, pertaining to coffee, 1962–1975

Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 Memoranda of the Secretary of State's and Under Secretary of State's conversations for the years 1961–1964, maintained by the Executive Secretariat

S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199 Files of the Policy Planning Council, 1963–1964

S/S Files: Lot 70 D 217 White House and executive departments' memoranda and letters to the Secretary of State and Under Secretary of State for the years 1963–1966

S/S Files: Lot 72 D 192 Files of Secretary of State Rusk, 1961–1969

S/S Files: Lot 74 D 272 Files of Under Secretary of State George W. Ball, 1961–1969

S/S–NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265 Master set of papers pertaining to National Security Council meetings, including policy papers, position papers, and administrative documents, 1961–1966

S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master file of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs), 1961–1968

S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 318 Files of the National Security Council, 1966–1968

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland Record Group 40, Records of the Department of Commerce Office of the Under Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 68 A 5947 Executive Secretariat files, 1963–1964

Record Group 59, Records of the Department of State E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248 Lot 70 D 467: Master set of the Department of State classified internal publication Current Economic Developments, 1945–1969, and Bureau of Economic Affairs Staff Minutes, 1965–1968

Record Group 286, Records of the Agency for International Development Advisory Committees on Foreign Aid: FRC 73 A 159 Miscellaneous papers relating to the advisory committees on foreign aid, 1966–1970

Advisory Committee on Foreign Aid: FRC 74 A 58 Miscellaneous documentation, 1966–1970

AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 1866 Executive Secretariat files, 1964–1965

AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 A 1866 Executive Secretariat files, 1965–1967

AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518 Executive Secretariat files, 1966–1969

DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922 Miscellaneous papers relating to the Development Assistance Committee, 1962–1968

Record Group 330, Records of the Department of Defense OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 306 Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1964

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546 Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1967

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4548 Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1959–1968

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 72 A 1498 Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1968

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 73 A 1345 Records of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1967–1973

OSD Files: FRC 69 A 926 Records of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their Special Assistants, 1963–1964

OSD Files: FRC 69 A 2317 Chronological files of Deputy Secretary of Defense Cyrus A. Vance, 1964–1967

OSD Files: FRC 70 A 4443 Records of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their Special Assistants, 1966.

OSD Files: FRC 71 A 6489 Records of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their Special Assistants, 1951–1966

OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468 Records of the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense and their Special Assistants, 1967.

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Massachusetts C. Douglas Dillon Papers

Christian A. Herter Papers

Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin, Texas Administrative Histories

Cabinet Papers

Confidential File Agency Reports

Meeting Notes File

National Security File Agency File

Committee File

Files of McGeorge Bundy

Files of Edward R. Fried

Files of Edward K. Hamilton

Files of Walt W. Rostow

Memos to the President

Name File

National Intelligence Estimates

National Security Action Memoranda

National Security Council Meetings

Subject File

Office Files of Ernest Goldstein

Papers of George W. Ball

Papers of Francis M. Bator

Papers of Anthony M. Solomon

President's Daily Diary

Recordings and Transcripts

Rusk's Appointment Books

Task Force Reports

White House Central Files Confidential Files

Published Sources

Note: The Department of State takes no responsibility for the accuracy of these publications nor does it endorse their interpretations.

De Vries, Margaret. The International Monetary Fund, 1966–1971: The System Under Stress, Vols. I and II (Washington: International Monetary Fund, 1976)

De Vries, Margaret G., and J. Keith Horsefield. The International Monetary Fund, 1945–1965; Twenty Years of International Monetary Cooperation, Vols. I, II, and III (Washington: International Monetary Fund, 1969)

Evans, John W. The Kennedy Round in American Trade Policy: The Twilight of the GATT? (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971)

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Basic Instruments and Selected Documents, Twelfth Supplement: Decisions, Reports, etc., of the Twenty-first Session (Geneva: The Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 1964)

Johnson, Lyndon B. Vantage Point: Perspectives of the Presidency, 1963–1969 (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971)

Office of the Special Trade Representative for Trade Negotiations. General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1964–1967 Trade Conference: Report on United States Negotiations, 2 Vols. (Washington: Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations, 1967–1968)

Rostow, W.W. The Diffusion of Power: An Essay in Recent History (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1972)

U.S. Congress. Hearings Before the Committee on Ways and Means House of Representatives, Ninetieth Congress, Second Session, on Trade Proposals, Parts I and II (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1969)

———. Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Foreign Economic Policy of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, Eighty-ninth Congress, Second Session, The Foreign Policy Aspects of the Kennedy Round (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1966)

U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office)

———. Department of State Bulletin, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office)

U.S. Department of the Treasury. Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the Finances for the Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office)

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968–69 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office)

List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations

A, Office of the Administrator, Agency for International Development; also airgram

AA, Office of the Assistant Administrator, Agency for International Development

ADP, Automated Data Processing

ADCOR, subject indicator for telegrams concerning aid coordination

ADELA, Atlantic Community Development Group for Latin America

AFI, Office of Inter-African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State

AFL, American Federation of Labor

AFR, Bureau for Africa, Agency for International Development

AID, Agency for International Development

AID/W, Agency for International Development/Washington

ASD, Assistant Secretary of Defense

BC, Berlin Conference

BDSA, Business and Defense Services Administration, Department of Commerce

BIAC, Business and Industry Advisory Committee (OECD)

BNA, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

BOB, Bureau of the Budget

BUSEC, series indicator for Department of State telegrams to the United States Mission to the European Community in Brussels

CA, circular airgram

CAS, controlled American source

CBA, Office of Commercial Affairs and Business Activities, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

CCC, Commodity Credit Corporation

CDF, Office of Capital Development and Finance, Bureau for Africa, Agency for International Development

Cedto, series indicator for telegrams from the United States Mission to European Regional Organizations in Paris to the Department of State

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIAP, Inter-American Committee of the Alliance for Progress

CID, Center for Industrial Development (United Nations)

CINC, Commander in Chief

CIO, Congress of Industrial Organizations

COCOM, Coordinating Committee for Export Controls

Comsec, secretary of commercial affairs (United States Foreign Service)

COMZEUR, Communication Zone/Europe, United States Army

CORDS, Civil Operations for Rural Development Support

CY, calendar year

D, Democrat

DAA, Deputy Assistant Administrator

DAC, Development Assistance Committee

DC, developed or developing country

Del, delegation

Deptel, Department telegram

DFPE, Office of Development Finance and Private Enterprise, Agency for International Development

DIF, Development Investment Fund

DL, Development Loan

DLF, Development Loan Fund

DNR, Daily News Record

DOD, Department of Defense

DREE, Department of Regional Economic Expansion (Canadian)

DTEC, an agency for aid coordination (Thailand)

E, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

EA, East Asian Affairs Section, Bureau of Far East Affairs, Department of State

ECON, Economic Section

ECOSOC, Economic and Social Council (United Nations)

ECRB, Export Control Review Board

EDF, European Development Fund

EDO, Economic Defense Officer

EEC, European Economic Community

EFTA, European Free Trade Association

EIB, European Investment Bank

ELS, extra long staple cotton

ENGR, Office of Engineering, Agency for International Development

EPTA, Expanded Program of Technical Assistance

ETA, estimated time of arrival

EUCOM, European Command

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

EWT, East-West Trade Division, Office of International Trade Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

EXCON, subject code for telegrams dealing with export controls

FAA, Foreign Assistance Act

FAC, Office of the Deputy Coordinator for Foreign Assistance, Office of the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization (United Nations)

FAS, Foreign Agricultural Service (Department of Agriculture)

FD, Foodstuffs Division, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

FE, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Fodag, series indicator for telegrams to the United States representative to the Food and Agriculture Organization

FonMin, Foreign Minister

FRG, Federal Republic of Germany

FSO, Fund for Special Operations, Inter-American Development Bank

FTD, Fibers and Textiles Division, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

FWA, Free World Aid Division, Office of Presidential Commissions, Department of State

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

G, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, Department of State

G/PM, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Politico-Military Affairs, Department of State

GA, General Assembly of the United Nations

GAC, General Advisory Committee

GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GCP, General Commercial Policy Division, Office of International Trade, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

GE, General Electric

GNP, Gross National Product

GOA, Government of Australia

GOI, Government of India

GOJ, Government of Japan

GON, Government of the Netherlands; also Government of Norway

GOS, Government of Sweden

GRC, Government of the Republic of China

H, Bureau of Congressional Relations, Department of State

HCT, High Commission Territories

HLM, high-level meeting

HMG, Her Majesty's Government

IADB, Inter-American Development Bank

IAEA, International Atomic Energy Agency

IBM, International Business Machines (Incorporated)

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

ICAC, International Cotton Advisory Committee

ICD, Office of International Commodities, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

ICSU, International Council of Scientific Unions

ICVA, International Council of Voluntary Agencies

ID, institutional development; also Office of Institutional Development, Bureau of African Affairs, Agency for International Development

IDA, International Development Association

IDB, Inter-American Development Bank

IDTH, Industrial Development, Transportation and Housing Service, Agency for International Development

IFC, International Finance Corporation

IMCO, Intergovernment Maritime Consultative Organization of the United Nations

IMF, International Monetary Fund

ISA, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

ISC, International Sugar Council

ITP, Office of International Trade Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

IWA, International Wheat Agreement

J, Office of Japanese Affairs, Office of East Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

KR, Kennedy Round

LA, Latin America

LDC, less developed country

LT, long ton

LTA, Long-Term Arrangement

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MdS, Montant de Soutien

MFN, most favored nation

MinAg, Minister of Agriculture

MITI, Ministry of International Trade and Industry (Japan)

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NATUS, series indicator for Department of State telegrams to the United States Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Brussels

NOA, New Obligation Authority

NESA, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Agency for International Development

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSC, National Security Council

NTSC, National Television Systems Committee

OAS, Organization of American States

OAU, Organization of African Unity

OECD, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

OEEC, Organization for European Economic Cooperation

OEP, Office of Emergency Planning (White House)

OR, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

OT, Office of International Trade, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

PC, Office of Program Coordination, Agency for International Development; Presidential Commission, Department of State; and Participating Country

PI, Private Investment Division, Office of Development Finance and Private Enterprise, Agency for International Development

PL, Public Law

POL, political section of U.S. Embassies

PPD, Policy Planning Division, Office of Program Coordination, Agency for International Development

PSAC, President's Science Advisory Committee

RA, Office of Research and Analysis, Office of Technical Cooperation and Research, Agency for International Development

RCA, Radio Corporation of America

REP, Foreign Reporting Staff, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

RPE, Office of Atlantic Political and Economic Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

RPL, replenishment

S, Office of the Secretary, Department of State

S/P, Policy Planning Council, Department of State

SA, security assistance

SEA, Southeast Asia; also Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

SecGen, Secretary General

SECAM, Sequential Colour Avec Memoire (sequential color with memory); French color television broadcast standards system

SFRC, Senate Foreign Relations Committee

SGS, Societa Generale Semiconduttori (General Semiconductor Society, an Italian firm)

SID, Society for International Development

SOA, Office of South Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near East and Asian Affairs

SOV, Office of Soviet Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

SPA, Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Agency for International Development

SPTF, Social Progress Trust Fund (of the IADB)

ST, Office of Strategic Controls, United States Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Brussels

STR, Office of the Special Trade Representative

SYG, Secretary General of the United Nations

TA, Trade Agreements Division, Office of International Trade, Office International Trade Policy and Economic Development, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State; also, technical assistance

TAGG, series indicator for telegrams to the U.S. delegation to GATT sessions

TC, Technical Cooperation

TCR, Office of Technical Cooperation and Research, Agency for International Development

TEC, Trade Executive Committee

Toced, series indicator for Department of State telegrams to the United States Mission to European Regional Organizations in Paris

TR–4, a sophisticated TV signal recorder manufactured by RCA

TR–22, a sophisticated TV signal recorder manufactured by RCA

TRP, Tropical Products Division, Office of International Commodities, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

TSC, Trade Staff Committee, Department of State

TSUS, Tariff Schedules of the United States

TVA, Tennessee Valley Authority

UAM, Union Africaine et Malgache (Afro-Malagasy Union)

UAR, United Arab Republics

UK, United Kingdom

UN, United Nations

UNCITRAL, United Nations Commission on International Trade Law

UNCTAD, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

UNIDO, United Nations Industrial Development Organization

UNOID, United Nations Organization for Industrial Development

USA, United States Army

USAFE, United States Air Force in Europe

USDA, United States Department of Agriculture

USEC, United States Mission to the European Community

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USOECD, United States Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

USRO, United States Mission to European Regional Organizations

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

UST, United States Treaties and Other International Agreements

V–E, Victory in Europe

VHF, very high frequency

WFP, World Food Program (United Nations)

WG, Working Group

WHO, World Health Organization (United Nations)

WMO, World Meteorological Organization (United Nations)

WP, Working Party

WP–3, Third Working Party, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

WSG, William S. Gaud

WW, Wyndham White

List of Persons List of Persons

Ackley, Gardner H., Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers, from 1964

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State until September 30, 1966; Representative to the United Nations, June 26–September 25, 1968

Barnett, Robert W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Economic Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs

Barr, Joseph W., Under Secretary of the Treasury from April 29, 1965

Bator, Francis M., Senior Economic Adviser, Agency for International Development, until April 1964; Staff Member, National Security Council, April 1964–1965; Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, 1965–September 1, 1967

Bell, David E., Administrator, Agency for International Development, until July 31, 1966

Blumenthal, W. Michael, Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations

Bullitt, John C., Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs until December 1964

Bundy, McGeorge, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs until February 28, 1966

Bundy, William P., Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs

Califano, Joseph A., Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense 1964–1965; thereafter Special Assistant to the President

Callanan, Paul E., Economic Office, Foodstuffs Division, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, until August 28, 1965; thereafter Chief, Tropical Products Division, Office of International Resources

Castle, Barbara, British Minister of Overseas Development

Chenery, Hollis B., Assistant Administrator for Program, Office of Program Coordination, Agency for International Development, until November 1964

Christopher, Warren M., Special Representative of the Secretary of State and Chairman of the U.S. Wool Textile Mission, 1964–1965

Clifford, Clark M., Secretary of Defense from March 1, 1968

Coffin, Frank M., Representaive to the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

Connor, John T., Secretary of Commerce, December 16, 1964–January 7, 1967

De Gaulle, Charles, President of France

Debre, Michel, French Finance and Economic Affairs Minister, January 9, 1966–May 31, 1968; thereafter Foreign Minister

Dillon, C. Douglas, Secretary of the Treasury until April 1, 1965.

Ellington, Buford, Director of the Office of Emergency Planning and Preparedness, 1965–1966

Fowler, Henry H., Under Secretary of the Treasury until April 1, 1965; thereafter Secretary of the Treasury

Freeman, Orville L., Secretary of Agriculture

Fried, Edward R., member, Policy Planning Council, Department of State, until October 24, 1965; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Resource, Bureau of Economic Affairs, October 24, 1965–August 15, 1967; thereafter, staff member, National Security Council

Fulbright, J. William, Senator (D-Arkansas); Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Gaud, William S., Deputy Administrator, Agency for International Development, February 27, 1964–July 1966; Administrator from August 1, 1966

Giscard, Valery d'Estaing, French Finance Minister until January 8, 1966

Goldberg, Arthur J., Representative to the United Nations, July 28, 1965–June 24, 1968

Goldstein, E. Ernest, Special Assistant to the President from 1967

Gordon, Kermit, Director, Bureau of the Budget, until 1965

Greenwald, Joseph A., Director, Office of International Trade, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, until August 14, 1965; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy, Bureau of Economic Affairs

Hamilton, Edward R., member of the National Security Council Staff, September 1965–December 1968

Harriman, W. Averell, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until March 17, 1965; thereafter Ambassador at Large

Hedges, Irwin R., Agricultural Trade Representative, Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations, to June 1967; Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of the War on Hunger, Agency for International Development, from July 1967

Heinz, Luther C., Director of Military Assistance, International Security Affairs, Department of Defense, from January 1966

Herter, Christian A., Special Representative for Trade Negotiations until December 30, 1966

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs until March 15, 1964

Hodges, Luther H., Secretary of Commerce until December 1964

Holt, Harold E., Prime Minister of Australia from January 26, 1966

Hoopes, Townsend W., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1965–1968

Humphrey, Hubert H., Democratic Senator from Minnesota until December 29, 1964; Vice President of the United States from January 20, 1965

Ignatius, Paul R., Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), December 23, 1964–August 31, 1967

Jacobs, George R., Deputy Director, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, July 5, 1964–September 25, 1965; Director, September 26, 1965–July 1967; Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Resources (Food Policy), July 1967–February 1968; Deputy Assistant Secretary, February–August 1968

Jacobson, Jerome, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs until August 1965

Johnson, Charles E., member of the National Security Council Staff

Johnson, G. Griffith, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs until May 1, 1965

Johnson, Lyndon Baines, President of the United States

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until July 12, 1964; Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam, July 1964–September 1965; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, November 1, 1965–October 9, 1966; Ambassador to Japan from November 8, 1966

Katz, Julius L., Deputy Director, Office of International Trade, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, until July 1966; Director, Office of International Commodities, July 1966–August 1967; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Resources (Food Policy), Bureau of Economic Affairs

Katzenbach, Nicholas deB., Deputy Attorney General until February 13, 1965–October 3, 1966; thereafter Under Secretary of State

Knapp, Burke, Vice President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

Kohler, Foy D., Ambassador to the Soviet Union until November 14, 1966; Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, November 29, 1966–December 31, 1967

Komer, Robert W., member of the National Security Council Staff until September 1965; Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs, September 1965–March 1966; Special Assistant to the President, March 28, 1966–May 1967; Special Assistant to the President for Peaceful Reconstruction in Vietnam, May 1967–November 1968; Ambassador to Turkey from December 3, 1968

Kristensen, Thorkil, Secretary-General of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

Leddy, John M., Representative to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development until June 15, 1965; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Linder, Harold F., President and Chairman, Export-Import Bank

Love, James S., Deputy to the Secretary of Commerce for Textile Programs until 1966

MacArthur, Douglas, II, Ambassador to Belgium until February 11, 1965; Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations, March 14, 1965–March 6, 1967

McCone, John A., Director of Central Intelligence until April 28, 1965

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense until February 29, 1968; President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development from April 1, 1968

McNaughton, John T., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, July 1, 1964–July 19, 1967

McPherson, Harry C., Jr., Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and Cultural Affairs, August 23, 1964–August 14, 1965; thereafter Special Counsel to the President

Mann, Thomas C., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, January 3, 1964–March 17, 1965; Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, March 18, 1965–May 31, 1966

Mansfield, Mike, Senator (D-Montana)

Martin, Edwin M., Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs until January 2, 1964; Ambassador to Argentina, January 29–January 5, 1968; thereafter Chairman of the Development Assistance Committee, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

Miller, J. Irwin, Chairman of the President's Special Committee on Trade Relations with East European Countries and the Soviet Union, February–May 1965

Mondale, Walter F., Senator (D-Minnesota)

Murphy, Charles S., Under Secretary of Agriculture until 1965

Nehmer, Stanley, Director, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, September 27, 1964–August 28, 1965; Director, Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs, August 29–September 11, 1965; thereafter Deputy Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Resources

Nitze, Paul H., Secretary of the Navy until June 30, 1967; thereafter Deputy Secretary of Defense

Palmer, Joseph II, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs from April 11, 1966

Passman, Otto E., Representative (D-Louisana)

Perkins, James A., President of Cornell University; Chairman of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs

Poats, Rutherford M., Assistant Administrator for Far East, Agency for International Development, April 1964–May 1967; thereafter Deputy Administrator

Prebish, Raul, Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

Read, Benjamin H., Executive Secretary of the Department of State

Rostow, Eugene V., Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs from October 14, 1966

Rostow, Walt Whitman, Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State, until March 31, 1966; Special Assistant to the President from April 1, 1966

Roth, William M., Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations until March 24, 1967; thereafter Special Representative

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State

Sanderson, Fred H., Chief, Foodstuffs Division, Office of International Resources, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, until February 1965; Chief, Temperate Products Division, Office of International Resources, February 1965–May 1967; thereafter Director, Office of Food Policy and Programs, Bureau of Economic Affairs

Saxe, Jo W., Associate Assistant Administrator for Multilateral Aid Programs, Office of Program Coordination, Agency for International Development

Schaetzel, J. Robert, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Atlantic Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, until September 1966; Representative to the European Economic Community from September 16, 1966

Schnittker, John A., Under Secretary of Agriculture from 1965

Schultze, Charles L., Assistant Director, Bureau of the Budget, until June 1, 1965; thereafter Director until January 29, 1968

Smith, Bromley K., Executive Secretary of the National Security Council

Smith, Fred B., Deputy General Counsel, Department of the Treasury, until 1966; thereafter General Counsel

Solomon, Anthony M., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs (Economic Policy) until May 31, 1965; thereafter Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs

Stevenson, Adlai E., Representative to the United Nations until July 14, 1965

Strauss, Franz Josef, West German Finance Minister from December 1, 1966

Thompson, Llewellyn E., Ambassador at Large until December 1966; Ambassador to the Soviet Union from January 23, 1967

Trezise, Philip H., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs until October 1965; Representative to the Organization for European Economic Cooperation from October 26, 1965

Trowbridge, Alexander B., Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Domestic and International Business until May 1967; Acting Secretary of Commerce, February 1, 1967–June 14, 1967; Secretary, June 14, 1967–February 28, 1968

Trued, Merlyn N., Acting Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs, 1964–April 29, 1965; thereafter Assistant Secretary until June 10, 1966

Tuthill, John W., Ambassador to the European Economic Community until June 7, 1966; thereafter Ambassador to Brazil

Vance, Cyrus, Secretary of the Army until January 27, 1964; Deputy Secretary of Defense until June 30, 1967

Wood, C. Tyler, Special Assistant to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development from January 1965

Wood, General Robert J., Director of Military Assistance, International Security Affairs, Department of Defense until January 1966

Woods, George, President of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development until March 31, 1968

Wright, Robert B., Director, Mutual Defense Control Staff, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State, until June 1965; thereafter Director, Office of East-West Trade, Bureau of Economic Affairs

Wyndham White, Eric, Director-General, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

Zwick, Charles J., Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget until January 1968; thereafter Director

International Development and Economic Defense Policy; CommoditiesInternational Development and Economic Defense Policy; Commodities

Contents

Foreign Assistance PolicyForeign Assistance Policy

1. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, January 7, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 276, Distribution of Foreign Aid Cuts, Box 2. Confidential.

2. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, January 17, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret. Two attachments listed at the bottom of the source text were not found attached: a January 10 memorandum from Bell to Buddy on “Addl $20 million MAP … ,” and a January 7 memorandum from Bell to Buddy on the “Impact of Cuts in Foreign Aid Approp.” For this last memorandum, see Document 1.

3. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 21, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid [3 of 3], Box 16. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Kermit Gordon, Ralph Dungan, William P. Bundy, and John C. Bullitt.

4. Editorial Note

5. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, March 23, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 297, Latin American Military Aid, Box 4. Secret.

6. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, April 2, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Bundy Memos to the President, Vol. 1–4, 11/23/63–5/27/64, Box 1. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text by a White House secretary reads: “Rec'd 4/2/64.” The source text also bears the President's initial.

7. Presidential Determination No. 64–8

Washington, April 22, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 39. Secret.

8. National Security Action Memorandum No. 297

Washington, April 22, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/PC Files: Lot 70 D 199, NSAMs. Confidential.

9. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, May 7, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Bundy Memos to the President, Vol. 1–4, 11/23/63–5/27/64, Box 1. Confidential.

10. Record of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, May 13, 1964, 11:20 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Ball Papers, Foreign Aid (DLF) 1/21/64–8/16/66, Box 3. No classification marking. No other record of this conversation has been found. However, later in the day the President had conversations with Douglas Dillon (11:41 a.m.), Larry O'Brien (time unknown), Douglas Dillon (3:11 p.m. and 3:44 p.m.), Charles Hallack (3:50 p.m.), John McCormack (3:55 p.m.), and George Ball (4:47 p.m.) on foreign aid related matters. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recordings of Telephone Conversations, Tape 6405.02, PNOs 25 and 26, Tape 6405.03, PNOs 4, 5, 6, and 16) During a 5:35 p.m. conversation with McGeorge Bundy, the President referred to his meeting “socially” with the Foreign Affairs Committees the previous evening, the unpopularity of foreign assistance in both the parties, and Congressional plans to recommit the foreign assistance bill, adding to military assistance and taking an even larger amount from economic assistance. The President told Buddy that Secretaries Rusk and McNamara needed to get reengaged, along with AID Administrator Bell, and take the initiative from Congress; he told Buddy that it was time to prepare a supplemental for Vietnam—$70 million on the military side and $35 million on the economic side. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a Telephone Conversation, Tape F64.27, Side A, PNO 1)

11. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, July 7, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, ADM 7–4 (White House) July–Nov., FY 1965. No classification marking.

12. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, October 2, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance FY 1965, July–October. Secret. An attached October 13 transmittal memorandum from General Robert J. Wood, Director of Military Assistance, to AID Director Bell indicates that Secretary of Defense McNamara approved the FY 1965 Military Assistance Program and requests Bell to approve the program for implementation. In addition to Tabs A, B, and C cited below, Tab D, “Areas Considered for Reductions But Not Recommended,” and Tab E, “Amendment of Current Retention and Transfer Policies to Increase Excess Material Available to MAP,” are not printed.

13. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, October 7, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, ADM 7–4 (White House) July–November, FY 1965. No classification marking. A covering note by Frederick F. Simmons, Executive Secretary of AID, reads: “Please distribute only to Gaud, Assistant Administrators, and Tom Farmer.” Copies were sent to Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Director of the Bureau of the Budget Kermit Gordon, Under Secretary George W. Ball, Thomas C. Mann, Lawrence O'Brien, and Ralph Dungan.

14. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, October 13, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Administrator's Weekly Report to the President, FY 1965. Limited Official Use.

15. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator for Program of the Agency for International Development (Chenery) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Washington, October 17, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance FY 1965, July–October. Secret. Drafted by Robert B. Black (PC/MAD) on October 16.

16. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the Director of Military Assistance, Department of Defense (Wood)

Washington, October 27, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret. Copies were sent to John McNaughton and McGeorge Bundy.

17. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, October 28, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/PC Files: Lot 70 D 199, Assistance to Foreign Countries—1964. Limited Official Use. Copies were sent to Ball, W. Averell Harriman, Llewellyn E. Thompson, Bell, Hollis B. Chenery, and G. Griffith Johnson. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “S saw.”

18. Memorandum From the Acting Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Thompson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, November 9, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, ADM 7–4 (White House) July–November, FY 1965. Confidential. Drafted by Howard Meyers and George L. Warren (G/PM) on November 6 and sent through Under Secretary Ball.

19. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, November 11, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Chron Files, 11/6–11/11, 1964. Secret. A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Noted—WSG".

20. Report of the President's Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Task Force Report on Foreign Economic Policy, 1964, Box 17. Secret. The report was submitted to the President under cover of a November 25 letter from Carl Kaysen, Chairman of the Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy. For this cover letter, part of the Report's Introduction and Summary, and Chapter Three, “Money,” see vol. VIII, Document 18. For another extract from the Introduction and Summary, and Chapter Two, “Trade,” see Document 161.

21. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon)

Washington, December 4, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Chron Files, December 1–7, 1964. Confidential.

22. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 7, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. I [1], Box 1. Confidential.

23. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, December 9, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Chron Files, December 8–11, 1964. Confidential. A covering memorandum from Bell to Moyers, December 9, reads: “Attached is our ‘Brief' on the subject of foreign aid. There are several issues in it which deserve discussion. One in particular—the question of what form of legislation the President should request—requires fairly urgent consideration. I believe that State, Defense and AID would be the key participants, apart from the White House-Executive Office complex.”

24. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, December 10, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, November–January, FY 1965. Secret. Drafted by Bell and cleared by William M. Leffingwell (DOD/ISA) and Howard Meyers (G/PM). The memorandum was submitted to President Johnson under cover of a memorandum, December 10, to Kermit Gordon from Bell who wrote: “The attached memorandum requests Presidential approval for a MAP funding plan for FY 1965 which may require up to a $50 million transfer from the Contingency Fund later in the year. This is a similar proposal to one we worked out last year. I have forgotten how we obtained the President's approval at that time, but I assume the right way to do it is through you, and accordingly I would appreciate it if you would consider the matter and, assuming you concur, request the President's approval. I am sending a copy of the memorandum to Mr. Buddy.”

25. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 21, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, November 1963–December 1964, Vol. 1 [1]. Confidential.

26. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon)

Washington, December 28, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Chron Files, December 23–31, 1964. Confidential. Two attachments, a chart comparing types of funding in millions of dollars between 1964 and 1965 and proposed for 1966 and another that uses the same variables as above but compares the funding amounts by region, are not printed.

27. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, December 30, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID 11/63–12/64, Vol. 1 [1]. Confidential.

28. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, January 11, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, November–January FY 1965. Secret. A copy was sent to Secretary McNamara.

29. Editorial Note

30. Memorandum From the Deputy Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 9, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, February–June FY 1965. Secret.

31. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, March 26, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, February–June FY 1965. Secret.

32. Editorial Note

33. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, April 6, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. II [1 of 2], Box 40. Secret.

34. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, April 27, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Komer Memos, Vol. II [1], Box 6. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Bill Moyers, and Douglas Cater.

35. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of the Treasury Fowler

Washington, July 9, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, FY 1966. Confidential.

36. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Washington, July 30, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, DEF 19 Military Assistance, FY 1966. Confidential.

37. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, August 6, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, DEF 19 Military Assistance, FY 1966. Limited Official Use. A stamped notation on the source text indicates the memorandum was received in McGeorge Bundy's office on August 7. A handwritten notation reads: “L[yndon] 8/7/65 7:30 PM.” An attached note reads: “Alice: For info: Bator scribbled on his copy of this: ‘FMB called Bell to say P. says O.K.' Dorothy"

38. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)

Washington, August 17, 1965.

Source: Washington, National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, DEF 19 Military Assistance, FY 1966. Confidential. A copy was sent to Schultze.

39. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze)

Washington, September 17, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. II [2], Box 1. Limited Official Use.

40. Memorandum From the Acting Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson

Washington, October 1, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, David E Bell (Speeches), FY 1966. No classification marking.

41. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary of Agriculture Freeman, and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Washington, October 6, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central File, Confidential File, FO 3–2, 10/6/65, Box 47. Confidential. Copies were sent to Schultze, Reuter, and Califano. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “JAC[alifano] has seen.”

42. Minutes of Meeting

Washington, October 12, 1965, 2 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Perkins Committee—President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs—C. Tyler Wood Files—CY 66 thru CY 70: FRC 73 A 159, GAC Minutes (1st-4th Meetings). Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. The General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs met for the third time October 11–12./1/

43. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, October 19, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. III [1 of 2], Box 40. Confidential.

44. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, October 21, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. II [2], Box 1. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Orig Buddy 10/21.”

45. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 23, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, U.S. Food Aid Policy [2 of 2], Box 15. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Francis: I seem to have got ahead of this last week (I promulgated a version not the one Ag suggests)—will you straighten out?” Attached to the source text are five additional documents; the first attachment is printed below. The second, not printed, an October 20 memorandum from Buddy to Secretaries Rusk and Freeman and Administrator Bell, states: “On October 6 I circulated to you a draft memorandum on the above subject. I have now heard from the Department of State that it is in complete agreement with these guidelines, and I have had no complaint from any other agency. Accordingly, I hope that we can all now agree to follow these guidelines until we get different instructions from the President.” A copy of the third attachment and its cover memorandum (the fourth attachment) are printed as Document 41. The fifth attachment, not printed, from Department of State Executive Secretary Benjamin H. Read to Buddy, is another covering memorandum to Document 41. It states: “The appropriate offices within the Department have reviewed your enclosed memorandum on the World Food Situation and US Food Policy. We are in complete agreement with the statement and the present guideline form.”

46. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze) to President Johnson

Washington, November 16, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, U.S. Food Aid Policy [2 of 2], Box 15. No classification marking.

47. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, January 31, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee], [3 of 3], Box 17. Secret. A stamped notation on the source text indicates that McGeorge Bundy's office received the memorandum on February 2 at 2:20 p.m.

48. Memorandum From President Johnson to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 10, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 6. Confidential. The memorandum was also directed to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, probably for action.

49. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, May 25, 1966, 9 a.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, LEG 6, Foreign Assistance Legislation FY 1966. Confidential.

50. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, June 1, 1966, 4:45 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, AID, Vol. III [2], Box 2. No classification marking. The handwritten notations “L[yndon]” and “Retd for Pres 6/2/66” appear on the source text. According to the President's Daily Diary, Senators Anderson and Fulbright met with President Johnson in the Oval Office from 6:20 to 8:13 p.m. to discuss Vietnam and the foreign aid bill. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary)

51. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, July 19, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, [2 of 3], Box 16. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Mr. O'Brien notified".

52. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Hamilton) to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, August 31, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Foreign Aid [2 of 3], Box 16. No classification marking. A handwritten note from Rostow to Hamilton on the upper right corner of the source text reads: “E.H. The battle must be fought for Bell's requirements: —a national balance of payments education for all hands; —could EX–IM be used more? —What about IDA? —What about more intensive use of IBRD regular loans? —What about accelerating country-by-country and otherwise private capital flows? Let's talk. W.”

53. Minutes of the Meeting of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs

Washington, September 13, 1966, noon.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Perkins Committee—President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs—C. Tyler Woods Files—CY 66 thru CY 70: FRC 73 A 159, GAC Minutes (5th-8th Meetings). Limited Official Use. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text was attached to two covering memoranda. The first, September 27, from C. Tyler Wood, Gaud's Special Assistant, in part asks Gaud for permission to send the minutes to Rostow for his review and his advice as to whether they should be distributed to the Committee members. Gaud indicated his approval on September 28 with his handwritten initials. The second covering memorandum, September 30, from C. Tyler Wood to Rostow informs Rostow of Gaud's approval of the minutes and seeks Rostow's permission to distribute them to the Committee members.

54. Memorandum From the President's Administrative Assistant (Manatos) to President Johnson

Washington, September 26, 1966, 11:50 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid [1 of 3], Box 16. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text presumably by President Johnson to Rostow reads: “W—send to Schultze for comment—L"

55. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson

Washington, October 6, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid [1 of 3], Box 16. Limited Official Use. A handwritten note on the source text by Rostow reads: “OK W"

56. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, October 14, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid [1 of 3], Box 16. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text indicates the memorandum was received at 12:40 p.m. Another handwritten note by the President reads: “Walt—See me L".

57. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson

Washington, November 10, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. III [1], Box 2. Confidential.

58. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, November 16, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. IV [2 of 2], Box 40. No classification marking.

59. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistants (Rostow and Califano) and the President 's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator)

Washington, December 1, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret; Sensitive.

60. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, January 5, 1967, 9:45 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. IV [1 of 2]. Box 40. No classification marking.

61. Presidential Determination No. 67–14

Washington, January 5, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, LEG 4–1 Presidential Determinations FY 1967. Confidential.

62. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson

Washington, January 11, 1967, 6 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, U.S. Food Aid Policy [1 of 2], Box 15. No classification marking. Sent under cover of a January 11 note to Rostow from Hamilton who wrote: “Attached is the memorandum to the President on food aid which we discussed yesterday. I checked it out with Charlie Schultze. He concurs. The sentiments ascribed to Califano and Katzenbach represent their views as of about a week ago. Schultze particularly hopes that Katzenbach will weigh in heavily on this one.” A handwritten “L” appears on the source text.

63. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) and the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, February 6, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Confidential.

64. Letter From the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright) to President Johnson

Washington, February 8, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, LEG 4–1 Presidential Determinations FY 1967. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Gaud.

65. Letter From President Johnson to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright)

Washington, February 15, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. IV [2 of 2], Box 40. No classification marking.

66. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson

Washington, July 29, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret; Eyes Only.

67. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, July 31, 1967, 1 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, vol. IV [2], Box 2. Confidential. A handwritten “L” appears on the source text. A handwritten note indicates the memorandum was received at 4 p.m.

68. Summary Notes of the 576th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, October 11, 1967, 12:10–12:40 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security Council Meetings File, National Security Council Meetings, Vol. 4 Tab 58, 10/11/67, Discussion of U.S. Food Aid. Confidential; Sensitive; For the President Only. A list of attendees at the meeting was attached to the source text; they were: McNamara, Rusk, Anthony Solomon, Helms, JCS Acting Chairman General McConnell, Fowler, Freeman, OEP Director Daniel, Schultze, Gaud, Rostow, George Christian, Bromley Smith, DeVier Pierson, and Edward Hamilton.

69. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, November 20, 1967, 11 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee] [2 of 3], Box 17. Confidential. Drafted by Edward K. Hamilton.

70. Report of the Task Force on Foreign Aid

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, Central File, FT 600/Task Force on Foreign Aid, Box 36. Confidential. The report was transmitted to Joseph Califano by Nicholas Katzenbach under cover of a December 11 memorandum that noted that the report, which represented the consensus of the members of the Task Force, did not cover the program for military assistance. The agencies represented on the Task Force were the Departments of State, Treasury, Defense, Agriculture, Health, Education and Welfare; Agency for International Development; Council of Economic Advisers; Bureau of the Budget; and the White House.

71. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, December 15, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546, 091. 3 MAP. Confidential.

72. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, January 18, 1968, p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret.

73. Summary Notes of the 581st Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, February 7, 1968, noon.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 5, Tab 63, 2/7/68, Conte/Long and Symington Amendments to Foreign Assistance Act, Box 2. Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith. The source text is misdated September 7, 1968. Another account of this meeting was prepared by Tom Johnson. (Ibid., Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings)

74. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistants (Califano and Rostow) and the Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Zwick) to President Johnson

Washington, February 16, 1968, 6:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee], [2 of 3], Box 17. Confidential.

75. Draft Memorandum for President Johnson

Washington, May 21, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret; Sensitive. The source text bears no drafting information. No record of whether it or a revised version went to the President has been found.

76. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, May 27, 1968, a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret; Sensitive.

77. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, June 7, 1968, 6 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. IV [2 of 3], Box 40. Confidential.

78. Presidential Determination No. 68–12

Washington, June 29, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determination, Vol. IV [1 of 2], Box 40. No classification marking.

79. Report of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs

Washington, October 25, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Perkins Committee—President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs—C. Tyler Wood Files—CY 66 thru CY 70. No classification marking. An attached October 28 letter from James A. Perkins, Chairman of the Committee, transmitted the report to President Johnson. The letter reads in part: “The experience of serving on the Committee has been a rich and rewarding one for all the members. We cannot help but be disturbed, however, at the increasing difficulty in securing public support for U.S. foreign assistance. Because of our deep concern, we have attempted, over recent months, to consolidate our ideas about ways in which foreign assistance programs could be strengthened.” The source text comprises pp. 1–3 of the 43-page report. For another extract, see Document 145.

80. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, November 1, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee] [1 of 3], Box 17. No classification marking.

81. Letter From President Johnson to the Chairman of the President's Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs (Perkins)

Washington, undated.

Source: Johnson Library, Edward R. Fried Files, Chron File, Box 3. No classification marking. Drafted by President Johnson, Edward R. Fried, and Roger P. Morris.

82. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Zwick)

Washington, November 25, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, FY 67 and FY 69, BUD Budget (October–December) FY 1969. Confidential.

83. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Zwick)

Washington, November 29, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, FY 67 and FY 69, BUD Budget (October–December) FY 1969. No classification marking. Drafted by Arthur A. Hartman (U).

84. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, December 10, 1968, 5 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee] [1 of 3], Box 17. No classification marking.

1. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 1. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, January 7, 1964.

SUBJECT

Impact of Cuts in Foreign Aid Appropriations

This memorandum is the response to NSAM 276 of December 26,2 which requests a report for the President on how we propose to adjust the economic and military assistance programs to the large cuts made by the Congress. It includes an analysis of military assistance supplied by the Department of Defense and is concurred in by the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense.

We would suggest that the President should be informed of the following major points: 1. Fund Availabilities. The President requested $4.5 billion in new appropriations and anticipated carryovers of $300 million more. $3 billion was appropriated and carryovers of $684 million are now estimated (including reappropriation of $127 million of last year's Contingency Funds, which we had not requested, and $37 million of uncommitted funds of the Social Progress Trust Fund which are with the Inter-American Development Bank). The total now available therefore is $3.7 billion, 24 percent less than was requested. The cut was fairly evenly divided among appropriation categories: Request to Congress Total Available Reduction

Development Loans and Grants—Latin America $ 907 $ 743 -164 (18%)

Development Loans and Grants—Rest of World 1,433 1,036 -397 (28%)

Military Assistance 1,555 1,173 -382 (25%)

Supporting Assistance and Contingency Fund 745 540 -205 (28%)

Other 223 192 -31 (14%)

Total Foreign Assistance 4,863 3,684 -1,179 (24%)

2. Comparison with 1963 Commitments. Compared to last year, FY 1964 funds are down by $470 million, almost entirely in military assistance. Total economic assistance funds are about the same as were used last year. However, on a geographic breakdown, funds available for Latin America have been increased by $160 million; those available for the rest of the world have been reduced by $200 million. 1963 Commitments 1964 Available Reduction

Military Assistance $ 1,599 $ 1,173 -426 (27%)

Economic Assistance (including Supporting Assistance) $2,555 $2,511 -44 (2%)

4,154 3,684 -470 (11%)

3. Allocation of Cuts: Economic. In the last few weeks a country by country review has been conducted of the economic aid program with the purpose of allocating available funds to achieve maximum progress toward U.S. objectives. In each case we have applied the basic criteria we use for determining priorities: — the importance to the U.S. of the results to be sought through aid;

— the extent to which the country is applying self-help measures and can use aid effectively;

— the availability of assistance from sources other than the U.S.

The results are very roughly summarized in the following table, which groups countries by the general purpose and nature of the economic aid program the United States conducts there. (There were of course variations among countries in each group.)

Request to Congress Present Allocation Per Cent Change

Relatively Small Cuts

1. General Support of Strategic Countries (Korea, Vietnam, Laos, Thailand, Jordan, Congo, Bolivia) 450 395 -12%

2. General Support of Economic Growth and Security in Priority Countries (India, Pakistan, Turkey, Tunisia, Nigeria, Colombia, Chile, Peru) 1,151 941 -19%

3. Maintenance of Access to U.S. Facilities (Morocco, Libya, Ethiopia, Panama, Trinidad, Cyprus) 56 59 +5%

Relatively Large Cuts

4. Successful Development Programs Approaching Termination (Taiwan, Philippines, Israel, Greece, Mexico, Venezuela, Jamaica) 159 57 -65%

5. Conditional Support of Countries Requiring Improved Self-Help (Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Central America, Liberia, Sudan, Iran) 437 256 -41%

6. Programs with Limited Objectives 210 134 -36%

(44 programs averaging $3 million, of which 28 are in Africa) - - -

Total Country Programs* 2463 1842 -25%

Attached to this memorandum are annexes which show the reduction made in each region and discuss countries in which substantial changes have been made in the program presented to the Congress.3

4. Allocation of Cuts: Military. A preliminary review has been made by the Office of the Secretary of Defense and tentative proposals put forward for adjusting Military Aid programs to the limited funds available. These figures will be reviewed further this week with the Unified Commanders and the Joint Chiefs of Staff and with officials of State and A.I.D. We do not anticipate any substantial modification as a result of these further reviews.

On the basis of country by country reviews to date, the Defense Department has proposed figures which would: — honor all explicit commitments;

— meet the increased needs in Vietnam and Laos;

— defer a large amount of implied commitments for modernization of forces, and

— radically reduce small programs of little military importance, including termination in Cambodia and very heavy cuts in Indonesia and Burma.

Reductions by major groups of countries are as follows: Request to Congress Present Allocation Reduction

Asia—Nine periphery countries (Greece, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, India, Vietnam, Thailand, Taiwan, Korea) $ 1005 $ 791 -214 (21%)

Rest of Asia 153 49 -104 (68%)

Latin America 77 63 -14 (18%)

Africa 24 18 - 6 (27%)

Europe and Other 296 252 -44 (15%)

Total 1555 1173 -382 (25%)

The State Department and Department of Defense are currently reviewing the allocation to Latin America, which is below the Congressional ceiling for equipment of $55 million and also somewhat reduces the $17–20 million originally planned for training. Assistant Secretary Mann is urgently considering this issue and the Department of Defense is prepared to consider restoring the program to approximately a total level of $70 million if it is State's judgment that this money can be effectively spent and that the priority is deserved in relation to other areas.

5. Contributions to International Organizations. You will recall that the Congress for the first time reduced the appropriations needed to meet pledges and commitments of the United States to International Organizations such as the UN Special Fund. They appropriated $116 million compared to a present estimate of needs of about $124 million. If the needs do not shrink further, we would propose to transfer Contingency Funds to cover the gap, a possibility mentioned explicitly in the Floor debate by Chairman Passman.

6. Effect of Cuts. Our present assessment is that the reduced economic assistance funds are: — relatively plentiful for Latin America, where some carryover of unobligated funds into next year seems likely;

— tightly budgeted elsewhere in the world, but sufficient to meet all firm commitments and high priority purposes.

The Military Assistance Program on the other hand is not adequate to cover priority requirements in several countries.

We are therefore considering the possibility of recommending a transfer of up to $50 million worth of economic Contingency Funds to the Military Assistance Program, and some shift in the financing of commercially available commodities from military assistance to economic aid appropriations. If it is undertaken, we would of course discuss it fully with the Congressional committees and would expect it to become permanent.

David E. Bell

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 276, Distribution of Foreign Aid Cuts, Box 2. Confidential.

2 Printed in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IX, p. 392.

* omits funds not allocated by country

3 Not found.

2. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 2. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 17, 1964.

Here is how AID and DOD have apportioned the FY 1964 aid cuts. While we requested this report to enable you to weigh in if there were any major problems or unresolved issues, we see none and recommend you merely note it.

To summarize the report (which it does not seem essential to read), AID and DOD have spread the cuts pretty evenly among the major aid recipients, while protecting high priority programs and prior commitments. Because of carryovers, we have $3.7 billion to work with, compared with the $4.15 billion we actually committed last year.

Most of the actual reduction comes out of MAP, where we have $426 millon less than we used last year. This will cover all explicit commitments, though we'll have to put off some force modernization which Korea, China, the Philippines, Greece, and Turkey expect. We're also trimming a number of smaller programs, e.g. Indonesia, Burma, some Africans. Tom Mann and DOD are still discussing how much to cut Latin American MAP, but any cut would be much less than in other areas.

The $2.5 million economic aid available is about what we actually committed last year. It will cover all firm promises and priority needs. What permits this is the slowness of many clients to come up with satisfactory project terms. We're also cutting back the more mature countries ready for conventional financing (China, Philippines, Israel, Greece, Mexico, Venezuela, Jamaica) and small marginal programs.

One problem is the lack of much cushion for emergencies or opportunities. Since an extra $40 million may be needed for more ammunition, etc. in Vietnam, Bell is already considering a $50 million transfer to MAP from our $179 million AID contingency fund. All in all, we'll probably get by this year, but partly by pushing our problems ahead of us, which underlines the importance of the FY 1965 AID reviews.

R. W. Komer 2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret. Two attachments listed at the bottom of the source text were not found attached: a January 10 memorandum from Bell to Buddy on “Addl $20 million MAP … ,” and a January 7 memorandum from Bell to Buddy on the “Impact of Cuts in Foreign Aid Approp.” For this last memorandum, see Document 1.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

3. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk 3. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, January 21, 1964.

Two actions I would like to propose to the President in connection with the 1965 foreign aid program have significant political overtones which I am bringing to your attention in this memorandum.

The first proposal is to announce plans to make no new economic assistance commitments after June 30, 1964, to the following nine countries: Free China, Greece, Israel, Iraq, Syria, Libya, Southern Rhodesia, Mexico and Surinam. Projects under way would of course be carried through to completion. We would plan to withdraw virtually all A.I.D. mission staffs from these countries by June 30, 1965.

I would propose to recommend to the President that he announce this decision in his foreign aid message, which will probably be sent to the Congress within the next two weeks.2 The President would make plain at the same time that while he does not expect to resume economic assistance programs in these countries, he has not foreclosed the possibility of doing so should their economic circumstances so require.

Each of these countries has been discussed with the relevant geographic bureau of the Department. There is uniform concurrence that the proposed decision to make no new commitments is warranted in every case in the light of normal aid criteria and the President's desire to pre-sent an austere program for 1965.

On the political side, Mr. Mann and Governor Williams have no objection to the proposal as it affects the countries in their areas (provided, of course, that advance notification is given to the countries concerned in appropriate ways before the President's message is released). Mr. Hilsman and Mr. Poats have jointly queried Taipei as to the possible effects there.

With respect to the four Near Eastern countries, Mr. Talbot is concerned over the political impact of such an announcement. I understand he is sending you his views on the subject. I have discussed the problems involved with him, and on balance I would urge that we keep all four countries on the list. Israel and Greece are today the most prosperous and economically progressive nations still receiving economic aid. If we do not stop new aid commitments to them, we would have no logical basis for stopping commitments to any other country.

The political problem with Israel should be bearable, assuming we continue to help provide them with military equipment, (either through credit sales or direct MAP), and assuming we give them strong support in the Jordan waters matter.

The political problem with Greece, it seems to me, can be minimized by stressing that their economic success has eliminated their need for aid on concessional terms, and that PL 480,3 MAP, and Export-Import Bank loans will continue to be available.

Furthermore, both Greece and Israel have been on notice for at least a year, by repeated public statements made by me and others, that we regard them as doing so well their need for economic aid is coming rapidly to an end.

Accordingly, I recommend that we propose to the President ending aid in the nine countries, with appropriate plans for notification—including the possibility of personal letters from him to the leaders of the other governments, at least in the cases of Greece and Israel.

The second proposal we are considering is to withdraw virtually all direct-hire AID personnel from 15 additional countries on or before June 30, 1965. Including the nine countries mentioned above, the net effect would be to reduce the number of AID overseas posts by 24, or almost a third.

The countries from which we expect to withdraw AID personnel, but to which we expect to commit new program funds in FY '65 or later, are the 12 UAM States, Sierra Leone, Haiti, and Trinidad. These are all countries in which the aid programs are quite small and concentrated on a few activities. We believe our operations can be carried out effectively in such countries without the necessity for a resident AID staff. Projects in such countries would be carried out by contractors, and AID supervision would be handled by staff stationed elsewhere, normally in a regional office or in Washington. We would expect to ask the Embassy in such countries to provide minimum liaison and service functions on our behalf.

We would expect to advise the countries concerned of our decision, stressing the administrative savings and efficiency that will result. If this is done, I would not anticipate any significant political reaction.

So far as I am aware, the regional Assistant Secretaries have no objections to this proposal.

David E. Bell

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid [3 of 3], Box 16. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Kermit Gordon, Ralph Dungan, William P. Bundy, and John C. Bullitt.

2 See Document 4.

3 The Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, as amended: P.L. 480, 83d Congress, approved July 10, 1954, as amended through P.L. 88–205, approved December 16, 1963. (77 Stat. 390)

4. Editorial Note 4. Editorial Note

On March 19, 1964, President Johnson delivered a special message to the Congress on foreign aid in which he recommended funding proposals for fiscal year 1965. For text of his message, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book I, pages 393–398.

Comments on President Johnson's draft message are in a February 27 memorandum from Walt Rostow to Bell (Department of State, S/PC Files: Lot 70 D 199, Assistance to Foreign Countries—1964), and a February 24 memorandum from Luther Hodges to the President. (Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, 1962–1964 Files, White House, January–February)

During a telephone conversation with McGeorge Bundy at 11:06 a.m. on March 19, the President learned that British economist Barbara Ward was in town. President Johnson told Buddy that he would like to meet with Ward the following afternoon if their schedules permitted. The President wished that Ward had written the March 19 message to Congress, which he wanted to be a good message. Bundy assured the President that the message was good. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a Telephone Conversation, Tape 6403.06, PNO 2)

5. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 5. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 23, 1964.

SUBJECT

Determination under sections 505(a) and 511(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, permitting the furnishing of defense articles on a grant basis to certain Latin American countries

The purpose of this memorandum is to recommend that you determine (1) pursuant to section 505(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,2 as amended, that the furnishing of defense articles on a grant basis under the Act to Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay is necessary to safeguard the security of the United States, or the security of such countries which are associated with the United States in the Alliance for Progress, against overthrow of duly constituted governments, or both; and (2) pursuant to section 511(b) of the Act, that internal security requirements may be the basis for furnishing defense articles on a grant basis to Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru and Uruguay.

The total programmed for countries listed in (1) above in FY 1964 for defense articles in general is $54,374,775. The portion of that amount which is related to internal security for countries listed in (2) above is $32,662,464. The amounts for each country are shown in Attachment #1 hereto.

In sum, my recommendation for the required determinations, supported by data in Attachment #1, is based upon the facts that: (1) all countries are associated with the United States in the Alliance for Progress,

(2) they have requested our help to meet the pressures of the Castro-Communist threat which is now a reality, and with which they cannot cope without our assistance, to defend their coastal waters, to engage in civic action, and to participate in collective defense missions; and

(3) maintaining the internal security of these countries and the freedom of the Hemisphere from aggression is necessary to achieve our objectives in the Alliance for Progress.

It is, accordingly, recommended that you sign the attached memorandum which embodies the determinations required by sections 505(a) and 511(b) of the Act and thereby authorize the furnishing of defense articles on a grant basis for the purposes described.3 The Department of Defense concurs in this recommendation.

David E. Bell

Attachment #14

1. Statutory Requirements

A. Defense Articles in General are limited by section 505(a) of the Act in pertinent part, as follows: … except (1) to the extent necessary to fulfill prior commitments or (2) to the extent that the President finds, with respect to any Latin American country, that the furnishing of military assistance under this Act is necessary to safeguard the security of the United States or to safeguard the security of a country associated with the United States in the Alliance for Progress against overthrow of a duly constituted government, and so informs the Congress, no further military assistance under any provision of this Act shall be furnished to any Latin American country.

B. Defense Articles for Internal Security Purposes are further limited by section 511(b) of the Act as follows: Internal security requirements shall not, unless the President determines otherwise and promptly reports such determination to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, be the basis for military assistance programs for American Republics.

2. Funds for Defense Articles in FY 1964 Program

The funds programmed per country are set forth below. The total funds programmed for defense articles for any one country may be varied by up to 15% of the amounts specified below to take account of changing circumstances and requirements, subject, however, to the requirement that the total amount programmed for all countries shall not exceed the ceiling of $55 million established for grants of defense articles by section 511(a) of the Act.

Column A—Total country grants for defense articles (including costs of packing, crating, handling, and transportation) for FY 1964 which, pursuant to section 505(a), are necessary to safeguard the security of the United States or to safeguard the security of these countries against the overthrow of duly constituted governments.

Column B—Portions of total defense articles in column A programmed to meet internal security requirements pursuant to section 511(b). These are defense articles necessary to safeguard the security of these countries against the overthrow of duly constituted governments and are considered to be primarily for internal security.

Country (Column A) Total Funds for Defense Articles (Column B) Internal Security Portion of Funds for Defense Articles (not additive)

Argentina* * $7,545,464 * $6,252,584

Bolivia 1,472,129 998,538

Brazil 10,422,686 4,823,369

Chile 7,467,191 2,570,929

Colombia 9,251,021 6,487,355

Costa Rica 398,813 110,939

Dominican Republic 126,695 0

Ecuador 3,178,984 2,729,838

El Salvador 975,954 769,048

Guatemala 1,382,100 746,016

Honduras 51,151 0

Nicaragua 443,903 411,503

Panama 143,958 133,958

Paraguay 909,149 0

Peru 8,189,750 5,762,567

Uruguay 2,415,827 865,820

Total $54,374,775 $32,662,464

All of these countries are associated with the United States in the Alliance for Progress.

Since all the materiel to be provided under this program is of United States origin, there will be no adverse effect on the balance of payments.

3. Basic Justification for Findings and Determinations

This recommendation for the necessary findings and determinations by the President permitting the furnishing of Defense Articles in General and for Internal Security is based on the following considerations:

Latin America has long been considered a target for Castro-communist subversion. Because of the unstable political institutions, enormous social differences, and retarded economic growth in these countries, many groups in their societies feel isolated from the main currents of national development, and are easy prey to Castro-communist propaganda and organizers.

The Castro regime has announced its intention to promote the overthrow of Latin American governments and replace them with totalitarian regimes patterned on the Castro model. In furtherance of this intention, subversion and guerrilla warfare are being used either unilaterally or in conjunction with local communists, exiles, or dissident opposition groups.

The insidious character of this threat has created critical new requirements for military training and equipment in the Latin American armed forces. Forces responsible for maintaining law and order have neither the equipment nor the trained personnel to counter well-conceived and well-executed plans to subvert the State, either by mob action, guerrilla warfare, terrorism and sabotage, or by armed invasion. They are turning to us for help in developing the special capabilities to seek out, destroy, or take into custody both arms and bands of armed men which move across their land, sea, and air borders for subversive purposes; to deal effectively with disorders in the cities; and to prevent or control guerrilla outbreaks in rural areas. Unless these countries develop the will and capability, individually and jointly, to deal effectively with this new threat, they stand to lose the opportunity for orderly economic and social growth within the framework of free institutions.

The prevention of any further expansion of communist influence and power within the Western Hemisphere is a major requirement of United States security. Any such expansion would not only greatly undermine the physical security of the United States, but would place the United States position in all other areas of Latin America in jeopardy and would adversely affect our power and influence in other areas of the world which are vital to U.S. security.

This assistance is also designed to increase the capabilities of recipient countries to provide for defense of their coastal waters, participate in civic action projects which serve to ameliorate socio-economic conditions and discontent upon which communism feeds, and to participate in collective defense missions. In general, the capabilities now being developed by military assistance in Latin America of light, mobile forces constitute an important collective defense asset.

Accordingly, the furnishing of defense articles for the purposes described above is necessary to safeguard the security of the United States or to safeguard the security of these recipient countries against the overthrow of duly constituted governments.5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 297, Latin American Military Aid, Box 4. Secret.

2 The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, P.L. 87–195 (75 Stat. 436) was approved on September 4, 1961.

3 This memorandum was not found. For the final version, see Document 7.

4 Secret.

* Implementation will be withheld pending conclusion of a normal military assistance agreement now being negotiated with Argentina.

* Implementation will be withheld pending conclusion of a normal military assistance agreement now being negotiated with Argentina.

* Implementation will be withheld pending conclusion of a normal military assistance agreement now being negotiated with Argentina.

5 An undated attachment entitled “FY 1964 Military Assistance Programs in Latin American Countries” is not printed.

6. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 6. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 2, 1964.

SUBJECT

The Administration's Argument on its AID Presentation

After the Rusk-McNamara lunch last week2 you asked me to talk with Dave Bell about the AID presentation and the relation between his argument and Bob McNamara's.3

Bell tells me that his own presentation was in line with your message and his talks with you: that there is no difference in principle between this year's request for $3.4 and last year's request for $4.5. His main argument is that this year we are asking only for what we know we will need, while last year our request was tailored to meet the possible requirements of countries with incompleted plans. The $1.1 billion difference is explained by $400 million in military aid, $150 million in the contingency request, $350 million in tighter estimates of the effective level of commitment, and $200 million by not respecting last year's request for the addition of this amount to the Social Progress Trust Fund. So on his side Bell sticks to the notion that this is a lean budget which nevertheless will do what we now know to be necessary. He also sticks to the formula that we will come in for more money if and when we need it (and we well may in Brazil, for example).

Bell also reports that as soon as he learned of McNamara's proposed testimony, he called Bob to raise the question whether it was consistent with your position. McNamara said he had already made his argument in the Armed Services Committee and would have to repeat it before the Foreign Aid Committee. The Washington Post editorial this morning shows the difficulty this puts us in, but Bell concedes that McNamara's position may well protect the military side of the AID budget in political terms.

The hazard is, however, that the weight of any budgetary cutting will fall on the economic side, where the budget is lean indeed. Bell hopes that you will be ready to weigh in at the appropriate moment with the Committee Chairmen on this point. Unless instructed differently, he will continue with his own line of argument, and he leaves it to you whether McNamara's special argument should be continued or modified.

My own view is that Bob has done what he quite often does—made the case his own way without checking with everybody else—but that we should not try to change his position for him right now.

The next question is what you should say if you get this one at a press conference. My suggestion is that your answer might be something like this: 1. The AID request as a whole is the bare minimum which is essential in the national interest. We will ask for more if events compel it.

2. Secretary McNamara has correctly stated that if we had any hope of getting any more money now from the Congress for military assistance, it would serve the national interest to have such additional funds. You have no reason to quarrel with Secretary McNamara's estimate of the readiness of the Congress to provide such additional funds.

3. Neither the military nor the economic portions of the AID program can safely be cut this year. You decided to submit an AID program without padding, and that is what you have done.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Bundy Memos to the President, Vol. 1–4, 11/23/63–5/27/64, Box 1. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text by a White House secretary reads: “Rec'd 4/2/64.” The source text also bears the President's initial.

2 President Johnson, Rusk, and McNamara met at 1 p.m. on March 24 at the White House for lunch. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Books, 1964)

3 On March 23 and 24, Bell testified before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on H.R. 10502 to amend further the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. McNamara testified the next day. For text of the testimonies, see Foreign Assistance Act of 1964: Hearings Before the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives, 88th Congress, 2nd Session, on H.R. 10502, March 23–25, 1964, Part I, pp. 15–37 and 39–97.

7. Presidential Determination No. 64–8 7. Presidential Determination No. 64–81

Washington, April 22, 1964.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE ADMINISTRATORAGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

SUBJECT

Determinations under sections 505(a) and 511(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, permitting the furnishing of defense articles on a grant basis to certain Latin American countries

In accordance with the recommendation in your memorandum of March 23, 1964,2 I hereby determine: (1) pursuant to section 505(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (hereinafter referred to as “the Act"), that the furnishing of defense articles on a grant basis under the Act to Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Panama, Peru, and Uruguay is necessary to safeguard the security of the United States, or the security of such countries, which are all associated with the United States in the Alliance for Progress, against overthrow of duly constituted governments, or both; and

(2) pursuant to section 511(b) of the Act, that internal security requirements may be the basis for the furnishing of defense articles on a grant basis to Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru and Uruguay.

You are requested on my behalf to give appropriate notice of this action, pursuant to sections 505(a) and 511(b) of the Act, to the Congress.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 39. Secret.

2  Document 5.

8. National Security Action Memorandum No. 297 8. National Security Action Memorandum No. 2971

Washington, April 22, 1964.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Administrator, Agency for International Development

SUBJECT

Latin American Military Aid

The President has today approved determinations with regard to military aid to Latin America.2

In administering these funds and planning future programs, the President wishes to insure that our policies, MAP and otherwise, are directed toward the following general objectives: 1. Military expenditures by the host country which are consistent with and proportionate to expenditures for social and economic development.

2. The maintenance of a military establishment in the host country which is realistic in terms of our estimate of its potential missions.

3. The establishment of elite units which might be used in U.N. peace-keeping assignments.

4. Continued emphasis on civic action and internal security missions, the latter to be realistically defined.

5. Definition of a clear relationship between military internal security missions and police functions and a rational pattern of U.S. funding for same.

6. Emphasis in training and by other means on the role of the military in a modern democratic society.

7. Avoidance of sophisticated and expensive prestige equipment in our grant or sale programs except where specifically justified. In this connection, host country purchase from other sources of non-essential prestige equipment is to be actively discouraged.

The President desires, by 1 August 1964, a brief analysis and report on the military situation in each country and the changes, if any, to which our policies are being directed. These reports should measure the existing situation against the above general objectives and other relevant factors. The reports should be prepared under the general direction of the Assistant Secretary for Latin American Affairs with the cooperation of other agencies.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Department of State, S/PC Files: Lot 70 D 199, NSAMs. Confidential.

2 See Document 7.

9. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 9. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 7, 1964.

SUBJECT

Use of Foreign Aid Funds

This memorandum reports on — progress in committing funds available in the present fiscal year

— progress in expending funds previously committed and in the pipeline

We are making satisfactory progress in committing funds available in fiscal year 1964. Our latest estimates are that, excluding the Contingency Fund, which is drawn on only to meet extraordinary situations, we expect to commit more than 97 per cent of the available funds for both military and economic aid. Commitments to date, while slow as always, reflecting the late date of Congressional action, are in most cases ahead of last year at this time.

Funds Available Commitments thus far (latest data) Per cent Anticipated Commitments by June 30 Per cent

Military Aid 1200.0 962.6 80.2 1175.0 97.9

Economic Aid 2145.0 1343.6 62.6 2075.0 96.7

Contingency Fund 127.9 7.9 6.2 ? ?

(Note: Above figures assume $50 million transfer from Contingency Fund to Military Aid)

With respect to military aid, as you know, total funds available are short of minimum requirements. We are proposing an initial transfer of $50 million from the Contingency Fund to military aid, (papers are on their way to you now), and are considering the possibility of an additional transfer later this month.

The only military aid funds expected to be uncommitted as of June 30th are the small residual amounts left in the various sub-accounts in Washington and the field. These usually total around $25 million.

With respect to economic aid, our record on uncommitted balances is expected to be much more impressive this year than last. The most striking change relates to Development Loans, outside of Latin America, where the last fiscal year ended with $96 million uncommitted. This year, we expect to commit all available funds, (including the $96 million carried forward from last year), and to have a number of projects on hand and fully reviewed on June 30 for which funds will not be available till next fiscal year.

As in the case of military aid, we expect to have small residual amounts remaining on June 30 in various economic aid sub-accounts. These usually total around $25 million or one per cent of available funds.

Apart from these, the only uncommitted economic aid funds are expected to be in the Alliance for Progress loan funds, where we may have up to $50 million uncommitted as of June 30, depending on developments in Brazil. We have a solid argument with which to defend this fact before the Congress: we are properly holding to high standards of self-help on the part of Latin American countries, and during the current fiscal year this has required program restrictions, particularly in Argentina and Brazil.

With respect to the Contingency Fund, there is of course no plan for full commitment. About $22 million has been authorized thus far and another $25 million seems likely to be committed for normal uses. A transfer of $50 million is now assumed. As of today, therefore, the uncommitted balance is estimated at about $80 million, less whatever further amount may be transferred to military aid.

We are also making good progress in expending obligated balances. The “pipeline” of unexpected commitments as of June 30, 1963 was $6,369 million. Two-fifths of the pipeline represented loans in process of being drawn down as projects are completed. Another two-fifths represented military assistance orders in process of production and delivery.

During the present fiscal year we expect expenditures to exceed new commitments in all categories except Alliance loans. Therefore, we expect a drop of more than $300 million in the pipeline of unexpended commitments by June 30, 1964.

During the last three or four years the assistance pipeline has increased sharply, but the entire increase has been in undisbursed loans. We have checked our experience with that at the World Bank and the Export-Import Bank and our record is just about the same as theirs. An agency which starts making development loans, as this one did on a large scale three or four years ago, must expect to build up undisbursed loan commitments for the first several years—until the rate of disbursements in a year equals the rate of new commitments. We have now reached that point with respect to development loans outside of Latin America. We have not yet reached that point with respect to loans under the Alliance.

Attachments A and B show current commitments and the pipeline in somewhat more detail.

We will be glad to furnish any additional information you may wish.

David E. Bell

Attachment A2

Mutual Defense and Development Programs

RESERVATIONS/OBLIGATIONS (Military Assistance figures as of March 31; Economic Assistance figures as of April 3)

1963 1964

Millions of Dollars Percent of Availability Millions of Dollars Percent of Availability

Military Assistance 1,373.8 86.8 962.6 80.2

Economic Assistance

Development Loans 517.0 52.1 593.5 72.3

Technical Cooperation 109.8 43.2 124.8 57.1

Alliance Loans 229.3 53.8 214.4 45.4

Alliance Technical Cooperation 80.0 59.5 64.0 69.6

Supporting Assistance 309.3 70.7 251.3 72.3

Other Programs 89.5 42.4 95.6 49.2

Sub-Total: Economic Assistance 1,334.9 54.4 1,343.6 62.6

Contingency Fund 61.1 23.4 7.9 6.2

Note: In fiscal 1964 there was an appropriation (not included in the above table) of $131 million for the Social Progress Trust Fund, all of which has been obligated for transfer to the Inter-American Development Bank under the trust agreement.

Attachment B3

Mutual Defense and Development Programs

END OF YEAR BALANCESa

(millions of dollars)

“Pipeline” (Unliquidated Commitments)

Total Development Loans Alliance Loans Other Economic Uncommitted Carryover Unexpected Balance

Military

6/30/63 actual 2395.9 — — — 25.8 2421.7

6/30/64 est. 2012.7 — — — 25.0 2037.7

AID

6/30/63 actual 3429.1 2113.8 331.7 983.6 249.4 3678.5

6/30/64 est. 3547.9 2086.9 597.0 864.0 75.0 3622.9

Contingency Fund

6/30/63 actual 209.1 — — 209.1 127.1 336.2

6/30/64 est. actual 111.2 — — 111.2 80.0 191.2

SPTF

1963 actual 335.0 — — 335.0 — 335.0

1964 est. 366.0 — — 366.0 — 366.0

Total

1963 actual 6369.1 — — — 402.3b 6771.4

1964 est. 6037.8 — — — 180.0b 6217.8

a excludes Investment Guarantee Reserve ($268.6 million in 1963 and $273.2 million in 1964) and Excess Property Revolving Fund ($4.1 million in 1963 and $3.3 million in 1964) which are not available for program purposes.

a Composition of uncommitted carryover: 1963 1964

Military Assistance 25.8 25.0

Economic Assistance

Development Loans 96.2 –

Alliance Loans 92.0 50.0

Other 61.2 25.0

Contingency Fund 127.1 80.0

Total 402.3 180.0

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Bundy Memos to the President, Vol. 1–4, 11/23/63–5/27/64, Box 1. Confidential.

2 Confidential.

3 Confidential.

10. Record of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 10. Record of Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, May 13, 1964, 11:20 a.m.

LBJ: I hear some bad rumblings on IDA. It is coming up today. They told me they had enough votes but the Sec. of State and Treasury is out of town. I think they are going to get that bill murdered like Freeman did. You had better get hold of Sec. Treas. or whoever is acting and get your people up there and start knocking on doors—door to door—and tell them how important this thing is. Any AID agents that you should have that have contacts on the Hill and get in touch with Larry. I don't know how accurate this is but they say it is critical.

GWB: We will mobilize everything we have. You know, Doug has been calling the shots on this.

LBJ: You had better get a hold of him and tell him that we hear bad reports. It doesn't hurt anything to win by 30 votes but it kills it if you lose by one. I think everybody in the Cabinet is traveling—they haven't got time to look after these programs—we're going to get the “stuffin” beat out of us. We haven't got a chance to pass foreign aid. I had the Foreign Affairs Committee down here last night and I pled with them and reported it just as it is and they are going to try to do that today. They think they can do that. The Republicans are going to have a motion to recommit and add a couple hundred million to the military and take 500 million off the economics. They say they will stay but we just can't hold them. We will have to fight that battle when we get to it. We are going to have to get our forces lined up—our newspapers and everybody else on that one. It is a very dangerous move. The Republicans are going to say we are trying to help win the war but we are not going to give this money away to India. I looked at a sample poll of some place in N.J. It had the Republican and Democratic nominees and how they felt and why they liked us. On this foreign aid it is just frightening. That is the sentiment of the country. Salem, N.J. and it is a sample town according to… the persons interviewed in the survey were asked, taking everything into consideration, do you think the U.S. is not getting its money's worth out of foreign aid. Two out of every three of 65 replied no. One in ten said yes. The remaining 25% expressed no opinion. Proportionately more men felt this way than did women. The major reasons cited the U.S. does not get its money's worth. The reason it is getting its money's worth is that it makes friends for the U.S., countries have been rebuilt.

Another reason the U.S. does not get its money's worth, countries turn their backs on us after we have helped them, we get nothing in return. Aid is misused. We should help our own people first. Countries don't pay back the money. You can't buy friendship. Dick Goodwin sent me this poll. It has been taken for a special National Broadcast—The Brinkley Journal. That is just one of the hundreds of questions. It is thick as a Sears Roebuck Catalog. They say it is as close as anyone could come to a small community which would be a small small model of the U.S. The social, economic and racial makeup is the same as the makeup of America. “A good friend of mine is producing this show. He let me see this survey on condition I return it to him and not let another human see it, in fear it would jeopardize the networks neutral position. One thing that impresses me is that when people asked what should be discussed by Presidential candidates, foreign affairs is high. When they are asked what concerns them most in their daily lives, they do not mention foreign problems. This strengthens my conviction that the foreign affairs problem is left to the President to pursue the peace [in] Cuba and keep America strong.” I just read it last night.

I had the Foreign Affairs Committee down and I told them I would cut it from 4.9 to 3.4. I told them I had to have them stand by it to the dollar. I wouldn't give an inch. They asked me to let them trim a little bit so they could meet the argument. I told them I couldn't do it. If they started trimming everybody would start trimming. They agreed to go up and do it. They say they will fight if the leadership—and McCormack and Albert say they would fight. You are the only one I can talk to. I have appointments the rest of the day.

GWB: I will get hold of Dave and we will go up on the Hill right now on that IDA thing. Our problem here is that this has been the Treasury …

LBJ: I would just call Dillon or who ever is acting and get them up there and get Joe Barr and go up there. Let's do whatever we can and let me know.

GWB: I will.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Ball Papers, Foreign Aid (DLF) 1/21/64–8/16/66, Box 3. No classification marking. No other record of this conversation has been found. However, later in the day the President had conversations with Douglas Dillon (11:41 a.m.), Larry O'Brien (time unknown), Douglas Dillon (3:11 p.m. and 3:44 p.m.), Charles Hallack (3:50 p.m.), John McCormack (3:55 p.m.), and George Ball (4:47 p.m.) on foreign aid related matters. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recordings of Telephone Conversations, Tape 6405.02, PNOs 25 and 26, Tape 6405.03, PNOs 4, 5, 6, and 16) During a 5:35 p.m. conversation with McGeorge Bundy, the President referred to his meeting “socially” with the Foreign Affairs Committees the previous evening, the unpopularity of foreign assistance in both the parties, and Congressional plans to recommit the foreign assistance bill, adding to military assistance and taking an even larger amount from economic assistance. The President told Buddy that Secretaries Rusk and McNamara needed to get reengaged, along with AID Administrator Bell, and take the initiative from Congress; he told Buddy that it was time to prepare a supplemental for Vietnam—$70 million on the military side and $35 million on the economic side. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a Telephone Conversation, Tape F64.27, Side A, PNO 1)

11. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 11. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 7, 1964.

SUBJECT

Use of Foreign Aid Funds

This reports on the results in committing funds available in fiscal year 1964.

We committed 99.6 per cent of the available funds for both military and economic aid. Commitments through June 30 are as follows: Funds Available Commitments through June 30 Percent

Military Aid 1231.8 1230.8 99.9

Economic Aid 2175.6 2162.2 99.4

Contingency Fund 108.3 107.5 99.3

The results are the best of any year since the inception of the program. Excluding $6.8 million of loan receipts which could not be used, the unobligated balance carried forward is $15.2 million. This compares to $398.7 million last year, and is less than a fourth of the amount in the best previous year.

The attached table shows the unobligated funds by program category. The bulk of the unobligated economic aid funds consists of unused remnants from our overseas missions. We are tightening our procedures still further in an effort to reduce these residual balances in future years.

David E. Bell 2

MUTUAL DEFENSE AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS UNOBLIGATED/UNRESERVED BALANCESa

[June 30, 1964]

Fiscal Year-End Balances Compared—FY 1964b and FY 1963 (in millions of dollars) as of June 30, 1964

6/30/64 Preliminary 6/30/63 Actual

Available Not Available for Obligation c Total Available Not Available for Obligation c Total

Economic Assistance:

Development Loans * 4.6 4.6 96.2 24.0 120.2

Alliance for Progress Loans * 2.2 2.2 92.0 92.0

Technical Cooperation/Development Grants 6.0 6.0 47.3 47.3

Alliance TC/Grants .1 .1 2.7 2.7

Inter-American Social & Economic Program .2 .2 1.6 1.6

Supporting Assistance 4.0 4.0 6.0 6.0

International Organizations — — .3 .3

Contingency Fund .8 .8 127.1 127.1

Administrative Expenses-AID 1.3 1.3 2.0 2.0

Administrative Expenses-State — — * *

Surveys of Investment Opportunities .5 .5 1.1 1.1

American Schools & Hospitals Abroad:

Regular Program 1.2 1.2 — —

Foreign Currency Program .1 .1 .1 .1

Total Economic 14.2 6.8 21.0 376.4 24.0 400.4

Military Assistance: 1.0 1.0 22.3 22.3

Total Military & Economic 15.2 6.8 22.0 398.7 24.0 422.7

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, ADM 7–4 (White House) July–Nov., FY 1965. No classification marking.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Bell signed the original.

a Excludes non-budgetary accounts—investment guarantees, excess property revolving fund, and MAP credit sales account.

b Preliminary data based on preclosing trial balance.

c Represents funds not legally available for obligation during the fiscal year.

c Represents funds not legally available for obligation during the fiscal year.

* Less than $50 thousand.

* Less than $50 thousand.

* Less than $50 thousand.

* Less than $50 thousand.

12. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 12. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, October 2, 1964.

I–28,283/64

THROUGH

Assistant Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) (signed/C. J. Hitch)

SUBJECT

FY 65 Military Assistance Program

Introduction

Set forth below is a proposed revision of the FY 65 Military Assistance Program necessitated by substantial increases in requirements for Laos and Vietnam and decreases in our estimates of recoupments and reappropriations. Table 36 of 17 July 1964, at Tab A, shows the program which you presented to Congress, with our proposed adjustments marked in red.2 The program as adjusted fulfills your commitments.

1. Theory of Reduction. As in prior years, the reductions proposed for the FY 65 program fall principally in the Forward Defense Countries.3 In making these reductions, the order of priorities established by the Unified Commands have generally been followed. (It is recommended that a long range study be made to determine, from a political-military point of view, how best to structure MAP in coming years if the present low level of appropriations continues, which study should include recommendations as to the force structure and tasks to be sustained in MAP recipient countries.)

The substantial cuts to the program of the Forward Defense Countries in recent years have resulted in serious deficiencies in the capability of the armed forces of these countries, without reduction in the tasks assigned to such forces. The deferral of the same low priority items over successive years (e.g., naval vessels for Turkey and China) has resulted in marked weaknesses in certain areas where the risk is least unacceptable.

2. Assumptions. In preparing our proposed adjustments we have assumed that the appropriation will be the $1055 million requested by the President.4 We have also assumed that Section 510 authority will not be used;5 that no supplemental appropriation will be sought; and that no funds will be transferred from AID. To the extent that funds are made available from any of these sources upward adjustments to the program can be made.

3. Shortfall. The presently estimated shortfall of $123 million from the FY 65 program presented to Congress is made up as follows (see Tab B6 for details): Item $ Million

Congo—Increase $4.3

Laos—Increase $33.9

Vietnam—Increase $19.4

Guinea—new program $1.0

Minor miscellaneous increase $5.4

Reappropriations loss $24.0

Recoupment loss $35.0

Total Shortfall $123.0

4. Additional Requirements. In addition to the increase listed in paragraph 3 above, there are potential additional increases of $61 million, two thirds of which is for Vietnam, plus an additional $100 million if we do not get the credit guarantee authority. (The chances at this moment are very good7 that we will have the credit authority.) These potential increases have not been provided for in the revised program. The amounts and details are at Tab C.8

5. Summary of Proposed Reductions. The reductions we propose in the FY 65 program, as shown in red on Table 36 at Tab A, are: Item $ Million

Hawk Consortium Cost—deferred to FY 66 $12.0

NATO Infrastructure—decrease in estimate $10.0

Program reduction in Forward Defense Countries (Analysis of the impact is at Tab B): $ Reduction MAP Asset Adjust Program Reduction % of Program Reduction

Greece $13.6 $5.5 $19.1 (23.6)

Turkey 19.3 3.7 23.0 (17.5)

Iran 5.3 — 5.3 (10.4)

Rep of China 28.1 -1.5 26.6 27.5)

Korea 18.7 1.4 20.1 (13.8)

Pakistan 1.6 — 1.6 (4.0)

Thailand 1.0 -.2 .8 (2.5)

Philippines .1 .8 .9 (4.0)

India .5 — .5 (1.0)

$88.2 $9.7 $97.9 88.2

Miscellaneous minor reductions:

$12.8 $5.7 $18.5 12.8

Total Dollar Reductions $123.0

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance FY 1965, July–October. Secret. An attached October 13 transmittal memorandum from General Robert J. Wood, Director of Military Assistance, to AID Director Bell indicates that Secretary of Defense McNamara approved the FY 1965 Military Assistance Program and requests Bell to approve the program for implementation. In addition to Tabs A, B, and C cited below, Tab D, “Areas Considered for Reductions But Not Recommended,” and Tab E, “Amendment of Current Retention and Transfer Policies to Increase Excess Material Available to MAP,” are not printed.

2 Tab A, “Summary of Proposed Reductions,” September 30, is not printed.

3 On May 21, Secretary McNamara delivered a speech in New York before the National Industrial Conference Board in which he argued against further reductions in military assistance to the 11 “Forward Defense” nations. For text of the speech, see Department of State Bulletin, June 1, 1964, pp. 893–899, or for excerpts, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 1255–1258.

4 For FY 1965, President Johnson originally requested the Congress to appropriate $1 billion in military assistance; see Document 4.

5 78 Stat. 1012 (P.L. 88–633), approved on October 7, 1964.

6 Tab B, “Analysis of Adjusted FY 65 MAP,” September 29, is not printed.

7 Almost certain. J. T. McN. [Footnote in the source text.]

8 Tab C, “Potential Additions to FY 65 MAP,” is not printed.

13. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 13. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 7, 1964.

SUBJECT

Legislative Results—Foreign Aid

Our initial assessment is that the legislative results of the session just ended are the most favorable in many years:2 —foreign aid funds were cut below your request by only 8 per cent, the lowest percentage cut since foreign aid began;

—nothing at all was cut from military assistance at either the author-izing or the appropriation stage;

—an ample record was made which would support a supplemental request for funds if one should later be found necessary;

—no significant new restrictions were written into the foreign aid bill; and

—we achieved all the legislative improvement we asked for, with the single (but important) exception of the special personnel authorities we requested.

These good results came about in our judgment primarily because of the following factors: —the President's strong personal support at every stage, manifested both publicly and directly to Members of Congress;

—the soundness of the strategy of asking for a minimum budget figure;

—Mr. Mahon's strong leadership at the appropriations stage in the House;3

—some demonstrable progress in tightening up the program, reducing AID staff, phasing out countries where aid is no longer necessary, etc.

One might conclude that the logical approach to next year's legislation would be to follow the lines that were so successful this year. However, the heavy demands on the time of the President, and the extensive legislative controversy, which are required by the present pattern lead to the question whether we should not ask for a multi-year instead of an annual authorization. Furthermore, Senator Fulbright has said to Secretary Rusk that he wants us to consider again the fragmented legislative package he proposed last winter.

We will examine these and other alternatives and have recommendations ready after the election.

David E. Bell 4

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, ADM 7–4 (White House) July–November, FY 1965. No classification marking. A covering note by Frederick F. Simmons, Executive Secretary of AID, reads: “Please distribute only to Gaud, Assistant Administrators, and Tom Farmer.” Copies were sent to Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Director of the Bureau of the Budget Kermit Gordon, Under Secretary George W. Ball, Thomas C. Mann, Lawrence O'Brien, and Ralph Dungan.

2 The Foreign Assistance Act of 1964, P.L. 88–633 (78 Stat. 1009), was approved on October 7, 1964. The President had many telephone discussions during the legislative debate running up to October 7 in which he defended his $3.5 billion request as both reasonable and essential. Good representative examples are his conversations with George Mahon on June 15 and AID Administrator Bell on June 17. On June 17 President Johnson also discussed his foreign assistance request with New York Times reporter James Reston. The President regretted Republican opposition to his foreign assistance request and told Reston the $3.5 billion he requested was less than the $4.9 billion President Kennedy had requested the year before and was below the level requested in any year of the Eisenhower administration. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a Telephone Conversation, Tape 6406.06, PNO 22)

3 Representative George H. Mahon (D.-Texas) became Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee on May 12, 1964.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Bell signed the original.

14. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 14. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 13, 1964.

SUBJECT

Use of Foreign Aid Funds—FY 1965

Foreign aid commitments for the first quarter of FY 1965 were more than double those for the first quarter of FY 1964:

FY 1965 FY 1964

Funds Available(millions) Commitments Through Sept. 30, 1964 Percent Commitments Through Sept. 30, 1963 Percent

Military 1,141.6 390.0 34.2 213.2 17.8

Economic 2,183.6* 323.7 14.8 133.4 6.2

Contingency Fund 102.4 — — — —

Total 3,427.6 713.7 20.8 346.6 9.8

These figures reflect our continuing drive to get things done more promptly and efficiently. They also reflect changes in the situations we are dealing with; thus, the increase in military assistance commitments compared to last year is due largely to a higher rate of activity in Viet Nam, Laos and the Congo.

The FY 1965 economic aid commitments include a very important $140 million loan to Pakistan to finance imports from the U.S. of iron and steel, chemicals, and other materials. This loan is part of the financing necessary to permit Pakistan to eliminate import controls on raw materials and spare parts—a step which we have been urging strongly as a major move to help the private sector in Pakistan grow faster, by increasing the flow of raw materials into the economy, by putting idle capacity to work, and by allowing small businessmen ready access to raw materials supplies. Other donor countries are also helping to finance this import liberalization.

In addition to a better showing on commitments of foreign aid funds, we are also doing much better this year in processing applications by private U.S. investors for specific risk guaranties for their investments in less developed countries. During the first quarter of FY 1965 we issued 150 coverages for a total of $299.5 million, as opposed to 27 coverages for $42.4 million during the first quarter of last year.

Attached are tables showing commitments made and guaranties issued in the first quarters of FY 1964 and FY 1965.

David E. Bell 2

Attachment

MUTUAL DEFENSE AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMSSTATUS OF FUNDS

First Quarter FY 1965 (9/30/64) First Quarter FY 1964 (9/30/63)

Funds Available (millions) Commitments Commitments

Amt. % of Funds Available Amt % of Funds Available

Military Assistance 1,141.6 390.0 34.2 213.2 17.8

Economic Assistance

Development Loans 798.6 150.2 18.6 10.7 1.3

Technical Cooperation 228.2 38.1 16.7 30.3 13.3

Alliance Loans 435.0 21.2 4.9 41.0 8.5

Alliance Technical Cooperation 89.9 10.5 11.7 10.3 11.2

Supporting Assistance 420.9 73.9 17.6 27.3 7.6

Other Programs 210.8 29.7 14.1 13.8 7.3

Total Economic 2,163.8 323.7 14.8 133.4 6.2

Contingency Funds 102.4 * — — —

Total Economic & Military 3,427.6 713.7 20.8 346.6 9.8

SELECTIVE RISK INVESTMENT GUARANTIES ISSUED

First Quarter FY 1965 First Quarter FY 1964

Number of Coverages Issued 150 27

Amount of Guaranties Issued (millions of dollars)

Convertibility 106.6 23.9

Expropriation 124.2 18.2

War Risk 68.8 0.3

Total 299.6 42.4

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Administrator's Weekly Report to the President, FY 1965. Limited Official Use.

* Includes $300 million which may be released only by Presidential determination.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Bell signed the original.

* Less than $50,000

15. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator for Program of the Agency for International Development (Chenery) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 15. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator for Program of the Agency for International Development (Chenery) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Washington, October 17, 1964.

SUBJECT

Review of FY 65 MAP—Meeting Scheduled for 4:30 P.M. Monday, October 19, with Assistant Secretary McNaughton, Ambassador Thompson and PC

We received on October 13 General Wood's transmittal of Secretary McNamara's proposed MAP for the current year (copy previously provided).2 This program is based on the $1,055 million of NOA and $117.8 million recoupments expected to be available for meeting FY 65 requirements. Original requirements were modified by program increases in Vietnam, Laos and the Congo of about $65 million and reductions from DOD estimates of about $60 million of anticipated reappropriations and recoupments. The resulting short-fall primarily affects four forward defense country programs in Greece, Turkey, Taiwan and Korea. State regional bureaus and the JCS have strongly objected to $88.8 million in cuts proposed for these four countries and another $5.3 million cut from Iran.

A total of $440.9 million has been approved by A/AID including the entire FY 1965 MAP for Vietnam and Laos. All approvals were specifically concurred in by G/PM and the State and AID bureaus concerned. As of October 16, DOD has made FY 1965 MAP allocations to the military services totaling $502.3 million, which includes the $440.9 million approved by A/AID, plus continuing MAP administrative and supply operations costs, which will later be largely attributed to and included within full annual country program levels.

Our task is to evaluate the full seriousness of these reductions against alternatives to cut elsewhere in the program or to supplement total funds available.

Possible Additional Resources

A supplemental appropriation request for MAP alone or use of section 510 authority to draw down Defense stocks is probably excluded unless there is a significant new situation which justifies an emergency appeal to the Congress this year or next. A shift of some of the Southeast Asia combat requirements to the DOD budget, which has been actively discussed in DOD and State, appears to be a possible course for the future, but given legislative history would be difficult to undertake this year unless, again, a new situation arises of the kind justifying a supplemental request or use of Section 510. Aside from small additional recoupments which might become available later in the year, this leaves a possible transfer from AID to MAP as the most practical course open to augment FY 65 funds. Attachment A3 contains a statement of the current status of economic aid program claims against the Contingency Fund and a rundown of the prospective DL demand and supply situation. DOD also has potential claims of $61 million for Vietnam, Congo and possible increased cost of the F–5 program. Contingent economic needs appear low leaving room for consideration of substantial transfer later in the year to MAP. Note however a legislative relations question on using contingency funds to supplement regular appropriations (John Funari feels strongly that this is not desirable).

Possible Reductions in the DOD Proposed Program

ISA has done a good job in screening requirements, we believe. To date we have found only four categories of proposed MAP which need further examination but are potentially sources of savings up to $50 million in: (1) NATO infrastructure for Europe—$50 million looks high, as it has turned out to be in past years, and although DOD has already cut this item $10 million, up to another $20 million reduction appears reasonable to us and to some ISA staff. The U.S. is however committed to support the construction program and would have no option but to pay any bills presented.

(2) Credit revolving fund—the proposed program includes $66.8 million for the fund, which added to an expected $40 million in repayments available for further credit financing this year, gives $106.8 million to carry out a proposed $205 million lending operation. The credit assistance program provides $70 million of increases for India, Iran and Libya offset by $18 million of decreases for LA compared to the Congressional presentation.4 Attachment B3 indicates the loans which DOD is considering and which have remained unchanged since June. We have seen little evidence that the credit assistance program has been submitted to the same review, in light of MAP short-falls, as the grant program in Greece, Turkey, Taiwan and Korea. There is a possible saving of $10 to $30 million if some proposed credits (Venezuela for example) which appear to be low priority are denied, deferred, or met by means outside of the Foreign Assistance Program. (Note that most of this potential saving is lost if the guarantee cannot be used for India.) It might also be worth exploring how bank guaranteed credits might substitute for grants in Greece, for example, with a resulting net saving for use in the short-fall countries.

(3) Indonesia—Asian fixed communications project financed in prior years included $8 million of equipment for Indonesia, which could now be diverted to Thailand or elsewhere, with resultant savings for FY 65 program.5

(4) Reductions in Laos, resulting from Secretary McNamara inquiry.6

Alternative Courses of Action (See Attachment C)7

(a) Defer program approval until overall 65 funding question is clearer.

(b) Hold back approval for the amount on the five short-fall countries and four possible reduction items noted above, and apply savings if later found to increases in Greece, Turkey, Iran, Korea and Taiwan, but proceed with the balance of the program.

(c) Permit DOD to overprogram by $40 million at this time on the assumption of a later consideration of a transfer from A.I.D. funds. This would permit partial restoration of cuts in the five problem countries.

(d) Combination of (b) and (c), with potential restoration of all of $94.1 million cuts.

Hollis Chenery

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance FY 1965, July–October. Secret. Drafted by Robert B. Black (PC/MAD) on October 16.

2 See footnote 1, Document 12.

3 Not printed.

4 A handwritten note in the left margin at this point reads: “$20 can be saved.”

3 Not printed.

5 A handwritten note in the left margin next to this paragraph reads: “Maybe $3 or $4 next year.”

6 A handwritten note in the left margin next to this sentence reads: “Prob. $6 can be saved.”

7 Not printed.

16. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the Director of Military Assistance, Department of Defense (Wood) 16. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the Director of Military Assistance, Department of Defense (Wood)1

Washington, October 27, 1964.

Thanks for inviting me to your clambake yesterday. It was highly educational, though I thought the people from the field put up a rather poor case (do we really need the CINCs in the MAP business?).

For what it's worth, I'm about convinced that a $1 billion MAP ceiling is a bit too low, if it must also accommodate such major program distortions as Laos/Vietnam. As I see it, Secretary McNamara had the right feel for the “peacetime” MAP level we could live with, even including say $65–70 million for Vietnam (the FY 60–61 level) and $10–20 million for Laos. But when almost $300 million goes into this undeclared war, it distorts the whole program. Ergo, I'd argue that we could quite honestly tell the Congress that we could still live with $1 billion if Vietnam/Laos were separately handled, but need $1.2 billion if it is to be included.

My own reservations about MAP, which I mentioned only briefly, go more to the key country programs themselves than to the global totals. I gravely question whether the existing programs for Korea, GRC, Turkey, Greece, and a few others give us the optimum military or political return for the MAP dollar. Turkey is a good case in point, as graphically demonstrated by the Haynes study.2 Nor have we yet achieved the optimum inter-relating of our MAP and economic aid programs to insure the best return per overall US aid dollar. I doubt that we need six-twelve months of intensive study to get at the most obvious weaknesses. Instead I'd urge a quick fix in time to influence the FY 66 program, while the more comprehensive studies are underway. Otherwise we'll just compound our problems further and make a turn-around that much more difficult.

R. W. Komer 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret. Copies were sent to John McNaughton and McGeorge Bundy.

2 Not further identified.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

17. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk 17. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, October 28, 1964.

SUBJECT

The Future of Foreign Aid

1. After a protracted examination of the problems involved, I have concluded that we must look forward, in the next phase of policy, to an expansion in the over-all level of economic and military aid, as well as to changes in the balance of aid policy which would give a heightened emphasis to agriculture and to the role of private enterprise both within developing countries and from abroad. I believe we should be prepared, under your leadership, to present this judgment to the President shortly after November 3.

2. With respect to the scale of economic aid, requirements will increase for two reasons. First, because in certain parts of the world (notably Latin America) improved self-help performance by the developing nations themselves automatically yield an expanded legitimate claim for external assistance; but, with the exception of a few countries, this enlarged external assistance cannot yet come wholly from private or other more conventional sources. Second, because expanded programs in agricultural development (discussed below) to some extent must be in addition to programs designed to expand infrastructure, education, etc.

3. With respect to military aid, the combination of increased tension in Asia with enlarged claims in Africa and, perhaps, for certain legitimate purposes in Latin America make it unlikely that the present $1 billion military aid ceiling will prove compatible with the national interest. It simply does not appear sufficient both to cope with our continuing commitments plus inevitable crisis situations.

4. With respect to agriculture, we have prepared a paper which has already been made available to you and been widely distributed in the town.2 It seeks to make clear the converging reasons why an increased emphasis is required both within developing countries and within our own aid programs. The reasons are essentially these: a. The gap, in certain areas, between the rate of increase in population and the rate of increase in local food production, yielding a slide into increased dependence on U.S. food surpluses;

b. The grave structural problem of a number of the more advanced developing countries which not only require an enlarged flow of agricultural products (for food, industrial raw materials, and exports) but also require the entrance of large rural populations into the markets for manufactured goods, if industrial production (now marked by substantial excess capacity) is to expand efficiently;

c. The need to pursue in the less advanced of the developing countries better balanced programs of urban-rural development to avoid a repetition of the structural distortions now to be seen in the more advanced developing countries; and

d. The important and largely neglected role of improvements in agricultural production and marketing in the struggle to contain cost-of-living indexes and inflation in developing countries.

5. We must, therefore, look forward to accelerated programs to expand food production in the developing areas. These will require stepped-up adaptive research and an experimental approach to institutions affecting agricultural incomes, incentives and distribution. They will also require such changes in policies and institutions within developing countries as will induce much larger applications of chemical fertilizers as well as increased production of chemical fertilizers. In addition, we shall probably be called upon in the transition period to generate and transfer substantially higher levels of food surplus from the United States, Canada, Western Europe, etc. than we transfer at present.

6. With respect to private enterprise, we are at a moment of both need and possibility for expanding its role both within developing countries and from abroad. The need arises from the fact that the foundations for industrialization have been laid in a good many countries, but the kind of diversified industry required for the next phase (including modern marketing methods) can only be efficiently developed by private enterprise. This means that relatively more emphasis should be given in our programs to development banks or other institutions which can lend to private firms within developing nations, as opposed to the more classic intergovernmental loans for infrastructure. The opportunity arises from the gradual waning of the old ideological struggle about government versus private enterprise, a waning to be observed, for example, in India and many parts of Latin America. There is a parallel growing sophistication in U.S. and European private enterprise about local sensibilities and the terms on which foreign enterprise can operate within a developing nation to mutual advantage.

7. This argues for a heightened AID effort in the next phase both to accelerate the generation of local private enterprise and to expand the contribution of U.S. foreign enterprise in the development business. Work in this direction is already going forward, much of it quite hopeful. What is needed is additional high level impetus.

8. I would hope that shortly after November 3 you would interest yourself directly in this array of issues, since, evidently, a decision to expand and shift the emphasis of our aid programs requires judgment and support at the highest level of the government.

1 Source: Department of State, S/PC Files: Lot 70 D 199, Assistance to Foreign Countries—1964. Limited Official Use. Copies were sent to Ball, W. Averell Harriman, Llewellyn E. Thompson, Bell, Hollis B. Chenery, and G. Griffith Johnson. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “S saw.”

2 Presumably a reference to a September 24 paper entitled “Agriculture and the Future of Development and Aid Policy.” (Ibid., Food—Population)

18. Memorandum From the Acting Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Thompson) to Secretary of State Rusk 18. Memorandum From the Acting Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Thompson) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, November 9, 1964.

SUBJECT

DOD Draft Legislation Transferring MAP to the DOD Budget

I bring to your attention an evolving problem in consideration of MAP legislation, which raises very serious issues affecting State Department ability to exercise a reasonable influence in the formulation and execution of Military Assistance Programs. The major elements are the following: 1. As you know, without making any final decisions, we have been examining the question of transferring Military Assistance to the DOD budget, on the grounds that this might ease some of the difficulties in obtaining adequate funds. Also, since a very substantial part of Military Assistance funds are expended for foreign forces activities in the U.S. military interest (e.g. Korea, Laos, Vietnam, Congo), a transfer to the DOD budget might facilitate internal DOD transfer of funds to meet military exigencies.

2. Discussions on the draft legislation have been carried on by State Department staff and the DOD General Counsel's Office. The DOD proposed legislation is basically similar to that which was considered last fall (suspended due to Congressional attitudes).2 At that time, the State Department had strong objections to various proposals which DOD incorporated into the draft legislation. George Ball expressed these views in a letter to Bill Bundy of November 30, 1963.3 The substance of our objections was that the DOD language effectively circumscribed and virtually gutted appropriate State Department control over foreign policy aspects of military assistance. Virtually identical language in all respects has been reintroduced by the DOD General Counsel's Office, and is being maintained against repeated objections voiced by the State Department staff-level representatives.

3. The issues can perhaps best be appreciated if it is recognized that the present legislation is formulated in terms of authorizing the President to furnish military assistance on such terms and conditions as he may determine, subject to certain legislatively-imposed restrictions. Exceptions to these restrictions can normally be made on a Presidential finding of necessity in terms of U.S. interests, with appropriate notification to the Congress. The Secretary of State is responsible for the continuous supervision and general direction of the programs authorized by the Act, including but not limited to determining whether there shall be a military assistance program for a particular country and the dollar amount, in order to assure that MAP is effectively integrated with economic assistance and our general foreign policy objectives. The Secretary of Defense has certain practical responsibilities related to program management.

4. The DOD draft legislation would substantially remove from the President most of the powers presently residing in him under the present act, and would give to the Secretary of Defense the right to make these various determinations. These include such matters as: a. The terms, conditions, and eligibility of countries to receive military aid;

b. Authority to initiate credit sales;

c. Authority to detail personnel to foreign governments and international organizations;

d. Authority to enter into international arrangements for the acquisition or construction of facilities for joint use with friendly foreign forces.

Furthermore, the language with respect to the Secretary of State's authority would be modified so that it would only speak in vague terms of that authority, essentially that nothing contained in the Act shall be construed to infringe on the powers of the Secretary of State.

Finally, DOD legislation attempts once again to achieve an objective which the State Department has repeatedly rejected: to grant to the Secretary of Defense authority to maintain special missions or staffs outside the U.S., in such countries and for such periods of time he may desire, compensating them at any of the rates provided under the Foreign Serv-ice Act of 1946.4 This could permit creation of a foreign service composed of DOD civilian personnel, which we have consistently rejected. Indeed, in terms of DOD effort to establish a senior defense representative (as in the UK), a recent DOD/State/BOB report on Europe, approved by the Joint Committee on DOD Representation Abroad, has decisively rejected this concept. This Committee is composed of Messrs. Crockett, Horwitz (DOD) and Lewis (BOB).

5. I have taken this opportunity to inform you of this development, because I think that the issue of the language of the draft legislation may be raised by Mr. McNamara in the near future, or you may wish to express your concern with these developments.

6. I recommend that, if the occasion arises, you say to Mr. McNamara: a. You understand that DOD staff is continuing to reject views on important elements of the legislation, which the State Department expressed a year ago. You believe that DOD should be responsive to these views.

b. Without prejudice to your final conclusions on the advisability of transferring MAP to the DOD budget, you think that the President should retain the necessary authorities, rather than having these transferred wholesale to the Secretary of Defense.

c. In any event, the Secretary of State should retain authority in the statute for determining whether there should be a Military Assistance Program in a particular country, its dollar amount, and its relationship to overall foreign policy objectives.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, ADM 7–4 (White House) July–November, FY 1965. Confidential. Drafted by Howard Meyers and George L. Warren (G/PM) on November 6 and sent through Under Secretary Ball.

2 A copy of the draft Department of Defense legislation has not been found; however, in a November 3 memorandum to Rusk and Ball, Legal Adviser Leonard Meeker wrote that a proposal from the Department of Defense to separate military assistance legislation from the Foreign Assistance Act was shelved last year “on the basis of the reactions of Speaker McCormack and Chairman Morgan, and partly as a result of a decision in the Executive Branch to seek minimum changes in the Foreign Aid legislation.” (Ibid.)

3 This letter has not been further identified.

4 P.L. 79–724 (60 Stat. 999) was approved on August 13, 1946.

19. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 19. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, November 11, 1964.

Dear Mr. Secretary:

We have reviewed the adjusted FY 1965 Military Assistance Program attached to General Wood's letter of October 13.2 I approve herewith for implementation grant programs totaling $1,107.7 million, inclusive of the $440.9 million in approvals given to date in MAP 65–1 through 65–3 under Continuing Resolution funding authority. This amount also includes $16.0 million which, together with $24.9 million of anticipated receipts to the MAP Credit Assistance Account, provides $40.9 million to finance directly or via guarantee authority interim programs of credit assistance sales that currently total $122.3 million.

With the exceptions noted in Annex No. 1,3 individual grant program figures are in conformity with the Total Adjusted Program figures presented in Tab A to Mr. McNaughton's memorandum (I–28,283/64) dated October 2, 1964.4 Individual credit sales figures approved are in conformity with the data appended to the memorandum from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense/ISA (ILN) dated October 14, 1964 (I–14983/64) and amendments thereto.5

The program values approved for Greece, Turkey, Iran, China, and Korea in Annex No. 1 are considered interim and minimal levels, to be augmented to the extent possible from funds now placed in reserve, any savings generated by drop-outs from FY 1965 MAP, and by transfer from the Foreign Assistance Act Contingency Fund or from other authorized sources. Reconsideration of the FY 1965 MAP levels for these countries will follow a forthcoming review of total fund availabilities and of these or other priority claims that may be identifiable at that time.

Sincerely yours,

David E. Bell

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Chron Files, 11/6–11/11, 1964. Secret. A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Noted—WSG".

2 See footnote 1, Document 12.

3 Not printed.

4  Document 12.

5 Not found.

20. Report of the President's Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy 20. Report of the President's Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy1

Washington, undated.

CHAPTER ONE AID

1. Economic Assistance and U.S. Foreign Policy

Foreign assistance programs have developed in response to a series of crises: post-War European prostration, the Korean War, flareups along the Iron Curtain, the collapse of colonialism, and growing social and political unrest in Latin America. In the underdeveloped world, they have gradually evolved from stop-gap measures designed to deal with the most visible aspects of these crises toward a more comprehensive attack upon the underlying economic and political problems from which crises arise.

This evolution became explicit in 1961 when the Act for International Development established continuing economic growth and the creation of self-reliant societies as the long term objectives of our assistance efforts.2 As a result, more than half of the funds appropriated to AID are now provided to finance development loans and grants, in contrast to 1961, when three quarters of comparable appropriations went for military security and political stability. Other free-world donors have also substantially increased their contributions in both bilateral and multilateral assistance to developing countries.

The effective linkage of foreign assistance programs to basic foreign policy objectives has required years of improvisation and experimentation, not all of it successful. Much of this experimentation took place in countries along the Iron Curtain from Korea to the Middle East, where we had initially responded to threats of Communist expansion. We have to our credit notable successes such as Taiwan, Greece, Iran and Israel where rapid economic growth and increasing political stability have been achieved, permitting the phasing out of U.S. economic assistance. On the other hand, our experience in Korea and Turkey has been much less pleasant, despite similarly large aid inputs. Since these countries have not yet been able to achieve rapid growth and increased self-sufficiency, we have had to continue very substantial aid programs because we cannot accept the military and political consequences of economic failure. In a third group of countries an interplay of U.S. and international political considerations, host country intransigence and the absence of any immediate external Communist threat have resulted in curtailment or termination of aid, though the desirability of this course can at least be questioned. Countries in this group include Indonesia, Burma, and Iraq.

From the lessons learned through this diverse experience, we have drawn the fundamental propositions of our current aid philosophy. They are as follows: 1. Despite temporary preoccupation with other objectives, the overriding concern of viable governments in the less developed countries must be the climb from poverty.

2. Sustained progress in increasing per capita incomes, rather than attainment of any particular income level, is the meaningful test of a government's effectiveness in this regard.

3. The interests of the United States and the other advanced countries of the free world require that these countries apply their attention and resources to this problem, that their governments achieve the degree of success necessary to maintain the confidence of their citizenries and their own ability to keep order, and that progress is made in the context of social and political institutions compatible with our own.

4. The policy instrument best suited to furthering these interests is foreign assistance, both as an indispensable source of growth-stimulating capital and as a lever to encourage recipients to adopt the policies necessary for progress.

Underlying all of these propositions, of course, is the blatant unacceptability of alternative paths of poor-country evolution, characterized by social and political chaos, massive popular dissatisfaction, worsening of living conditions, and quite likely, tendencies toward coercive systems of government on the Communist model.

In mounting programs to implement this philosophy, we have made two key operating assumptions: that the sense of progress necessary to produce the desired recipient attitudes and behavior can be maintained if per capita growth rates average about 2% in the aggregate; and that the ability of recipients to make effective use of aid as revealed by experience to date places a limit on the amount of aid the United States will supply. These principles have been most clearly manifested in our large programs in such countries as India and Pakistan, where our political interests are major and prospects for achieving economic growth are encouraging. In Latin America and Africa aid levels in each country are determined by how important that country's progress is to the United States, how effectively it uses resources for development, and whether aid is available from non-U.S. sources. Only in a very few countries—Viet Nam, Laos, Jordan—are security considerations so dominant that we still provide economic assistance almost without regard for longer term development prospects.

Since Latin America is politically very important to the U.S. and European resources are available for Africa, we have given high priority to Latin America. In Africa, we have tried to maintain European aid predominance while the U.S. played a supplementary role, though in Tunisia, Nigeria and Liberia and, eventually, East Africa, a major U.S. effort is warranted by our criteria.

American assistance programs have thus become more diversified geographically and more oriented toward long term development. There is a similar trend in the assistance activities of the Western European countries, although many still concentrate their aid in former colonies. As a result, fewer underdeveloped countries are now dependent on a single dominant donor and the larger ones receive assistance from many sources. Thus, an increasing portion of all assistance is now devoted to long term development—perhaps $6 billion out of a Free World total of military and economic assistance of $8–9 billion.

2. Requirements for external capital under the current aid philosophy

Given this trend and the theory which underlies it, what is the probable magnitude of future needs of the underdeveloped countries for external capital? This section outlines the past trends in development performance and external capital inflow and estimates the results to be anticipated from alternative levels in the future. All the estimates are based on experience to date with the recipients' performance and capacity to use external aid.

a. Past trends in growth and capital inflow

Since 1950 the combined Gross National Product of the underdeveloped countries has grown at about 4.2%—somewhat more rapidly in the export boom following the Korean War and less rapidly since. The gross investment required to sustain this rate of growth is equal to 16% of their gross national product of about $200 billion. The inflow of foreign capital has financed a share of this investment which has risen from less than 20% to nearly 30%. Since about half of growth has been offset by population increases, foreign capital has made possible more than half of the increase achieved in per capita income.

The distribution of this capital flow among countries has changed markedly, and it has been increasingly from public sources. In countries with relatively effective development programs, such as India, Pakistan, and Nigeria, needs for external capital have increased rapidly and the increase has been financed almost entirely from public funds. As shown on Table 1, the flow of public resources has risen at 11.5% per year over the past decade and is still rising at 10% per year. The flow of private investment, on the other hand, has increased at only 4% for the decade and has actually declined over the past five years. Since 1958, therefore, the total net flow of resources to the less developed countries has grown at about 5% per year—not much faster than their own increase in savings.

TABLE 1

Net Flow of Resources from DAC Countries to LDC's ($ billions)

1950–55 Average 1956–63 Average 1961–63 Average 1963 5-year growth rate (1958–1963) 10-year growth rate (1952–1962)

Public

U.S. Bilateral $1.1 $2.2 $3.4 $3.6 10% 12%

Other Bilateral .7 1.5 2.0 2.1 7% 11%

Total Bilateral 1.8 3.7 5.4 5.7 9% 11.5%

Multilateral .2 .3 .6 .8 21% 11.5%

Total, public 2.0 4.0 6.0 6.5 10% 11.5%

Private 1.5 2.7 2.3 2.1 -5% 4.3%

Total DAC flow 3.5 6.7 8.3 8.5 5% 9.0%

Total, All Sources (see Table 5) n.a. 7.0 9.0 9.4 5% —

The U.S. share of public assistance provided by the Development Assistance Committee countries declined from 62% in 1956 to 55% in 1959. It has now risen again to 63% as a result of expenditures under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961. The multilateral portion of the DAC total has risen from 8% to 12% and is expected to rise further.

United States economic assistance is currently provided through three main channels: AID bilateral programs (50%), P.L. 480 (37%) and the Export-Import Bank (8%). U.S. contributions to multilateral programs total only 5% of our total assistance. Over the past several years the commitments of the Export-Import Bank (which were 18% of the U.S. assistance in 1960–61) have declined substantially, while the share of P.L. 480 has risen by 10%.

b. Assistance needs and development policies

Past estimates of the future needs of the underdeveloped world for external capital have not provided adequate measures of the desirable flow because they have not taken sufficient account of the leverage effects of alternative assistance levels. In order to weigh more accurately the gains from higher aid levels against their cost, AID has now calculated the capital inflow that would be required in each of the principal recipient countries under various assumptions as to rates of growth, effectiveness in resource mobilization, and possible growth of exports. These calculations (which are shown in detail in an appendix)3 yield the estimates of total capital requirements shown in Table 2.

The need for external capital in any particular country is heavily dependent on (1) growth rates achieved, (2) success in improving development policies, and (3) ability to increase exports to advanced countries. To maintain the growth rate of 4.2% (less than 2% per capita) achieved over the past decade will require annual increases of 5% in external capital, about the rate of increase which has prevailed in the past few years. With the improvement in recipient internal performance that is envisioned in the better development plans, the average rate of growth could be raised to 5.1% (Table 2, line B). The capital inflow to support this effort would have to increase at 9% per year between now and 1970, but this rate of increase should then taper off.

By 1970 the GNP of the less developed countries would be $14 billion higher under the second assumptions than under the first, and investment would be $8 billion higher. Two-thirds of the required increase in investment would be financed by increased domestic savings and the remainder by an additional $2.8 billion of external capital.

Table 2 also gives external capital requirements corresponding to other combinations of growth and self-help performance. The range of capital requirements on the more likely assumptions (A and B) is $9–13 billion in 1970 and $12–18 billion in 1975, which corresponds to an annual rate of increase of between 5% and 10%. However, if all the underdeveloped countries could achieve the growth rates labeled “Best Possible"—rates which have so far been accomplished only in the most successful cases—the aggregate growth rate would rise to 6%. The corresponding range of capital requirements in 1970 would be $11–18 billion depending on the effectiveness of internal policies.

Requirements for external capital would be reduced somewhat for all growth patterns if more optimistic prospects can be assumed for the expansion of exports from these countries. Given present world trade policies and current prospects for growth in the advanced countries, total exports are not likely to grow more rapidly than the 4% rate of the past decade. Raising this rate of growth by a third would result in an increase in the level of LDC exports in 1970 of $3.2 billion. That would reduce the overall requirements for external capital by about $1.5 billion. Thus, it takes $2 of increased exports to save $1 of aid on the average. In countries where balance of payments is not the principal factor limiting growth, of course, it is necessary to raise taxes and savings as well in order to reduce the aid required.

TABLE 2

EFFECT OF LDC PERFORMANCE ON EXTERNAL CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS1

($ billions)

(Annual rate of growth in requirements from 1962–1970 shown in parentheses)

1970 Capital Requirements 1975 Capital Requirements

Growth of Capital Flow in 1962 Historical Performance Plan Performance Best Possible Performance Historical Performance Plan Performance Best Possible Performance

(A) Historical (Mean 4.3%) 9.1 (5%) 8.9 (5%) 7.4 (3%) 11.8 11.5 9.2

(B) Plan Targets (Mean 5.1%) 6.0 12.8 (10%) 11.7 (9%) 8.6 (5%) 18.4 17.1 11.7

(C) Best Possible (Mean 5.9%) 17.7 (15%) 14.3 (12%) 10.5 (7%) 25.8 22.1 15.6

3. Debt service and terms

To sustain a future growth rate of about 5%, the net resource transfer to the LDC's must grow at an average annual rate of about 9% from now until 1970. The financial implications of this annual increase are shown in Table 3. The gross financial requirement over the period 1964–70 comes to $105 billion plus the service on new debt in 1970 of about $3 billion. However, if most of the funds carry short grace periods and commercial interest rates, the burden of new debt could reach $7 billion.

TABLE 3

LDC Gross Financial Requirements, 1964–1970

($ billions)

I. Requirements

Cumulative Resource Requirement (1964–1970) $80

Cumulative Service of Pre-1964 Debt (1964–1970) 25

Total Financial Requirements 105

Net Resource Requirement (1970) 15

Gross Resource Requirement (1970) 18–20

II. Illustrative Sources of Financing (1970)

Grants 5–6

Official Credits and Private Investment 13–15

Growing short term debt severely limits the ability of the LDC's to finance the imports required by their growth targets. If a net resource transfer of $15 billion is required by 1970, then the gross external finance required will be at least $18–20 billion, unless an increasing proportion of aid extended between now and 1979 is on softer terms.

In recent years the external debt of the less developed countries has grown at about 15% per year. Their annual repayments have been rising even faster. Easier terms on official credits have been more than offset by the growing volume of suppliers' credits, which bear much harder terms. Indeed, the easing of the terms on official credits has made it possible for the underdeveloped countries to contract for a larger amount of suppliers' credits. The annual debt servicing burden for $1 of suppliers' credit has been about $.25 as against only $.06 for $1 of official credits.

This increase in debt service requirements would make little difference if enough gross external assistance were always forthcoming so that the required net resources could be transferred. But this is not the case. Sharp increases in debt service requirements actually provoke liquidity crises, since gross lending does not readily expand to meet the need. Some countries—Brazil, Argentina, Turkey, Chile—have already had external liquidity crises. Others are likely to encounter them during periods when their export receipts decline sharply, or their imports are unusually large. In such crises, efforts to refinance existing debt are competitive with efforts to obtain funds needed to promote growth.

Therefore, the capital exporting countries must be concerned with the net resource requirements. Aid programs must provide a level of gross lending sufficient to produce the net inflow of external capital implied by the desired growth rate, and on terms which do not intensify the problem. The latter is particularly important because to the extent our long term loans are used mainly to repay shorter loans on higher terms, it becomes increasingly difficult to defend higher gross lending.

The avoidance of liquidity crises requires international agreement to control the extension of hard-term credit. Easing of terms on official credits is only a partial solution if a large part of the borrowers' debt-servicing ability must be devoted to short term debt. And it is even less effective if the United States tries to practice it unilaterally.

The Task Force offers the following suggestions for easing the debt-service problem: I. DAC should seek to keep aid recipients from becoming overloaded with external suppliers' credits. For example, agreement might be reached to group borrowers into three or four classes, according to the severity of their debt-servicing problems. Those with major debt-servicing problems would require screening by a DAC committee before they could be extended additional suppliers' credits.

2. Suppliers' credits extended by each DAC donor should be limited to some maximum proportion of the donor's total financial assistance. Each donor could be obliged to refinance automatically suppliers' credits extended in excess of this amount.

3. The United States should be prepared to lead other advanced nations in organizing moratoria on debt service.

4. The financial implications of more rapid growth

Free world aid programs are currently designed to support aggregate growth rates of 4–5 %. Substantially higher rates would be advantageous to donors as well as recipients since they are likely to involve lower total assistance costs in the long run, even though costs are higher in the short run.

For example, if India's GNP grows at 4.3% (its best recent performance) and its development policies continue on present lines, a total inflow of $52 billion in new capital over a period of 23 years will be needed to increase per capita income by 50%. If the growth rate could be raised to 6.5%, the capital inflow required to achieve this income rise would fall to $26 billion over a period of 11 years. The lower growth rate would require only $16 billion during these 11 years, but this short-run economy would be achieved at a very high long-run cost.

Similar calculations for other less developed countries suggest that growth rates of 6–8% produce a given increase in per capita income at minimum total cost in foreign assistance, under typical conditions of self-help. These rates are well above the 5% objectives typical of recent plans.

More rapid growth saves on the total aid required to reach a given increase in per capital income for two reasons: 1. Rapidly rising income levels make possible higher tax and savings rates and more rapid export growth.

2. More rapid growth in GNP means that a smaller proportion of the increase in any time period is used just to keep up with the increase in population.

Table 4 shows the results of applying this analysis to all the less developed countries. As in the Indian example, the total capital inflow required for a 50% increase in per capita GNP is substantially reduced if growth takes place at the highest rate now considered feasible and given present development policies. If increased aid is accompanied by improved development performance, the reduction in total aid requirements will be even greater.

Thus: 1. At present growth rates, more than half of GNP growth is offset by increase in population. Thus substantial reductions in total external capital required to reach a target level of per capita income would result from faster growth of GNP, even without improvements in self help.

2. Raising the performance of the underdeveloped countries to the standard envisioned in their development plans would reduce external capital requirements for a given rate of growth by at least 25%.

3. The most efficient path to any aid objective—either an increase in per capita income or self-sustaining growth—is almost certain to involve substantial increases in total capital inflow in the next ten years.

In analyzing the possibilities for financing the capital inflows shown in this analysis, principal attention will be paid to the central estimates in Table 2: the 9–10% annual increase in external capital needed for growth rates averaging 5.1% with some modest improvement in development policies. While well below the growth rate that would maximize the recipient's welfare or minimize the long term requirements for external assistance, this set of assumptions represents the greatest improvement in country performance, aid contributions, and other sources of external capital that we can envision given existing programs, policies and institutions.

TABLE 4

EFFECTS OF HIGHER GROWTH RATES ON TOTAL EXTERNAL CAPITAL REQUIRED TO INCREASE PER CAPITA GNP BY 50% 1

($ billions)

Historical Development Performance Planned Development Performance

Growth of GNP Per Capita Growth Years Required Total External Capital 2 Average Annual External Capital Total External Capital 2 Average Annual External Capital

Historical of GNP

India (4.3%) 1.9% 23 $47 $2.04

50 LDCs (4.3%) 1.9% 24 291 12.13 176 7.33

Plan Growth

India (5.3%) 2.9% 15 28 1.87

50 LDCs (5.1%) 2.7 16 213 13.31 157 9.81

Best Possible Growth

India (6.5%) 4.1% 11 22 2.00

50 LDCs (5.9%) 3.5% 13 206 15.85 158 12.15

5. Financing the capital requirements

To derive the possible future level of U. S. aid from global figures for external assistance, we must first consider the outlook for other sources of finance. These are (a) private investment, (b) multilateral assistance, and (c) other free world (DAC) bilateral assistance. The likely trends in each of these sources, as well as the resulting requirements for U. S. bilateral assistance, are shown in Table 5.

The range of net requirements for all countries (rather than the 50 countries in Table 2) has been estimated at $12–17 billion. The possibilities for financing requirements of this magnitude are indicated in Table 5.

a. Private Investment

In 1963 the flow of private investment from developed countries to the underdeveloped world—which includes suppliers' credits and long term debt as well as direct investment—totaled $2.5 billion. Direct investment in extractive industries accounted for over two-thirds of the total and suppliers' credits for 20%. Direct investment in manufacturing was only 10%.

A simple projection of current investment levels suggests a net flow of between $3.5 billion and $4.5 billion in 1970. This estimate assumes continuation of existing institutional arrangements and the existing investment climate. This is unlikely. To be sure, specific measures like tax credits and direct subsidies to increase the return on investment, and guaranties to reduce the risk may raise the level of private investment somewhat. So should improvement of the investment climate, a likely adjunct of increased growth rates in these countries. On the other hand, the political complications of foreign investment are distasteful to many countries. These political factors are especially relevant to investment in extractive industries, which is much the largest share of the total. There is little reason to expect any marked improvement in this regard; indeed, circumstances are more likely to worsen and lead to lower figures or even net disinvestment. The $2.5 billion figure shown in Table 5 is therefore optimistic.

b. Multilateral Assistance

It is in our interest to secure a substantial increase in the share of aid provided through international agencies. First, our contribution to these agencies ranges from 40% to 45%, considerably less than our 63% share of bilateral aid. Even if we have to increase our share of any increment in multilateral resources to 45–50%, a substantial reduction in our share of the assistance total would result, so long as other donors maintain their shares of bilateral aid.

TABLE 5

NET CAPITAL INFLOW BY SOURCE

($ billions)

Source 1956–60 Projected for 1970

Average 1963 Low High

A. Private1 2.9 2.5 2.5 2.5

B. Multilateral .3 .8 1.7 3.3

C. Bloc Aid .1 .4 .5 1.0

D. Other DAC Bilateral Aid 2 1.5 2.1 2.7 3.5

E. U.S. Bilateral2 2.2 3.6 4.6 6.7

TOTAL3 7.0 9.4 12.0 17.0

Corresponding 50-country total (6.3) (9.0) (14.0–15.8)

Second, the major outlet for increased multilateral assistance is expansion of the grant and soft lending programs of the IDA and IFC. These agencies provide aid on far more favorable terms than do most DAC donors. In our judgment, these advantages outweigh the balance of payments disadvantages that result from the fact that multilateral aid is difficult to tie.

A conservative estimate of prospective commitments and disbursements of multilateral aid is given in Table 6. On more optimistic assumptions, the total might run as high as $3.3 billion in 1970.

We do not, however, subscribe to the view that the entire U.S. aid effort should be exerted through the IBRD and related institutions, keeping only direct military and security programs in bilateral channels. International institutions have on the whole been followers, not leaders in aid practices and policies. Pressure of competition from bilateral lenders has been indispensable in inducing acceptance of successful innovation.

TABLE 6

MULTILATERAL AID DISBURSEMENTS

($ millions)

1960 1962 1963 1970

IBRD 224 270 327 525

IDA — 25 105 300

IFC 13 15 9 25

IDB — 40 74 200

EDF 4 55 66 200

EIB — — — 50

Total, capital 261 405 581 1300

UN 123 178 195 400

Total Disbursements 384 583 776 1700

Total Commitments 787 1293 1317 1900

c. DAC bilateral aid

The lower target of $12 billion shown in Table 5 could be reached without an increase in our share of DAC bilateral assistance above its current proportion of 60% of this total. However, the areas of most rapidly growing aid need are Latin America and South Asia, the areas of U.S. concentration. Accordingly, the projected figures assume that other DAC countries will broaden the geographic distribution of their aid, and thus maintain in 1970 their present share of the total.

d. Aid to be supplied by the United States

The U.S. bilateral contribution is determined from the range of needs of the LDC's (from $12 to $17 billion in 1970) and the assumption of a constant proportion between the U.S. and other DAC contributors of net bilateral assistance. On this basis, between $4.6 and $7.0 billion of U.S. bilateral aid will be needed in 1970, depending on the performance of the recipient countries.

The possible distribution of this total among the major U.S. aid sources—P.L. 480, the Export-Import Bank and AID—is discussed in an Appendix. We conclude that a reversal of the decline in the Export-Import share of the total is both feasible and highly desirable. The share of AID in the total may have to rise to offset limited growth possibilities for the effective use of agricultural surpluses, particularly if requirements approach the upper limit of $7 billion. The maximum indicated for AID financing is $4 billion, which would require a 12% annual increase from 1963 to 1970.

6. Improving assistance policies

As the leader of the free world and the largest supplier of foreign assistance, the United States is in a position to influence the whole development effort through the way that it administers its own programs.

While our bilateral aid finances only 10% of the recipients' development effort, its effect can be magnified by using aid to improve the efficiency of other development resources, domestic and foreign.

Among the most promising innovations in recent years are (1) formulation of overall programs for major aid recipients; (2) selectivity in allocating aid according to country performance; (3) use of aid to influence internal development policies; and (4) development of institutions to coordinate bilateral aid efforts. These procedures should be developed.

1. Country Programming. By relating the nature and volume of its assistance to recipients' development programs, the United States has strengthened the ability of the recipient countries to formulate and carry out sound development policies. Country programs provide the best basis for assessing self-help efforts and development priorities, determining the most useful forms of assistance, and coordinating the aid efforts of various donors.

2. Selectivity in Allocating Aid. Assistance is most effective when it not only fills resource gaps but also provides the recipient an incentive to make better use of its own resources. This incentive effect can be achieved only when priority is given to countries which make relatively effective use of their own resources. While security and other political considerations will continue to affect aid allocation, AID has made considerable progress in establishing this priority. Further progress requires that development needs and self-help performance become the dominant criteria for U.S. assistance and that other objectives be even more often subordinated to them. Further tying of aid or greater use of assistance for export promotion would weaken this principle.

3. Influencing Development Policy. In the 25 countries where the U. S. provides substantial support for development, we have a real opportunity to influence key development policies. We have begun to exploit this opportunity in a few countries, such as Pakistan, Korea, Chile, and Colombia. In these cases we have made a portion of our aid available in the form of “program assistance” conditioned upon specific decisions on balance of payments policies, fiscal policy, and investment allocation. Such agreements provide a basis for increasing aid when performance standards are met as well as for reducing it when they are not (as in Brazil in 1963). Experience with this practice of “incentive programming” suggests that it should be extended to more of the countries where the U.S. makes a significant aid input.

Program assistance—the provision of imports necessary for development but not identified with individual investment projects—has proved to be the most efficient instrument for supporting development programs and influencing development policy. Sixty per cent of development lending now takes the form of program loans. This proportion should increase if we are successful in accelerating growth in the principal countries.

4. Aid Coordination. Since the bulk of public assistance will continue to be on a bilateral basis, the IBRD, the DAC and the Alliance for Progress (CIAP) should be strengthened in order to provide a more effective multilateral framework for a predominantly bilateral aid effort. They should perform the management function for the development assistance field that the IMF performs in the field of stabilization and balance of payments policies.

7. Is our current philosophy adequate?

The projections for future aid needs and our contribution to them in the preceding sections are based on the current philosophy of aid. That philosophy is a product both of history and of current notions of what is politically and economically feasible.

On its most optimistic assumptions concerning recipient self-help and free world aid, the current program will increase per capita income in the poor countries by some 50% over the next 15 years. This means an increase in average income from $140 to $200 per year. To achieve this, we will have to increase our aid contributions to more than twice the current level by the end of the period. Income per capita in the developed countries will then have reached a level perhaps eight times as high. In the face of this widening disparity, and especially in the context of a changing world political situation, is our present philosophy of aid still appropriate?

The Task Force believes that the answer to this question is no.

The attention of both the more and less developed countries is focused increasingly on the concrete fact of poverty in the underdeveloped countries, and upon the gap between the rich and the poor, rather than on the more abstract question of growth rates. Already this emphasis is beginning to appear in world discussions. The recent United Nations Conference on Trade and Development is only the beginning of organized presentation of these views. The prospect of disarmament adds to this emphasis. Any decrease in the resources spent by the major powers on defense will lead to urgent demands that some of the saving be devoted to narrowing the distance between rich and poor.

The increasing acceptance on both sides of a political theory of community underlies this shift. The proposition that rich and poor peoples alike are fellow members of a single world community implies an obligation of the richer to the poorer. This obligation implies, at least, that the wealthy must be concerned to see that the poor move as rapidly as possible toward the minimum income needed to support decent standards of life.

While this mode of thought cannot yet be said to represent national consensus, we believe that the trend is clear. Even European governments, often reluctant followers in the aid field, have begun to accept the concept of community and its consequences.

If this is so, the two operating assumptions underlying the current program can no longer be relied on. Growth in average per capita income of 2% per year will no longer provide the sense of progress that dampens dissatisfaction. Movement toward self-sustaining growth is not enough. Progress must be faster, and it must be overly directed toward attainment of decent living standards within the foreseeable future. Thus, we can no longer view recipient absorptive capacity as the operative limit on aid. Rather, increasing absorptive capacity must be seen as the heart of the aid problem, and we must be prepared to risk substantially larger amounts of money to accomplish such increases.

The income gap between the rich and poor countries cannot, of course, be closed within the time frame of this report. Experience suggests, however, that a per capita annual income somewhere in the neighborhood of $300–$400 will provide a minimum decent standard of living as well as the prospect of further growth with decreasing external assistance. This figure, of course, is representative, and cannot be applied to every underdeveloped country. The concept itself is most meaningful in South Asia, where at least a part of the apparatus of a modern society exists. It still has little meaning in African countries where the majority of the population is still organized in the institutions of tribal agriculture.

A breakthrough in increasing absorptive capacity will require larger amounts of aid year by year. But this in turn will result in savings in the total of aid expenditures in the long run. The arguments of Section 4 above apply even more forcibly here.

Of course, aid programs have sought from the beginning to raise the absorptive capacity of recipient countries. Technical assistance is directed to precisely this end. In many cases these efforts have had striking success. Nonetheless, there are fundamental limitations on the effectiveness of government-to-government activities in creating widespread institutional change. Penetrating widely and deeply into the institutional structure of the recipient country requires other approaches, particularly in agriculture, education, public health, and local government. The need here is for institutional innovation. Peace Corps was an important step in this direction. We will need many more.

In the industrial sector we already have a basis for building the kinds of institutions needed to do the job. The western business corporation is skilled and experienced in combining capital, technological know-how, organization and management to create new production units and turn them into functioning business enterprises. This experience has been developed in situations ranging from branch plants in the next state to subsidiaries in the Arabian desert. It is the major virtue of traditional private foreign investment that it makes use of just these capacities possible.

For a variety of reasons, we cannot count on increased conventional private investment as a vehicle for the greatly accelerated transmission of skills needed. The economic incentives for large-scale investment are insufficient. The political disincentives are strong; and there is little prospect of their becoming much less so since the poorer countries are likely to continue to view large-scale increases in traditional foreign private investment as something of a threat. Although this reaction may contain elements of prejudice, it also represents a judgment from past experience that is difficult to gainsay.

If capital investment is not the path of progress, we must develop new organizational arrangements more acceptable to the recipients and yet attractive enough to tap the skills and experience which the business community alone possesses in large volume.

A wide range of arrangements is conceivable through which private enterprises undertake management functions without risking their own capital. The spectrum runs from ventures between U. S. and foreign business concerns with both governments acting as guarantors, to ventures financed by the U. S. Government and the host government, to projects in which capital is channeled through public or quasi-public corporations that contract with business on a fee basis. In every case the U. S. business organization that takes responsibility for management would also take responsibility for training its successors. Whatever the arrangement, it should incorporate such limitations on ultimate ownership and external participation as are suited to the circumstances of the particular recipient country and the particular transaction.

Examples of this kind of mechanism can be found in current legislative proposals. The Cuban Claims Bill, in the last session of Congress, originally provided that once the value of a claim had been adjudicated by the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission, the claimant could get a loan up to a given proportion of the adjudicated amount for investment in an approved Alliance for Progress project.

A similar example is the proposal for a 30% tax credit for new investment in the underdeveloped countries, a proposal which, properly safeguarded, is well worth considering. The proposal would be substantially improved by giving the AID Administrator discretion to set standards to determine the eligibility of investments to receive tax credits. These could include, among others, provisions governing the training of local management and high-level technicians, as well as workers, and provisions with respect to local ownership and the like. The appropriate rules might well vary among countries.

What government and business did jointly in the defense buildup—provide the complicated weapons for our arsenal, train the men who operate and maintain them, and perform the research development and engineering tasks for them—is a rich storehouse of experience and analogy. The fixed fee contract with or without incentive provisions, government financing of most or all of the facilities required for specialized activity, private operation of government-owned facilities, the not-for-profit corporation doing government business, the joint venture in which universities and the government unite—all these were born of the needs of defense. If we had limited ourselves to the conventional government-buyer to private business-supplier relationship as we knew it before World War II, we could never have created and equipped our modern military force. We broke new ground because we saw defense as an urgent task for the national welfare. We can expect equal fertility of invention in response to the job of economic development if we view it in the same light.

The scale of the effort must be sufficiently large so that the business community sees this as they saw defense—not as a marginal problem, but as a major challenge—the financial returns must be sufficiently generous to attract their best talents. Innovation is a risky process and failures must be anticipated. The risk of failure must be accepted; failures should not be the excuse for drastic change in the direction of the program. Perhaps most important, we must recognize that it will take a relatively long period for this process of innovation to bear measurable fruit and that we must make an advance commitment to the whole effort if it is to have a decent prospect of success.

If we must be inventive and adaptive, so must recipient countries. One premise of the aid program, written into the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, is that aid levels to a particular country should reflect the willingness of that country to mobilize its own resources in the development effort. This premise remains valid. The most effective use of aid is achieved when it not only fills an existing resource gap, but encourages the recipient country to make better use of its own resources.

Among the lessons recipients must learn is that efficient enterprises, whatever their ownership, require a managerial organization with responsibility for the business, with power over its budget, and with substantially the degree of independence that is conventionally accorded U.S. business management. The critical contribution of our own business system lies less in its ownership arrangements than in the central role it accords to autonomous organizational units responsible for their own resources and operating in response to the markets in which they buy and sell. The Communist world now shows signs of accepting this proposition; it should not be too difficult to convey it to the new nations.

It is only in industry that we have an institutional basis in our own society on which we can start to build. For the equally important problems which await us in agriculture, education, local government and public health, we ourselves must create new institutions which in turn can stimulate the process of innovation in the developing countries. Agriculture and rural development are especially important in this respect both because much of the population of the underdeveloped world lives close to the margin of starvation and because agriculture is typically the largest source of employment and the area of the greatest potential increase in productivity. It is, however, especially resistant to change. The agricultural extension technology appropriate to a highly literate farm community which is an intimate part of an advanced urban industrial society simply cannot carry over directly to the needs of the illiterate and isolated peasant villages of the underdeveloped world.

Closely bound up with the public health problem is the population problem. The rapid rate of population growth in the underdeveloped countries is a major drag on their efforts to raise incomes. Better sanitation and medicine reduce death rates, especially infant death rates and compound the problem. The importance of programs to dampen population growth is recognized in many underdeveloped countries, but effective programs for this purpose have not yet been developed. Here again institutional innovation is likely to be the key to success.

7. Conclusion

One stark fact emerges from the Task Force's analysis. If the United States is to protect its material and moral stake in the stability and order of the underdeveloped world, it must be prepared to increase its foreign assistance programs sharply in the years ahead. To refuse to do so, or to abandon the aid effort is to deny ourselves the most effective means within our control for influencing long term developments in these areas in a favorable direction.

To increase aid appropriations on the scale we have suggested is a formidable political task. If American business can be involved in the aid effort along the lines we have recommended, it should provide some of the needed political support. If the task is projected against the background of the growth in our national wealth and budgetary sources, it can be made more manageable.

But in the end, to secure the aid appropriations necessary to pursue our interest in a stable and peaceful world is a challenge to the leadership of the Administration, a challenge which it has no option but to surmount.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Task Force Report on Foreign Economic Policy, 1964, Box 17. Secret. The report was submitted to the President under cover of a November 25 letter from Carl Kaysen, Chairman of the Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy. For this cover letter, part of the Report's Introduction and Summary, and Chapter Three, “Money,” see vol. VIII, Document 18. For another extract from the Introduction and Summary, and Chapter Two, “Trade,” see Document 161.

2 75 Stat. 436; the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, P.L. 87–195, was approved on September 4, 1961.

3 Not printed.

1 Derived from net foreign balances of 50 LDCs accounting for 87% of total GNP. Bases for the estimates are given in the appendix. The total capital flow needed is $2–3 billion greater, as shown in Table.

1 The calculation covers the 50 countries analyzed in Table 2. Assumptions are the same as in Table 2. India's export growth is assumed to be 2.7%.

2 Discounting future capital inflows at rates of 3–4% would reduce the differences in total capital requirements but still favor the higher growth rates.

2 Discounting future capital inflows at rates of 3–4% would reduce the differences in total capital requirements but still favor the higher growth rates.

1 Includes 1–5 year public or guaranteed credit and non-profit private foundations programs.

2 Assuming present proportions of U.S. bilateral (63%) and other DAC bilateral (37%).

2 Assuming present proportions of U.S. bilateral (63%) and other DAC bilateral (37%).

3 Exceeds the 50-country gap estimate by $3.0 by reason of: (a) Inclusion of all LDCs, (b) Capital outflows, and (c) discrepancies between capital flow and balance of payments estimates.

21. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon) 21. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon)1

Washington, December 4, 1964.

Dear Kermit:

Attached are our detailed budget recommendations for FY 1966, which in total call for new obligational authority of $2,674 million for economic assistance and $1,170.2 million for military assistance. The amount proposed for economic assistance is in line with the planning level which we discussed with you last summer, while the amount for military assistance is $170 million higher, due to the extraordinary expenses anticipated in Southeast Asia.

The proposed economic assistance program level of $2,790 million for FY 1966 is consistent with the recommendations of the Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy,2 although my projections for future years are on a somewhat more conservative basis than theirs.

As you know, we are considering two major legislative changes: to seek a four year authorization and to seek separate bills for economic and military assistance. Representatives of the Defense Department and I are discussing these proposals with Congressional leaders at the present time, and we will forward firm recommendations on them as soon as possible.

I anticipate expenditures in FY 1966 of $2,150 million for A.I.D., $80 million for the Social Progress Trust Fund and $1,335 million for military assistance.

We are proposing no increase in employment for FY 1966. This matter is being handled separately through detailed discussions between our staffs.

As you know, your staff participated in the extensive series of review sessions upon which this request is based. We found their participation very helpful, and hope it was valuable from your point of view.

Sincerely yours,

Dave

Attachment3

A.I.D. LEGISLATIVE AND FUNDING PROPOSALS FOR FY 1966

A.I.D. is considering proposing that the Administration seek a four year authorization for Foreign Assistance and statutory separation of the economic and military programs. We recommend appropriations for FY 1966 totalling $2,674 million per year for economic and $1,170 million for military assistance. The present appropriation and administrative structure should be continued. The four year authorization should be sufficient to accommodate a gradual increase in development assistance and continuation generally at current levels of security and other assistance; requirements for future years cannot be predicted with confidence, but it seems likely that it will be in our interest to step up our assistance to a number of major aid recipients as they prove able to use it effectively in order to support accelerated growth which will better serve U.S. purposes and hasten the day when concessional U.S. assistance can be phased out.

The first section of this submission discusses the longer term perspective underlying our legislative and funding proposals. The second section explains our major legislative proposals. The third details the funding plan and appropriations for economic assistance recommended for FY 1966. The fourth section summarizes the military assistance proposals.

Part I. Objectives and Strategy

A. Objectives

The main purpose of the Foreign Assistance Program is to assist in building a world society of independent, self-reliant nations secure against external aggression or internal subversion; responsive to the rights and initiative of their people; progressively achieving their economic and social goals; and joining in international economic and political cooperation. The U.S. can be secure and prosperous only in such a world society.

Security is basic. Foreign assistance contributes to it in building the military capacity of less developed nations to protect their borders and to participate actively, if necessary, in the collective defense of the Free World. It also assists them in building the capacity to protect their political and social structures from internal subversion and to maintain law and order. Both military and economic assistance are engaged in supporting these purposes in varying degree.

Development is also basic. In the modern world, governments cannot continue stable and secure unless their people are able to satisfy their positive aspirations for progress. Foreign assistance provides the margin of resources needed for adequate progress without imposition of excessive sacrifices on the people. It is the alternative to repressive rule and economic coercion.

In addition to these long-term purposes, foreign assistance must also be flexibly responsive, at the margin and usually on a modest scale, to short-range policy requirements. This daily role of foreign assistance as the handmaiden of policy is of continuing importance, but the basic factors which govern the size of the program are the strategies developed in pursuit of the primary security and development objectives. This will be the main subject of the remainder of this paper.

B. Military Assistance Strategy and Trends

Pending are a number of studies and developments which may affect significantly the level and character of MAP in the five-year period. An examination of U.S. military objectives is underway. This will include a study of the relationship between missions assigned to U.S. strategic forces and the levels of complementary local forces in the various theaters. It must also include such political factors as the acceptability to the allies concerned of coverage by U.S. firms of certain risks or use of alternative defensive strategies. Recommended changes in force goals for some of the forward defense countries may ensue, although not in time to undermine FY 66 program levels. Any reductions in force goals, in any case, may be offset by military assistance requirements for qualitative improvements of remaining forces. In addition, the range of examination will undoubtedly include alternatives as to U.S. strategy and the deployment of U.S. forces with cost and political implications which must be carefully evaluated before decisions can be made on possible force reductions.

Similar basic thinking is needed and is going forward on the question of contributions to continental and world-wide peace-keeping forces by Latin American or African countries, and the relationship of the military assistance program to the development of such units. It is conceivable that over the course of a number of years a substantial share of the modest amount of military assistance flowing to these continents will be focused on peace-keeping units of a non-national dedication and scope. However, this too is a potential development which will have little effect on the FY 1966 budget. MAP programs in these two continents will, during this period, continue to be focused primarily on counter-insurgency and civic action.

In addition to Japan and most of Western Europe, several countries receiving MAP are now able to support their economies without concessional economic assistance and potentially are increasingly able to self-maintain their military establishments. Greece, Taiwan and Iran are already able to meet some requirements with internally produced materiel and may also soon be able to finance some offshore procurement from U.S. and other sources. However, political factors prevent further shifting of these countries at this time from grant aid to a credit assistance or cash purchase basis. There has been major progress in the last year toward integrated programming of military assistance grants and credits in South Asia. Further progress in this regard is anticipated throughout the budget period with particular regard to the economically stronger recipients in Latin America and elsewhere.

In several countries, savings are assumed in these estimates through local production and financing of defense items previously provided through MAP. Studies are now underway to explore further expansion of local defense production in all of the forward defense countries (except Laos). A.I.D. continues to work with Defense on these programs of planned steps toward self-help in the military field. Such steps will continue to be made gradually to avoid jeopardizing economic development goals for these countries.

The above trends and considerations support a view that appropriation requirements for “regular” or “foreseeable” military assistance will decline moderately over the next few years. However, current experience supports the view that we may expect increasing Communist pressure on the forward defense countries and subversive ventures in Africa and possibly Latin America. Such offensives would require substantial new programs to strengthen local forces or meet combat consumption requirements as in Laos, Vietnam and the Congo.

In sum, any projection of the future level of military assistance at this time is uncertain in the extreme, and the conservative levels indicated in the attached table assume the availability of substantial additional authority to meet unforeseen emergencies.

C. Development Assistance Strategy

The main considerations in programming development assistance are (1) the U.S. interest in the development of a country; (2) the country's need for outside resources and ability to make good and efficient use of these resources in development; and (3) the availability to the country from other sources of needed outside resources. Based on these considerations, U.S. development assistance is regarded as a major element in an integrated U.S. plan for promoting U.S. objectives in the country concerned.

There have been some shifts over the past year in the way various particular countries look in terms of these criteria. The new government in Brazil is committed to reform and a vigorous development effort and has already announced a number of constructive measures. Peru has shown evidence of greater determination to deal effectively with its economic and social problems. Chile has given a mandate to a democratic administration committed to further reforms and continuation of sound economic programs. Pakistan has moved to liberalize its economic control system and is making good progress in invigoration of its rural economy.

In our proposed FY 1966 funding over two thirds of the development assistance recommended for country programs is intended for eight countries (India, Pakistan, Turkey, Nigeria, Tunisia, Brazil, Chile, and Colombia—see Table 1).4 The U.S. interest in development is high for each of these countries. We expect that country performance will be sufficiently good and that our aid and other assistance available to them together with country efforts will produce substantial, measurable, economic and social progress. Over 16% of country development assistance is intended for 10 additional programs—Central America, Argentina, the three East African countries, Ethiopia, Guinea (also receiving SA), Liberia, Morocco and Peru. In these countries too we recognize a U.S. interest in development progress. Hope for substantial achievement, however, is dependent on improved country performance or completion of necessary groundwork as a basis for a comprehensive development effort. Several significant changes are reflected compared to last year's listing. Brazil has moved up to the first category on the basis of better prospects for improved performance. A definite U.S. interest in development progress in a number of additional countries in Africa has been recognized. We now distinguish much less between these two groups in terms of our program strategy. Better performance is possible and important even for the eight countries which have broadly satisfactory programs. We are seeking ways to use our assistance to promote better performance in all of these countries.

It is now generally recognized that successful development is primarily a result of effective performance by the government and people of the country concerned. Foreign Assistance can help. It can provide an important margin of resources and skills, but it cannot produce development at reasonable cost unless the country is making major efforts itself. This simple fact is the foundation for effective development assistance strategy. The essence of A.I.D.'s strategy is twofold. First, concentrate assistance in countries in which performance is good enough to enable our assistance to produce results. Second, administer assistance in such a way as to encourage and promote better performance by the recipient countries.

There have been some important developments in our approach to administering aid to promote improved country performance. We are less and less inclined to be satisfied with past performance standards in any aid recipient countries. In virtually every case we are intensifying our efforts to identify needed improvement in country economic policies and programs and to secure adoption of these improvements through “incentive programming". In more and more cases we are seeking specific country undertakings with respect to these improvements, and in many cases we have provided incentives to important improvements by offering to provide more assistance than we otherwise would if needed self-help steps are taken. In other instances both project and program assistance are being deferred pending country adoption of measures which will make development assistance effective. As our experience with these techniques for promoting better performance grows, we expect to increase the effectiveness of our efforts.

Better coordination and cooperation among aid donors becomes more important as efforts expand to use assistance to negotiate improved performance by recipients. Incentive programming implies coordinated action in the major assistance programs of the U.S. Government; the Export-Import Bank, Public Law 480 program, and A.I.D. It also requires improved coordination of other bilateral donors and the international aid agencies. Experience to date with consortia and consultative groups has been spotty in this respect. We intend to work intensively with other governments and agencies to improve our joint efforts. The CIAP review was a major step in this regard, improved cooperation is high on the agenda of the DAC, and we are urging the IBRD to take a more active role in coordination.

D. Trends in Need for Aid

We have made an intensive study of available estimates of future foreign aid needs and we have conducted our own analysis of this question from several points of view during the course of the past six months. Our conclusions are as follows: 1. Any estimate of future assistance needs is conditioned on many unpredictable factors, particularly performance by the countries involved. Even if these determining factors could be predicted with accuracy, our estimates of future assistance needs would be approximate rather than precise. It is possible, however, to indicate alternative probable trends of needs, based on alternative assumptions concerning the determining factors.

2. U.S. objectives for development in many countries can probably be achieved sooner, and at smaller total cost, if the growth rate in these countries can be accelerated. This may be true even if this acceleration requires higher annual aid levels now. If more rapid growth allows better performance sooner, and also keeps farther ahead of population pressures, the higher annual aid levels will be required for fewer years, and the total cost will in many cases be less.

In our studies this summer we looked intensively at a number of the major countries and we also prepared across the board estimates for a group of 50 of the LDC's accounting for the bulk of development needs. The major country studies involved detailed section-by-section analysis of past performance, country plans, and future prospects on the basis of which the web of situation, continuity and change under alternative policy assumptions was simplified down to a set of key performance indicators on the basis of which alternative patterns of growth and foreign resource requirements could be computed. The model thus developed was then used to project comparable alternatives for a sample of 50 less developed countries for which the necessary historical macro-economic data was available.

Table 2 shows the values for the variables used for four of the major countries and the average variables for the 50 countries. The key findings for India and Peru illustrate the conclusions of our country analyses with respect to development prospects, assistance requirements, importance of savings in relation to exports, and priority needs for better performance. They also illustrate the conditions under which it would be advantageous to us to provide increased aid to accelerate growth.

The major financial constraint on growth in India, as for most LDC's, is a scarcity of foreign exchange. Imports are needed for growth of production, and export earnings limit India's ability to purchase those imports. If more foreign aid were made available, India could expand necessary imports and grow more rapidly. Total aid required to achieve a given increase in income level will be minimized if annual aid is raised sufficiently to permit GNP to grow at 6% to 7% per year, and total annual foreign capital flows rising to $1,900 or $2,200 million by 1970. If Indian performance follows 1957–62 patterns, the lower figures are relevant; better performance would raise the desirable growth rate and the desirable rate of capital inflow. The upper figures would be relevant under the best Indian performance we consider likely.

The case of Peru, however, is somewhat different. The scarcity of savings will be more of a problem than the scarcity of foreign exchange for some time. Development policies should focus on increasing savings; increased exports will be far less valuable for Peru than for India. In cases such as Peru the entire financial burden of the increased investment needed for accelerated growth falls on foreign capital unless savings performance can be improved. Only through such improvement will faster growth mean smaller total aid to reach a given income target in such a case.

The results of the 50 country projections are summarized in Figure 1 which shows the range of external capital requirements of the LDC's in 1970 (and the corresponding rates of increase from 1962–1970 in the flow of capital to the LDC's) related to the various combinations of growth rate, growth of exports and country performance. The extreme low is $6 billion, roughly the present level, associated with continuation of growth at past levels combined with “best possible” improvements in export growth and internal performance—a very unlikely combination. The extreme high of $12 billion implying a 15% annual increase in net aid expenditures, results from the opposite combination of rapid growth combined with no improvement in performance or export expansion is also unlikely. More probable is the middle range where it appears that a 5–10% annual increase in the flow of aid can support a small to major improvement in LDC growth depending on their performance and success in expanding exports.

These estimates are subject to many qualifications. Nevertheless, we believe the conclusion is probably correct that faster growth will require an increase in the flow of external capital, even if performance improves substantially, and that if it were possible to step up the average growth rate of the LDC's to something like 5% the total net flow of external capital would probably have to rise somewhere in the neighborhood of 5–10% per year.

As we noted above, it is advantageous probably in terms of total cost and certainly from a political standpoint, to support faster growth where it is practical in countries in which we have growth objectives. If it should prove possible to accelerate LDC development to something in the order of an average 5% growth per year, we think the developed countries of the West should find it in their interest to support such acceleration. They should therefore be prepared to finance a flow of resources rising by some 7 or 8% per year. In practice such a flow may not prove justified, LDC performance may be disappointing and the ability to accelerate development may lag. In view of recent developments in Latin America and the Near East and South Asia however, there seems to be a reasonable possibility that faster progress will be possible and every effort should be made to take advantage of it if it does materialize.

A.I.D. assistance in the total flow of foreign capital to the LDC's will probably have to increase at least in proportion to the total. We intend to do everything practical to stimulate and expand private investment. It is important both as a source of needed outside capital and even more for its contribution to technical and managerial advance. It can make a critical contribution in some key industries. Nevertheless, it is unlikely to become more than a minor factor in meeting the capital needs of the LDC's, particularly those not blessed with abundant oil and exportable mineral resources.

International aid-giving organizations, the IBRD complex, the UN Special Fund, etc. can probably be built up to provide an increasing proportion of LDC capital needs. This is advantageous both in increasing the contribution of other donors and also in improving the terms and quality of aid. We support the maximum growth of these institutions, including the possibility of matching additional contributions to them on up to a 50–50 basis. The main limit will be the willingness of other countries to increase their contributions.

Other bilateral donors are most unlikely to increase their relative share of the net flow of resources. In fact, vigorous efforts will be necessary to induce them to maintain their share, particularly when account is taken of the very heavy debt repayments now owed to the European countries by many of the major LDC's, most of which must be refinanced or postponed by the creditor. Bloc aid will probably rise gradually but will not provide an increasing portion of the needed flow of resources.

Export-Import Bank credit could become an increasing factor if the Export-Import Bank were to follow more liberal policies than those which have resulted in the accumulation of nearly $1 billion of undistributed earnings in the last 15 years. It can be particularly effective as countries approach transition to normal sources of foreign capital and are able to dispense with extremely concessional aid. Realistically, however, the current and prospective flow of debt servicing from the LDC's to the Export-Import Bank is such that a sharp increase in new loans is needed if it is to make any net contribution at all to the capital needs of the less developed world during the next few years.

It is difficult to forecast the possible role of PL 480-type programs. In recent years the demand for food in LDC's, supported by rapid population growth and rising incomes, has outrun supply, despite rapid growth in agricultural production. There has been room for and need for substantial agricultural imports from the temperate zone countries, a large and rising share of which was financed by PL 480. This budget request is premised on the assumption that these trends will continue on both the demand and the supply side. A major renewed focus on more rapidly increasing agricultural production is needed but cannot be expected to reduce greatly the need for food aid by 1970. Any shift in the U.S. legislative picture which removed PL 480 financing would, of course, require a large, though not fully compensating, increase in the AID appropriation.

The above assumptions are summarized in Table 3, which being based on DAC reported data, is on a basis of expenditures net of reflows. Taking everything together, it seems quite optimistic to assume that other sources of assistance will continue to provide the present share of total resource flows to the LDC's, particularly if these resource flows are to rise materially. We estimate that the U.S. aid share would have to rise somewhat if a flow near the high side of the probable need is to be achieved.

In light of the foregoing considerations, we have also looked forward on a program basis at possible requirements for the areas and countries with which the U.S. assistance program is most deeply concerned. Table 4 sets forth the resulting estimates of program obligations. These are not firm estimates of what will be required, but rather are attempts to estimate what might be in the U.S. interest on a conservative basis and also on somewhat optimistic assumptions concerning the ability of the countries concerned to step up their development progress with reasonable efficiency and self-help efforts. Annual appropriation requests will continue to be held to the hard requirements in the light of actual country performance. It may well prove unnecessary to request appropriations for these full amounts as the years pass by, but our multi-year authorization request is framed to permit coverage during the four years of the upper range of requirements should country performance justify appropriations at that level.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Chron Files, December 1–7, 1964. Confidential.

2 See Document 20.

3 Confidential. Only Part I is printed here. Part II, “Legislative Proposals,” Part III, “Proposed Economic Assistance Program for 1966,” and Part IV, “FY 1966 Military Assistance Program,” which includes an unsigned, undated memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, are not printed.

4 None of the tables or figures is printed.

22. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk 22. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, December 7, 1964.

John McNaughton and I had a disturbing conversation with Senator Fulbright on Friday.2 The purpose of our call was to ask his views of (a) a four-year foreign aid authorization, and (b) separating economic and military aid legislation. The Senator was polite on these proposals; he favors both.

But the main thrust of his comments was to repeat, firmly and frequently, that he is unwilling any longer to lead the Senate battle for foreign aid legislation in anything like its present form. Changing to a multi-year authorization is not enough; splitting economic and military aid is not enough. His own recommendation is to change the entire pattern of economic aid: to channel all U.S. funds for development loans and technical assistance through international agencies; and to appropriate Supporting Assistance funds to the State Department.

The Senator recognizes that the majority of the Congress—particularly in the House—may not be willing to appropriate to multilateral institutions anywhere near as much as they now appropriate for bilateral aid. He agrees that other donor countries are not now prepared to share in such a substantial increase in the resources of the international agencies. He does not insist on his position; he would not be at all put out if the President does not accept his recommendations.

But in that case Senator Fulbright will not wish to take responsibility for the legislation. His suggestion is that the President ask Senator Mansfield to handle the bill.

This position leaves us in a very difficult position. The Senator's recommendations on aid legislation seem to me to be both unwise in terms of United States interests, and impractical in terms of Congressional re-alities. I do not see how the President could accept them.

The suggestion of asking Senator Mansfield to handle the aid legislation does not seem feasible. Nor is there an obvious alternative. Senator Sparkman is up for re-election in 1966 and would not, I am sure, want to handle the aid legislation. Next in line is Senator Morse.

I believe this problem can be resolved only by discussion between the President and Senator Fulbright. It is possible that Senator Fulbright's views stem, in part, from a feeling that his role in handling the bill in the Senate has not been sufficiently appreciated and that he has not been consulted directly by the President on the future of foreign aid.

I would appreciate an opportunity to discuss this matter with you at an early date.

DEB

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. I [1], Box 1. Confidential.

2 December 4; no other record of this meeting has been found.

23. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 23. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 9, 1964.

SUBJECT

New Directions in Foreign Aid

For at least the next decade, strong U.S. economic and military assistance programs will be required to support our foreign policy in Latin America, Africa, and Asia. Two key problems grip those continents: (1) the attempt by the Russian and Chinese Communists to seize control of the developing countries, an attempt which is accentuated at the present time by the competition between Moscow and Peiping for leadership of the international Communist movement, and (2) the necessity for the developing countries to overcome poverty, ill-health, and obsolete social and economic patterns. Effective foreign aid programs are essential to deal with these conditions and achieve the U.S. objective of a dynamic and peaceful world community of open societies.

This memorandum outlines the principal issues needing consideration in looking ahead to the foreign aid program over the next few years. We comment on the principal points about aid that are raised by the President's Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy,2 as well as a number of other issues.

This memorandum has been prepared by the Agency for International Development, with the benefit of comments from the Departments of State, Treasury, Defense, and Agriculture. It discusses (1) the prospective requirements for aid, (2) the legislative framework, and (3) current major program issues.

1. Requirements for Aid

a. Economic Assistance—The most important conclusion of the President's Task Force is that more aid, not less, will be required for the next few years. The Executive Branch agencies agree.

This is especially evident in Latin America, but true as well of Africa and parts of Asia, as more of the developing countries organize themselves better and adopt stronger self-help policies, which will enable them to use—and to justify—larger aid from outside. (e.g., Brazil under the Castello Branco government is tackling its problems seriously, and therefore qualifying for major assistance, as Brazil under the Goulart government did not.)

It is plainly in our own interest to provide more aid when it can be used well. With respect to developing countries that are ready to sacrifice and work hard, the best and cheapest aid policy—for the U.S. and for other donors—is to give them maximum help, which will lead to economic independence, and the end of the need for aid, in the shortest possible time.

It is difficult to estimate how fast aid requirements will rise. Over the past ten years, economic aid from advanced countries to the developing countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America rose from $2.0 billion to $6.5 billion per year. About 60 percent came from the United States. On the average, output in the developing countries rose by 4.2 percent per year, which was significantly higher than their population growth rates of perhaps 2.5 percent per year.

During this period, several countries—notably Greece, Taiwan, Israel, Mexico, Venezuela—made enough economic progress to end the need for further concessional economic aid. Several other countries—notably India, Pakistan, Iran, Thailand—made substantial progress.

Looking ahead, AID estimates that economic aid requirements are likely to rise on the order of 5 to 10 percent per year between now and 1970, based on a realistic anticipation of self-help performance by recipient countries. Assuming that the aid programs of other advanced countries rise proportionately, this would mean that expenditures under the U.S. bilateral aid program might need to rise roughly in the following way: ($ billions)

1963 1965 1970

low high

Ex-Im Bank (net) .1 .1 .2 .5

P.L. 480 1.4 1.5 1.7 2.1

AID (net) 1.8 2.2 2.5 3.2

Other (including Peace Corps) .1 .1 .2 .2

3.4 3.9 4.6 6.0

The President's Task Force considers that this rate of growth in aid will not support a rate of economic growth in the developing countries which is adequate to satisfy the political dynamics of those countries. Furthermore, the Task Force believes it would be possible, by a more generous and aggressive aid policy, to expand the investment capacity of the developing countries more rapidly than AID anticipates. On these assumptions, the Task Force would urge that the United States plan for a larger growth in economic aid than AID now foresees as necessary.

This difference of judgment about future requirements probably need not be resolved at present. The Task Force has not urged a different budget proposal for FY 66 than AID has submitted to the Budget Bureau, and we believe the Task Force would agree with the following recommendations.

Recommendations: (1) That the United States continue to relate its aid for development to strict standards of self-help by recipient countries, recognizing that this will require some increase in economic aid over the next few years, particularly in Latin America but also in Africa and Asia; (2) that the United States vigorously seek to help raise the managerial competence and investment capacity of developing countries.

b. Military Assistance—Since 1960, outlays for military aid (and for directly related supporting economic assistance) have fallen markedly.

Military assistance appropriations have been reduced from $1.8 billion in 1961 to $1.055 billion in 1965. Grant military aid to Western Europe has been phased out except for the completion of small remaining commitments. The budget proposal for FY 1966 is based on “normal” military aid requirements of $1 billion plus $170 million for unusual combat requirements in Vietnam and Laos.

Supporting Assistance, which amounted in 1961 to $1.1 billion, has been terminated altogether in such countries as Taiwan, Greece, Iran, Pakistan, and Turkey, where U.S. economic aid has been shifted to a development basis. Present commitments are about $400 million annually, with three-fifths going to Southeast Asia.

Future requirements depend heavily on unpredictable events in Southeast Asia, and there is no basis for projecting a clear trend.

Recommendation: That the United States continue to provide military and economic supporting assistance for the security efforts of countries striving to maintain their freedom, recognizing that this may require funds of the present order of magnitude for the next four years.

2. Legislative Framework

Next spring's legislative presentation should certainly stress the successful themes of the past year: continued emphasis on a tight, “bare bones” budget, and continued emphasis on strong self-help standards and getting developing countries into a position in which they will no longer need aid. We would also like to urge the earliest possible beginning for the Congressional consideration of aid legislation; the Executive Branch will be prepared for hearings by February 1.

Beyond these points, there are important issues to be considered regarding the legislative framework of foreign aid programs.

For the last dozen years, the economic and military assistance programs have been authorized annually in a single bill and funds have been appropriated for them annually in a single bill. This is a very difficult legislative framework, which requires maximum Congressional time and energy, and results in minimum stability and continuity for the aid programs. With the gain in Congressional strength for the Administration following the November election, the question arises whether this legislative framework can and should be improved.

Three possible changes have been suggested.

a. Multi-year Authorization—Great advantages would be achieved if multi-year authorizations could be enacted for all parts of the aid program, as they have been in the past for some parts, (e.g. development lending was authorized for five years in the 1961 Act). Congress would presumably be unwilling to enact permanent authorizations, but a four-year authorization would not seem unreasonable in view of the obvious requirements of U.S. foreign policy. Such an authorization would provide a far stronger basis of stability and continuity for operating the aid programs, would accomplish a great saving of time and energy for both Congress and the Executive Branch, and would provide a strong base from which to continue pressing other advanced countries to enlarge their aid programs.

Arguments against a four-year authorization are the possibility that changing requirements may force the President to ask for annual amendments in the statute, thus losing the benefit of the multi-year authorization, and the possible unwillingness of the authorizing committees to abandon their annual legislative control of aid policy.

Chairman Morgan and Senator Fulbright have indicated that they would support a four-year authorization proposal, although both expressed skepticism about the likelihood of obtaining it in full.

Recommendation: That in view of its great advantages, the President make a major effort to obtain four-year authorizations for economic and military assistance, in amounts which will cover the probable annual changes in the different categories of aid, and with an arrangement under which the Executive Branch will present to the authorizing committees each year a full report on their current aid plans and programs. Annual appropriations would continue to be requested.

b. Separate Legislation for Military and Economic Assistance—The Executive Branch has frequently desired in the last dozen years to split off military aid from economic aid legislation. The principal advantage this would have is to eliminate some of the confusion in the public mind regarding our foreign assistance by permitting the Administration to emphasize the role of military assistance not as “foreign aid” but as an integral part of our own defense effort. In addition, it would replace a large legislative target with two smaller ones.

This proposal has always been strongly opposed by the leadership of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and of the House. The proposal was blocked at the last minute in 1961 by Speaker Rayburn, and the opposition of the House leadership a year ago was the principal factor leading the President to decide against the proposal at that time. The argument of the House leaders has always been that they need to have military assistance combined with economic assistance in the same bill in order to carry a satisfactory economic aid authorization. A part of the opposition by the House Foreign Affairs Committee may stem from a fear of losing jurisdiction over the military assistance legislation.

Senator Fulbright favors separate legislation. Chairman Morgan opposes it.

Recommendation: That in view of the risk to House passage of economic aid legislation, the President propose a combined aid bill in the past. Secretary McNamara differs with this recommendation, believing that the advantages of separate bills are substantial, the risks to economic aid legislation are low, and that, especially if jurisdiction over the military bill is left in the Foreign Affairs Committee, the price in lost good will of the split will not be great.

c. Fragmenting Aid Legislation—Senator Fulbright proposed a year ago and continues to propose today fragmenting the aid legislation into as many pieces as possible. Thus he would not only split off military aid legislation; he would also abandon altogether U.S. bilateral programs of development lending and technical assistance, and channel all U.S. funds for such purposes through the World Bank and other international organizations. He would channel supporting assistance through the State Department. He would thus end up with at least three aid bills, perhaps more.

On the merits, these proposals run contrary to U.S. interests. It would be detrimental to U.S. objectives if Felipe Herrera3 were administering all the U.S. funds for the Alliance and Tom Mann were administering none of them. Likewise in Africa and Asia, we need a major bilateral aid program to accomplish U.S. objectives in developing countries. (We should continue our policy of steadily enlarging the amount of money we contribute to international aid agencies, but this is an entirely different policy from one of abandoning our bilateral aid program altogether.)

In terms of legislative strategy it is difficult to see what Fulbright's proposals would accomplish. The Congress would probably spend more, not less, time on aid if it had to pass several aid bills instead of one (or at most two). Moreover, unlike Fulbright, the majority in the Congress prefers bilateral to multilateral aid, and an effort to transfer the present bilateral programs to a multilateral basis would undoubtedly result in a major reduction in the total funds made available.

Recommendation: For these reasons we strongly recommend against Senator Fulbright's position, while recognizing that he has thus far been unwilling to accept leadership on behalf of the Administration for aid legislation on any other terms. We believe this matter requires the President's early consideration.

3. Program Issues

In addition to the general issues outlined above, the following specific issues need consideration.

1. Food supplies and population growth. Food supplies in developing countries are not keeping up with rising demands brought by growing populations and rising incomes. Very serious food shortages could develop in a few years' time unless strong action is taken.

The fundamental response to this problem must be to help bring about greater agricultural production in the developing countries. U.S. surplus food cannot meet the demand, even though substantially increased food aid is necessary and desirable.

Therefore, we must clearly place new and heavier emphasis on technical and other assistance to agricultural production in developing countries, drawing more heavily on the resources of the Department of Agriculture, the cooperatives, the Land-Grant Universities and American industry.

Recommendation: That the President continue to stress in his public statements the need for the U.S. to help other countries expand their food production. We face opposition, led by Representative Whitten,4 to aid for agriculture in developing countries based on exaggerated fears of interference with potential U.S. agricultural exports, and it is important to state the Administration position clearly.

It is also necessary for developing countries to face the many problems stemming from rising rates of population growth, and more and more of them are doing so. As developing countries adopt their own population policies and programs, the question arises in what ways and to what extent the U.S. should assist.

Public and religious opinion at home and abroad have become increasingly ready to face the issues involved. The United States is now on record as urging developing countries to consider their population problems, but does not (and should not) urge any particular policy on any country. We favor and support careful research on all aspects of the problem, and have supported some training and technical assistance, particularly on demographic aspects of the matter. By and large, U.S. governmental action has followed, rather than led, public and Congressional opinion, and we believe this is desirable in the future as well. In our opinion the time has come to expand the range of technical assistance and other kinds of help the U.S. will provide to population programs of developing countries.

Recommendation: That U.S. assistance to population programs in developing countries be expanded without fanfare as requests are received. A.I.D. is preparing a memorandum on this subject recommending specific policy guidelines.

2. Enlarging the use of private U.S. resources to help the developing countries. We have been steadily expanding and improving our arrangements for drawing on the skills of American business, universities, cooperatives, labor unions, engineering firms, and many other institutions. We intend to continue these efforts to engage American professional skills more fully in the problems of development.

The President's Task Force has recommended that new ways be sought to enlist the skills and energy of American business management in the development process—as new methods were devised some years ago to meet the demands of the missile age. They feel that U.S. private enterprise may be harnessed much more extensively to the problem of increasing the investment and growth capacity of the developing countries if management talents can be engaged separate from, as well as in association with, financial investment. This problem, among others, is now under intensive review by the Advisory Committee on Private Enterprise in Foreign Aid, chaired by Arthur K. Watson, whose report is due by June.5

Meantime, we are prepared now to make the following

Recommendations: —Congress be asked to raise the present limit on guaranties of U.S. business investment in developing countries against the political risks of expropriation, inconvertibility, and war by $1.25 billion per year—an amount we hope would be adequate for the next four years;

—that Congress be asked to raise the limit on “extended risk” guarantees (against loss from any cause) from the present $300 million to $500 million, and eliminate the limits of $25 million per loans and $10 million per equity investment, retaining however the limit of guarantee to 75 percent of the value of any investment;

—that Congress be asked to extend the Latin American housing investment guarantee program, (which guarantees up to 100 percent of an investment), by an additional $200 million, aimed primarily at developing financial institutions which can mobilize private savings for housing which meets the needs of middle and lower income families;

—that Congress be asked again this year to authorize a special 30 percent investment tax credit for new private business investment in less-developed countries. The Treasury Department doubts that Congress will approve a credit of this magnitude, but has no objection to the request being repeated.

3. How rapidly should we expand U.S. aid provided through international institutions? We favor such an expansion because of the potential advantages of imposing self-help standards through international institutions, the lower U.S. share in such aid than in bilateral assistance, and the concessional terms still possible through these channels. The crucial questions here relate to funds made available to IDA and IDB for soft-term loans. Definite international agreements have been made covering the three years FY 1965–67 for the IDB and the three years FY 1966–68 for the IDA. The annual total contribution to IDA is $250 million of which the U.S. share is $104 million (42 percent), and the annual total contribution to IDB is $300 million, of which the U.S. share is $250 million.

Recommendation: That authorization be urgently sought early in the next session of Congress for the IDB contributions. The IDA contributions were authorized in the last session.

We believe future U.S. policy with respect to IDA should be to propose as large an increase in total contributions as we can get other donors to agree to, with the U.S. contribution limited to about 40 percent. A realistic view, however, would anticipate reluctance by the European donors to increase their IDA contributions very rapidly—a doubling of the total would be an extraordinary good result—and therefore little opportunity to shift from U.S. bilateral to multilateral financing in the next three or four years.

It is in our opinion too soon to make a judgment about future financing of IDB, where the non-U.S. funding is in any event smaller and the Bank's policies are still evolving.

4. Finally, there is the issue of how to improve further the administration of aid, and particularly to eliminate marginal employees in AID . Last year's request for selection-out authority to apply to AID's civil service employees, parallel to the authority AID already has for foreign service employees, was not granted by the Congress. Our present opinion is that it would be extremely difficult to obtain it from the next Congress.

It is our understanding that John Macy is considering recommending to the President appropriate legislative and policy changes to convert all three foreign affairs agencies—State, USIA, and AID—gradually to a common personnel system, based on the Foreign Service Act. We would enthusiastically support such a proposal, and in that event would not recommend asking again for selection-out authority, since AID employees would be gradually converted to the foreign service system where the selection-out authority already exists.

If however the President decides not to ask for such a general change, or if the Congress refuses to grant it, then we would recommend repeating—in somewhat modified form—the request for selection-out authority for AID.

David E. Bell

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Chron Files, December 8–11, 1964. Confidential. A covering memorandum from Bell to Moyers, December 9, reads: “Attached is our ‘Brief' on the subject of foreign aid. There are several issues in it which deserve discussion. One in particular—the question of what form of legislation the President should request—requires fairly urgent consideration. I believe that State, Defense and AID would be the key participants, apart from the White House-Executive Office complex.”

2 See Document 20.

3 President of the Inter-American Development Bank.

4  Jamie L. Whitten (D.-Mississippi).

5 This Committee was established under Section 601 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1963, P.L. 88–205 (77 Stat. 379), approved on December 16, 1963. The Committee, composed of representatives from business, labor, universities and foundations, was asked to “carry out studies and make recommendations for achieving the most effective utilization of the private enterprise provisions of this Act.”

24. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 24. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 10, 1964.

SUBJECT

Military Assistance Funds, FY 1965

The FY 1965 military assistance appropriation ($1.055 billion) does not provide sufficient funds to meet substantial unforeseen combat requirements which have arisen in Laos and Vietnam. The add-on requirements for Laos and Vietnam to date total $47.3 million above the $221.4 million requested from and appropriated by the Congress for these countries. Further requirements for Vietnam are quite probable, stemming from discussions with Ambassador Taylor, and recent cuts in ammunition estimates for Laos may need to be restored.

Absorbing these extra burdens within the current availability of MAP funds would result in reductions in certain country programs which would be politically and militarily unacceptable. The reductions would have to fall largely in Korea, Taiwan, Greece and Turkey, in each case coming on top of severe reductions necessitated by shortages of funds in the prior two fiscal years.

It is conceivable that the problem may be met in part, later in the fiscal year, by future reductions in requirements outside of Southeast Asia, or increases in recoveries of prior year funds. There is no basis at present however for anticipating such relief.

Accordingly, we believe the national interest requires us to proceed, as we did last year, to program an extra $50 million for MAP, which will be funded, insofar as that turns out later in the year to be necessary, by transferring $50 million from the Contingency Fund to the military assistance appropriation.

In making these plans, all of us are aware that the Contingency Fund contains only $100 million this year and that unforeseen requirements for the Alliance for Progress or for other purposes may result in substantial claims on these funds later in the year. At the present time, however, we believe a proper weighing of the probabilities supports the desirability of committing up to $50 million for a MAP transfer.

I recommend, therefore, your approval of a funding plan for military assistance in the present fiscal year which may require a transfer of up to $50 million from the Contingency Fund. The Departments of State and Defense concur in this recommendation.

David E. Bell 2

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, November–January, FY 1965. Secret. Drafted by Bell and cleared by William M. Leffingwell (DOD/ISA) and Howard Meyers (G/PM). The memorandum was submitted to President Johnson under cover of a memorandum, December 10, to Kermit Gordon from Bell who wrote: “The attached memorandum requests Presidential approval for a MAP funding plan for FY 1965 which may require up to a $50 million transfer from the Contingency Fund later in the year. This is a similar proposal to one we worked out last year. I have forgotten how we obtained the President's approval at that time, but I assume the right way to do it is through you, and accordingly I would appreciate it if you would consider the matter and, assuming you concur, request the President's approval. I am sending a copy of the memorandum to Mr. Buddy.”

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Bell signed the original.

25. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 25. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, December 21, 1964.

SUBJECT

Background information for your lunch with Senator Fulbright 2

Senator Fulbright proposes to break the aid program into a number of pieces. He would not only split off military aid, but would also: —abandon altogether our present bilateral programs of development lending and technical assistance, turning over all U.S. funds for these purposes to the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and the U.N. agencies;

—channel supporting assistance through the State Department or the Department of Defense; and

—distribute the remaining bits and pieces of the aid program to unspecified places.

The Senator would accomplish this by a series of separate bills—one for each component of his fragmented program.

The case he argues for this proposal is threefold: —he thinks bilateral aid involves the U.S. in all sorts of awkward relationships with less-developed countries whose problems are extremely difficult, reaping us more antagonism than respect for our foreign policy;

—he thinks international agencies are in a stronger position than the United States by itself to impose the kind of self-help standards which are necessary to achieve progress in the less-developed countries;

—he thinks breaking up the bill in the Congress will confuse the opposition and result, at least for the time being, in an easier legislative passage.

We think these arguments add up to a very weak case—so weak that we suspect they are really only rationalizations for (a) Fulbright's understandable boredom with the annual effort he must make, and the annual pounding he takes, in leading the struggle for aid legislation, and (b) his feeling of being neglected by the Administration, in spite of his yeoman efforts in the Senate and in Arkansas during the election campaign (he feels that those who differ with the President, such as Russell and Morse, get more attention than the President's friends, such as Fulbright).

On the merits, Fulbright's arguments are far outweighed by these considerations: —The U.S. plainly needs strong bilateral aid programs to support its foreign policy of seeking to influence events in less-developed countries toward peaceful progress; we cannot escape involvement in the affairs of these countries—aid permits this involvement to be constructive and helpful and is far more of an asset than a liability to us. (Fulbright's proposals, incidentally, would not avoid U.S. bilateral aid involvement in our most difficult countries—Vietnam and the Congo—both of which are financed from supporting assistance funds which he recognizes would have to remain bilateral.)

—Only some, not all, international agencies apply strong self-help standards; in Latin America, the Alliance under Tom Mann is far more effective in requiring self-help action than is the IDB under Felipe Herrera. Furthermore, the views of international agencies may not advance U.S. interests; at present, for example, the United States is strenuously seeking to get the World Bank to modify its position with respect to Turkey; if we did not have a bilateral aid program at the present time we would be hard put to it to pursue our interests in Turkey.

—Legislatively it seems clear that most members of the Congress, unlike Fulbright, would be inclined to make much less money available for a multilateral program than for a bilateral program. Moreover, Congress and the Administration would probably have to spend more, not less, time and effort on aid if it were necessary to pass several bills rather than one (or at most two).

It seems to us, therefore, that Fulbright's proposals are unacceptable. We should not, however, make a wholly negative response, and I suggest trying out the following points as elements of an alternative legislative proposal: 1. A Presidential request for a multi-year authorization, which would, if successful, greatly ease the legislative burden on Fulbright.

2. We are not adverse to—indeed we favor—the expansion of multi-lateral aid, as rapidly as the Europeans are prepared to match larger amounts. We might write into the legislation an authorization permitting the President to transfer bilateral funds to international agencies as rapidly as matching amounts are forthcoming (on the usual basis of the United States providing up to 40%).

3. The President will certainly present to the Congress, as he did last year, a tight, lean, “bare-bones” aid program which, along with demonstrable improvements in administrative efficiency, ought to command more respect and less opposition in the Congress, as was in fact the case this past year.

These alternatives, I think, offer an attractive and feasible legislative package. Needless to say, they do not change the facts of Vietnam and the Congo, nor will they change the attitude of Morse, Gross, Passman and Ellender; but they offer as good a basis for legislative action as can be devised.

Fulbright will still, I suspect, propose that someone else on his Committee be asked to lead the legislative battle for the President. Aside from the fact that the Chairman of the Committee ought to take responsibility for such a major element of the President's program, there is in fact no alternative. The ranking Democrat is Sparkman, whose impending election campaign (1966) rules him out. Next is Mansfield, whose duties as Majority Leader preclude such a responsibility. And next is Morse.

Dave

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, November 1963–December 1964, Vol. 1 [1]. Confidential.

2 No record of this meeting has been found.

26. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon) 26. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon)1

Washington, December 28, 1964.

Dear Kermit:

In accordance with our discussion with the President,2 I am submitting herewith, with the approval of the Secretary, my revised budget recommendation for economic aid for Fiscal Year 1966, totaling $2,210 million. The attached tables set forth the major elements within this total.

Together with the recommendation of $1,170 million for military aid, this makes a total request of $3,380 million of new obligational authority for FY 1966, for the programs now authorized by the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. We estimate that expenditures in 1966 will be $2,100 million for economic assistance and $1,335 million for military assistance.

As you know from our conversation with the President, I regard these budget figures as representing the rock-bottom minimum of new funds essential to meet requirements in the U.S. national interest under world conditions as they are now foreseen. These funds would be inadequate if various possible developments occurred in Latin America, Southeast Asia, and elsewhere. As I understand it, the President agreed that the Budget Message, the Foreign Aid Message, or preferably both, would refer to the possibility that additional requirements may necessitate a supplemental appropriation request.

May I mention in this letter one other point connected with the budget presentation. As we have indicated earlier, we now estimate that the $300 million reserved under language included under Title I of the Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 1965 will be obligated this year. Therefore, it seems proper that the budget should show the full amount as obligated as of June 30, 1965.

Sincerely yours,

Dave

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, Chron Files, December 23–31, 1964. Confidential. Two attachments, a chart comparing types of funding in millions of dollars between 1964 and 1965 and proposed for 1966 and another that uses the same variables as above but compares the funding amounts by region, are not printed.

2 Presumably a reference to meetings held with the President on December 23 at the LBJ Ranch in Texas. Bell and Moyers met with President Johnson to discuss budget matters at 10:55 a.m. At 11:40 a.m. Freeman, Gordon, Gronouski, and Horace Busby joined the meeting, which lasted until 12:20 p.m. A working lunch among these individuals and a few others was held from 1:10 to 1:40 p.m. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary, 12/1/64–4/30/65)

27. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk 27. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, December 30, 1964.

This responds to your request for advice on the possibility of asking for supplemental funds for Fiscal Year 1965 for economic and military assistance.

There will be a need for additional funds for military assistance to Vietnam, if agreement is reached with the Vietnamese Government on the force expansion plans along the lines Ambassador Taylor was authorized to pursue. Rough initial estimates by DOD staff indicated possible add-on fund requirements on the order of $100 million for FY '65 and a similar amount for FY '66. Secretary McNamara has asked that these figures be reviewed and refined, and they may well be reduced in the process.

Whether to base a supplemental MAP request on this requirement raises two issues: 1. Does the present state of affairs in Vietnam offer a sufficiently firm base of policy and program to call forth quick and solid Congressional action? Would the situation in Saigon at present be helped by a public request by the President for additional MAP funds for Vietnam?

These questions require political judgments which I am not well informed enough to make with any confidence. I was impressed by the fact that the Vietnam supplemental we requested last spring was accepted easily in the Congress in part because Secretary McNamara and I had just been to Vietnam;2 the position of the U.S. Government was clear; we had a firm and uncomplicated understanding with the Vietnamese Government. It does not seem to me we are in as good a position today.

2. Secretary McNamara has thus far been willing to seek a supplemental for MAP this year. The question arose first two or three months ago when it became evident that MAP requirements for FY '65 would exceed available funds—even though the Congress provided the full amount which the Administration had requested. As I understand it, Secretary McNamara was reluctant to return to the Congress and ask for additional funds, since he had opposed the move by Broomfield, Frelinghuysen, and others in the House Foreign Affairs Committee last spring to raise the Administration's request for MAP. For this reason we worked out the arrangement with which you are familiar—to plan on a transfer of up to $50 million of the Contingency Fund to MAP should that prove necessary later in the year.

The question arose again recently in relation to the add-on requirement for MAP described above. This time it was Secretary McNamara's proposal to use the “drawdown” authority he has under the foreign aid legislation, which permits him to draw upon DOD stocks, to be replenished by funds appropriated in the next fiscal year. At present, therefore, it is Secretary McNamara's intention, as I understand it, to meet the add-on requirements for FY 1965 by drawing on DOD stocks, recognizing that this will require a supplemental appropriation over and above the budget in FY 1966.

These questions might point to the desirability of holding off a decision on a 1965 MAP supplemental for a few weeks, and if at that time the situation in Vietnam is somewhat more stable and the requirements are still firm, ask Secretary McNamara to reconsider his opposition to requesting a supplemental in the present fiscal year.

There is no strong case for a supplemental in FY '65 for economic assistance. Any economic supporting assistance that may be needed in connection with a force build-up in Vietnam would not be required before FY 1966. Apart from Southeast Asia, the only potential requirement is in Latin America. It now appears likely that we will want to make development loans in Latin America totaling about $50 million more than the available appropriations for the Alliance would support. We expect, however, to be able to finance these loans either by using worldwide development loan funds or by drawing on the Contingency Fund.

I have communicated the substance of this memorandum to Mr. Gordon and McGeorge Bundy. Nevertheless, you might wish to pass it along to the President.

DEB

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID 11/63–12/64, Vol. 1 [1]. Confidential.

2 Secretary McNamara, Bell, and other members of the McNamara-Taylor Mission arrived in Saigon on March 8 and returned to Washington on March 12. For documentation on this trip, see Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, vol. I, pp. 129 ff.

28. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk 28. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, January 11, 1965.

SUBJECT

Funding Requirements for Vietnam, FY 1965 and 1966

As you will recall, in October and November a proposed MAP funding plan for FY 1965 was worked out, which involved a $50 million transfer from the A.I.D. Contingency Fund.2 This permitted covering some $47 million in MAP requirements for Vietnam and Laos which had then been approved over and above the budget projections, without cutting too sharply into the requirements for Korea, Taiwan, Greece, and Turkey.

Now Secretary McNamara has authorized further commitments for Vietnam (on the order of $50 million) and proposes to meet these requirements by cutting back the funds for other countries—principally Korea, Taiwan, Greece and Turkey.

State and A.I.D. staffs differ with this proposal, and believe instead that additional requirements for Vietnam in FY '65 should be met by using the authority of Section 510 of the Foreign Assistance Act to draw upon Defense Department stocks, to be replaced by appropriations in the subsequent fiscal year.3 For the reasons stated in my December 10 memorandum to the President (copy attached),4 we believe it is highly undesirable to cut MAP funds for the four countries further.

Secretary McNamara's view I believe rests on two points: (1) he is not persuaded that the requirements in Korea, Taiwan, Greece and Turkey are in fact as large as the MAP plans for those countries would indicate;

(2) he is very reluctant to request funds beyond the 1965 budget, since he committed himself to the Congress to live within that figure if they gave him all he asked for.

We consider that these points are outweighed by the following considerations: (1) while I agree that MAP requirements in the four countries need review, it would plainly be a disorderly process to cut existing plans, jointly agreed to by the U.S. and those governments, by whatever amounts happen to be required for Vietnam and Laos. The State regional bureaus concerned have expressed the deepest concern over the political effects of Secretary McNamara's proposed action. In Korea and Taiwan particularly, there is increasing concern over the continued determination of the U.S. to stand by its commitments to them;

(2) the Secretary's funding plan puts us in an unnecessary straight-jacket for FY '65. The Congress certainly would not hold him to his budg-et presentation in the light of obviously increased requirements in Vietnam;

(3) moreover, it is plain that there will be still additional requirements to be met in FY '65. Under the Secretary's proposal they could only be met by further cutbacks in military assistance to other countries. The alternative of using Section 510 draw-down authority was provided by the Congress to meet exactly the present type of situation;

(4) finally, the Secretary's proposals do not meet the problem of how to fund additional requirements for fiscal '66, which are already evident, and which are larger than the 1966 budget would support. Our proposal would be to make clear to the Congress early in this session that we are using Section 510 during FY '65; that this will require additional appropriations in fiscal '66 for replacement of stocks; and that there may well be add-on budget requirements for fiscal '66 as well. Later in the spring, when requirements are clearer, we could amend our request for FY '66 more or less as we did last year.

I would appreciate an opportunity to discuss this with you at your early convenience. If you agree with the staff view, we will need to arrange to talk with Secretary McNamara, Budget Director Gordon, Mr. McGeorge Bundy, and perhaps the President.

DEB

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, November–January FY 1965. Secret. A copy was sent to Secretary McNamara.

2 See Document 19.

3 78 Stat. 1012; P.L. 88–633, the Foreign Assistance Act of 1964, as amended, was approved on October 7, 1964.

4 Not attached but printed as Document 24.

29. Editorial Note 29. Editorial Note

On January 14, 1965, President Johnson delivered a special message to the Congress on foreign aid in which he recommended an appropriation of $3,380 million for Fiscal Year 1966. Of this sum $1,170 million was requested for military assistance and $2,210 million for other categories of aid. For text of the message, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pages 44–50.

A January 14 briefing memorandum from the AID Assistant Administrator for Program, Hollis B. Chenery, to the Deputy Administrator of AID, William S. Gaud, indicates that a briefing session “to provide DAC representatives with U.S. views concerning our aid effort, the aid efforts of other DAC members, and the position of the U.S. on subjects of special interest to DAC members” was scheduled for January 15 at 3:30 p.m. at the State Department. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1 Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965) No record, however, of this meeting has been found.

On January 13, George Ball submitted a memorandum to McGeorge Bundy commenting on the President's draft foreign aid message dated January 12, 1965. In this 3-page memorandum, Ball wrote, in part: “The draft foreign aid message sounds like the presentation of a necessary—but very distasteful—program. I appreciate the need to give Congress the sense that the program is pared down to the bone. As drafted, however, the statement seems to me too defensive and apologetic. Its possible harmful effects overseas, and not merely on the recipients of aid but on other donor countries as well, should be carefully considered.” (Department of State, S/S White House Files: Lot 70 D 217)

30. Memorandum From the Deputy Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to Secretary of State Rusk 30. Memorandum From the Deputy Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, March 9, 1965.

SUBJECT

Status of MAP Funds—FY 1965

As you know, military assistance costs for Vietnam have continued to rise during this year. After taking account of all possible adjustments in the MAP programs in Latin America, Africa, Europe, and Asia (apart from Vietnam and Laos)—and after allowing for a possible $50 million transfer from the A.I.D. Contingency Fund to the MAP—we are currently in my judgment about $40 million short, figuring in the currently approved level of $43.4 million for Laos and $278.8 million for Vietnam. (Those two country levels amount to $100.8 million higher than those included in our FY 1965 MAP request for $1,055 million, including the special augmentation for Vietnam.) Substantial cuts have already been made in programs for Greece, Turkey, Taiwan and Korea to accommodate the increased costs in Vietnam.

We are informed by the Department of Defense of additional firm costs of $31.9 million for Vietnam, beyond the $278.8 million currently approved for FY 1965 funding, which must soon be provided for, and still more to be expected.

Accordingly, it is believed we should plan on either a supplemental appropriation request for the present fiscal year, or a use of the authority to draw upon Defense stocks in the present fiscal year to be replaced by a supplemental appropriation for FY 1966. The latter course may be preferable since it would permit us to adjust more easily if, as it now seems probable, still further MAP requirements for Vietnam will need to be provided.

Secretary McNamara has not agreed with either of these courses of action. Thus far, he has proposed to meet the $40 million shortage cited above by making further cuts in the Greece, Turkey, Taiwan and Korea programs.2 The means of accommodating the additional $31.9 million firm costs for Vietnam is yet to be faced.

Our consultations with the Near Eastern and Far Eastern Regional Bureaus and the Deputy Undersecretary for Political Affairs have indicated that the political consequences of further reductions in the four key countries would be very serious, and therefore we feel it would be preferable to plan on some means of augmenting the current appropriation for FY 1965.

William S. Gaud

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, February–June FY 1965. Secret.

2 See Document 19.

31. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 31. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, March 26, 1965.

Dear Bob:

To follow up our discussion at the White House on Tuesday,2 I thought it would be useful to get to you in written form a summary of State and A.I.D.'s current views concerning the increasingly acute need for more funds for the current year's military assistance program.

The currently approved FY 1965 MAP levels for Laos and Viet-Nam are $43.4 million and $278.8 million respectively. Their total is $100.8 million higher than the levels included in the augmented program of $1,055 million presented to and approved by the Congress for FY 1965.

Even after taking into account the already agreed upon $55 million transfer from the A.I.D. contingency fund, these program levels can be met from presently appropriated funds only by withholding from the programs for Greece, Turkey, Taiwan and Korea some $40 million more than I believe it is politically feasible to withhold. Indeed, the programs for those countries are already desperately low. To reduce them still further is in my view unthinkable.

I am now informed, however, of the following additional $57.5 million of FY 1965 MAP requirements: —$31.9 million firm, plus $8 million probable, for Viet-Nam,

—$7 million probable for Laos,

—$10.6 million probable for Thailand.

There may, of course, be still further requirements for Viet-Nam.

I know you would like to live within currently available appropriations if you possibly could. Under existing circumstances, however, I do not see how you can possibly do so. I am convinced that we should plan on either a supplemental appropriation request for FY 1965, or a use of Section 510—the latter of which would require replacement through a supplemental appropriation for FY 1966.

The Section 510 route seems to me to be preferable. Given the tangled state of affairs now prevailing in the Congress—particularly the controversy in the Senate over the way in which military aid is to be handled—I question the practicality of going for a supplemental.

With warm regards,

Sincerely,

Dean

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, February–June FY 1965. Secret.

2 March 23.

32. Editorial Note 32. Editorial Note

On March 26, 1965, President Johnson met with the members of the General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs for the first time. The meeting was held at the White House and served to formally convene the Committee. At this gathering, President Johnson said, “The government is very large and is staffed by many capable and intelligent people, but it is in constant need of new ideas and mature judgement from private citizens.” He concluded, “We need your help in making our assistance more effective, more sure, more imaginative.” For complete text of President Johnson's remarks to the Committee, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pages 333–335.

The Committee was composed of the following: Dr. James A. Perkins, Chairman, President of Cornell University; Dwayne O. Andreas; Eugene R. Black; Mrs. Everett N. Case; Dr. Luther H. Foster; General Alfred M. Gruenther; William R. Hewlett; Dr. Franklin D. Murphy; Dr. Samuel N. Nabrit; David Rockefeller; and William J. Zellerbach.

For the final report dated October 25, 1968, containing the Committee's recommendations to improve the foreign aid program, see Document 79.

33. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 33. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 6, 1965.

SUBJECT

Proposed Transfer of $55 million of Contingency Funds to the Military Assistance Program (FY 1965)

I recommend that you determine (1) that the transfer of $55,000,000 of contingency funds to the military assistance program is necessary for the purposes of the Foreign Assistance Act; and (2) that a transfer of contingency funds without regard to the usual 10% limitation is important to the security of the United States.

The Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense concur in this recommendation.2

Section 610(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act authorizes transfers between appropriations, but places a limitation of 10% on transfer from any one appropriation.3 Section 614(a) authorizes you to waive provisions of the Act, including the 10% limitation, when you consider it important to the security of the United States to do so. These are the authorities we are recommending that you use.

For Fiscal Year 1965, the Administration requested a military assistance appropriation of $1,055 million which the Congress appropriated. In addition it was estimated that approximately $117.8 million will be available from recoupments and reappropriations. Following Congressional action on appropriations in October, 1964, joint reviews by Defense, State and A.I.D. concluded that a military assistance program for fiscal 1965 of $1,172.8 million would be seriously inadequate, particularly in view of increasing demands from the combat operations in Southeast Asia, and that a program totaling at least $1,222.8 million should be planned for, contemplating a $50 million transfer from the contingency fund at a later date in the fiscal year assuming that programmed requirements did not decline, and that availabilities from anticipated recoupments did not increase to any significant extent.

Program requirements in fact have not declined. It was our combined judgment in December, and is our combined judgment today, that even a program totaling $1,222.8 million is inadequate for Fiscal Year 1965. An additional requirement of $5 million for Morocco military grant aid has been added to current funding shortfalls. Increasing demands from Southeast Asia, now estimated at well over $100 million above Congressional Presentation levels, has required withholding funding of a major portion of long deferred modernization programs for the military forces of key forward defense countries on the periphery of the Soviet Union and Communist China. The programs proposed to the Congress for Greece, Turkey, the Republic of China and Korea for Fiscal Year 1965 have already been seriously reduced. These repeated deferrals are aggravating serious deficiencies in the equipment of allied forces, and in the event of emergency, missions planned for such forces may be required to fall upon U.S. forces in increasing degrees.

To avoid further reductions, the proposed transfer of $55,000,000 of contingency funds is therefore in our judgment a minimum and necessary step in the interest of the security of the United States. We foresee the need to examine the possibility of recommending additional transfers later in the fiscal year to meet urgent or special requirements, such as those in Southeast Asia. We are not making such a recommendation at this time, pending further review of competing economic assistance priority demands on contingency funds, of progress in realizing recoupments from prior year military assistance funds and other possible sources of funding.

It is, accordingly, recommended that you sign the attached memorandum making the determination under the Act which will permit transfer of $55,000,000 of contingency funds to the military assistance program.4

David E. Bell

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. II [1 of 2], Box 40. Secret.

2 Director of the Bureau of the Budget Kermit Gordon, in an April 12 memorandum to President Johnson, also recommended the approval of the $55 million transfer. (Ibid.)

3 75 Stat. 442; P.L. 87–195, the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, approved on September 4, 1961.

4 Not attached. A signed copy of an April 15 memorandum from President Johnson to Bell indicating the President's approval of Presidential Determination No. 65–11, transferring up to $55 million of contingency funds to the military assistance program, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. II [1 of 2], Box 40.

34. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 34. Memorandum From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 27, 1965.

While you're thinking about foreign aid, here's a fascinating statistic. A recent study claims that if economic resources in many LDC's were devoted to retarding population growth rather than accelerating production growth, these resources could be 100 times more effective in raising output per capita! In many of these countries, spending only about one percent of their present overall development outlays on reducing births could be as effective in raising per capita output as the other 99%.

The above figures are just one good economist's. However, even if they're off somewhat, there's no doubt of the rapidly declining cost of population control because of new devices. This could have immense significance for areas where we are investing massive amounts of development capital—all of Latin America, India, Pakistan, Turkey (to take just our biggest clients). The process of getting these countries to the stage of self-sustaining growth, and thus reducing the longer term foreign aid burden on us—could be greatly foreshortened.

I'm not propagandizing for a big US push on the still sensitive issue of birth control. Things are already moving in this field at a pretty good pace. But the relevance of figures like the above to the achievement of our foreign aid goals is so striking that you may want to consider ways and means of gradually using our foreign aid more as an incentive to major efforts in this field by the less developed countries themselves. You might want to include this subject in your aid talks with Bill Gaud.

Would you like to hear more about this?2

R.W. Komer

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Komer Memos, Vol. II [1], Box 6. Secret. Copies were sent to McGeorge Bundy, Bill Moyers, and Douglas Cater.

2 A handwritten note at the bottom of the page reads: “Yes L[yndon]". Buddy wrote below that: “Francis [Bator] Can you take this on? McB".

35. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of the Treasury Fowler 35. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to Secretary of the Treasury Fowler 1

Washington, July 9, 1965.

Dear Joe:

In accordance with the proposal made in Secretary Dillon's letter of August 13, 1964, to Secretary McNamara,2 there have been a number of discussions among the staff of Treasury, Defense and State/A.I.D. in an attempt to develop policy guidelines for the military credit sales assistance program.

First, there is agreement that in countries receiving military or economic aid, military credit assistance should be planned, along with military grant assistance and the various forms of economic assistance, as one of the means for achieving U.S. objectives in each country. Specifically, there is agreement that military credit assistance will be included in the programming of total military assistance required to meet U.S. objectives, and that credit assistance to the major aid-recipient countries will so far as possible be programmed in advance, and thus reviewed as part of the total U.S. assistance provided to that country whether by grant or loans. The Defense Department and State/A.I.D. are now operating under these understandings, and it is my impression there has already been some improvement in the rationality of our decisions. Further effort needs to be made to be sure that credit is programmed against requirements and not as add-on to grant aid.

Second, there is agreement that the logical way to achieve the best relationship between grants and credits in the allocation of military assistance funds would be first to estimate total requirements for U.S. military assistance in aid-receiving countries, and then to determine the best techniques for financing, bearing in mind our political objectives in each country. Proposed military assistance programs would be adjusted with a view to allocating credits to those countries in the best position to carry repayment burdens. While there is agreement on this objective, it will take some time before it can be reached. Such countries as Greece and Taiwan are logical candidates for shifting away from grant aid and toward credit aid, thus leaving grant funds available to meet the needs of countries with lesser repayment capacity, such as India. To make such changes will necessarily take time, in view of existing commitments, political problems associated with the changes, etc. Nevertheless, I regard it as a major step toward a rational use of MAP funds that all of us are agreed to move in the direction of allocating credit and grant availabilities in such fashion as to place repayment burdens on those countries most able to bear them.

Third, State/A.I.D. are vitally concerned with the terms on military assistance to the less developed countries, not only in connection with the general coordinating responsibility provided for in the Foreign Assistance Act,3 but also, specifically in connection with the capacity of the less developed countries to service loans for economic and social development. The rapidly increasing debt burden on less developed countries is a matter of growing concern to the industrialized countries, as well as the less developed countries and has a substantial bearing on the possibility of these countries being able to finance their development at a rate consistent with Free World objectives.

As you know, A.I.D. seeks to make its assistance available on terms consistent with the capacity of the aid-receiving country to service foreign exchange debt. Consequently, nearly all of the less developed countries that A.I.D. continues to assist are receiving loans on the most concessional terms authorized under the Foreign Assistance Act. I believe that military assistance to recipients of substantial and continuing A.I.D. assistance at minimum terms should be planned, so far as feasible, on a grant basis. Where special circumstances indicate the desirability of credit sales to these countries, terms should be roughly comparable to A.I.D. medium terms. Originally, I had hoped it would be possible to reach agreement on a general principle that military credit terms would parallel economic assistance terms as to maturities, grace periods, and interest rates. I have been persuaded that this is infeasible because to provide terms for military credit sales as “soft” as those for development loans, for all the countries where credit sales are desirable this year, would require more MAP funds than are available. In order to stretch the MAP funds as far as they need to go, it is plainly necessary to use the guaranty authority granted by the Congress in this year's Foreign Assistance Act.4 This means, even in cases where there is a mixture of guaranteed private financing and direct MAP credit sales, the resulting average credit terms in most instances will exceed substantially the terms on which development loans are made to the same country.

As a practical matter, therefore, it seems to me necessary for the present time to stretch the available MAP funds by using the guaranty authority, recognizing that the resulting terms in a number of cases will be higher than would be desirable in terms of the purchasing country's repayment capacity. This stretch of availability can be maximized where credits are substituted for grants. Sales and grant plans should be adjusted, however, to result so far as possible in softer terms for those countries with the lowest economic capacity to repay. We can and should ask in each case whether the military sales in question are of sufficient value to U.S. interest to warrant the assumption of the repayment burden that will ensue.

This leaves unsettled, however, the question of what policy should guide us as we look to the future. I take it none of us holds the view that we should regard military credit sales, on the model of Export-Import Bank loans, essentially as means for selling American equipment on near commercial terms, and that such sales should be made to less developed countries only to the relatively small extent that they can afford to accept quasi-commercial terms. All of us, I believe, regard military credit assistance, like military grant assistance and economic assistance, as a flexible means for enabling the U.S. to help a less developed country achieve defense and development objectives with which the United States must concur if the assistance is to be granted.

Logically, the use of all these forms of aid should be related to a plan under which the recipient country can achieve in a foreseeable period of time a self-sustaining economic situation, under which it can afford to pay for its defense and development needs without special assistance from the United States or anyone else. In practice the application of such a standard is, of course, difficult and uncertain. Nevertheless, it is clear that in seeking to achieve it in the case of countries like India, which have very limited economic capacity to assume more debt, military credit sales on medium or hard terms will either slow down the time at which economic viability can be achieved or enlarge the amount of economic assistance on soft terms which will be needed.

So far as I am aware, this logic has not been challenged. Defense, however, proposes to continue providing military credit to these countries on hard terms; indeed, the softest terms that Defense has been willing to consider for the less developed countries would necessitate repayment during the grace period of A.I.D. loans. Defense justifies these terms on the lack of available commercial funds for periods longer than ten years, even when guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. Government. We believe this questionable in light of our experience in guaranteeing 20-year credits under the A.I.D. housing and other extended risk guarantee programs. We have already authorized guarantees of more than $100 million in credits with 20-year terms and have a number of institutions seeking guarantees for additional credits of this type.

We have concluded, after considerable analysis and evaluation, that Defense should not and need not undo what is being accomplished by A.I.D. We, therefore, would urge that the terms on credits made by Defense to less developed countries to which A.I.D. provides substantial assistance at minimum terms should, in any event, not be harder than a term of 20 years, a grace period of 5 years, and an interest rate of 3% per annum. We would expect such terms could be achieved by an appropriate combination of guaranty and direct credit arrangements.

Sales to non-industrialized countries, other than recipients of substantial A.I.D. assistance at minimum terms, we would suggest could generally be bank financed under the MAP credit guarantee. Such terms currently are 5% interest, repayment 5–10 years, and we would expect, as indicated above, that longer maturities would be feasible where appropriate.

Attached is a list giving a suggested indication of the countries we would think should be included in these categories.5 Such a list should, of course, be revised from time to time to reflect changing circumstances.

I assume that sales to industrialized countries should not need military credit sales funds, since the Export-Import Bank will normally be able to supply any credit needed.

I would be glad to discuss these matters further with you and others concerned. I believe the issues involved are important and we should continue to seek their resolution.

Sincerely yours,

Dave 6

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, DEF 19 Military Assistance, FY 1966. Confidential.

2 Not found.

3 See footnote 3, Document 33.

4 Section 509(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1964, as amended, P.L. 88–633 (78 Stat. 1011).

5 Not printed.

6 Printed from a copy that indicates Bell signed the original.

36. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 36. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Washington, July 30, 1965.

I–10575/65

Dear Dave:

Secretary McNamara asked me to report a problem of ours to you. I tried to telephone you this afternoon but was unable to reach you. The problem is that our South Vietnam-Laos overrun in FY '66 is going to exceed the $300 million limit of Section 510. The overrun may or may not be large, depending on such things as whether the Koreans contribute a division, whether the Thais provide some forces, etc.

For reasons with which you are familiar, we are not prepared to solve this problem by going to the Congress for more money. The implication seems to be that the overrun will have to be met by cuts of one kind or another elsewhere. The two possibilities are: (1) A transfer to MAP from AID (which, since the contingency fund will probably not be large enough, would have to come from someone's program), and/or (2) a reduction in certain MAP programs (a la FY '65).

Secretary McNamara would like for you to think about this problem and consider the possibility of finding a way to transfer some funds to us.

(Also, I am reminded that, before I realized the possibility that we would overrun the Section 510 limit, I agreed with Bill Gaud to pick up certain Korean costs in Vietnam which AID might otherwise properly have covered. I think the amount was $18 million or $43 million, depending on the interpretation. I ask you to reopen this issue. If we could relieve ourselves of that obligation, we would to that extent have reduced our overrun problem.)

Sincerely,

John

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, DEF 19 Military Assistance, FY 1966. Confidential.

37. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 37. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, August 6, 1965.

SUBJECT

Aid Legislation

The Senate Foreign Relations Committee has requested that David Bell and I meet with them on Thursday morning, August 12.2 The purpose of the session will be to receive Administration suggestions for ending the present deadlock in the conference committee on foreign aid legislation and to seek commitments from the Executive Branch that next year it will request aid legislation that will satisfy the major concerns of the Foreign Relations Committee. If our suggestions and commitments satisfy these concerns, the Senate Conferees would, presumably, recede on the two issues now in dispute—the two-year authorization and Senator Morse's Planning Committee.

The principal issues on which we shall have to comment are: (1) The question of a multi-year authorization;

(2) The nature and scope of a study of the present assistance program;

(3) The extent to which total U.S. assistance should go through multilateral channels.

Multi-year authorization

I propose that we express the intention of seeking a multi-year authorization next year for all categories of assistance.

The length of the authorization could be for two or more years, and I propose if possible to avoid expressing a preference. Chairman Morgan has told us privately he will have no objection if we testify for a two year authorization.

Nature and Scope of a Study of the Present Aid Program

As you know, the Senate bill “terminates” the present assistance program and creates a Planning Committee to design a new program. This proposal, as written by Senator Morse, is wholly unacceptable because it “terminates” assistance, establishes guidelines for a new program that are unrealistic and impinges on the responsibility of the President for conducting foreign policy.

I propose to restate our objections to this Planning Committee proposal but suggest as an alternative, in recognition of Congressional concerns, that the Executive Branch will conduct a special study of the number of countries receiving assistance; the requirements for assistance and the prospects for achieving our objectives and terminating assistance; the contribution of other developed countries; and the appropriate relationship between bilateral and multilateral assistance.

Such a study could include Congressional participation and/or private, impartial institutions or individuals, but I believe it best to leave that indefinite for the present.

Multilateral aid

Throughout the presentation of this year's program and legislation, we have stated that the Administration favors increasing the use of multilateral channels for aid wherever that is feasible and in the U.S. interests.

I propose to restate our support for increased use of multilateral channels, citing our support for the proposed Asian Development Bank, our extensive and increasing use of World Bank Consultative Groups, and our encouragement for the enlargement of the resources of the I.D.A. In addition, I will point out that the Administration has consistently asked for the removal of the ban, imposed by the House Appropriations Committee, on the use of up to 15% of A.I.D. funds for I.D.A. under Section 205 of the authorization act.3 We would propose to use the authority, if we obtain it, to seek to induce additional contributions to I.D.A. over and above the regular contributions agreed to in the course of the I.D.A. pledging process.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, DEF 19 Military Assistance, FY 1966. Limited Official Use. A stamped notation on the source text indicates the memorandum was received in McGeorge Bundy's office on August 7. A handwritten notation reads: “L[yndon] 8/7/65 7:30 PM.” An attached note reads: “Alice: For info: Bator scribbled on his copy of this: ‘FMB called Bell to say P. says O.K.' Dorothy"

2 Secretary Rusk and Administrator Bell met with members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee at 9:30 a.m. on August 12 to discuss the foreign aid bill. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book, 1965)

3 79 Stat. 653, P.L. 89–171, the Foreign Assistance Act of 1965, approved on September 6, 1965.

38. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) 38. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)1

Washington, August 17, 1965.

Dear John:

Your letter of July 30 regarding MAP requirements for FY 1966 points to one of several serious questions that face us during the present fiscal year with respect to foreign assistance requirements.2

Your letter indicates that you expect the increased Vietnam-Laos MAP costs in FY 1966, over and above the amount provided in the MAP budget, will exceed the $300 million authority to draw upon Defense Department stocks established in Section 510 of the Foreign Assistance Act. In these circumstances, you raise the question whether there is a possibility of transferring some funds from economic aid appropriations to military aid.

I am afraid I cannot be encouraging. If Congress acts favorably at the appropriations stage, we hope to have about $464 million available for Supporting Assistance, which is not enough to meet requirements already in sight, including $330 million for Southeast Asia; $65 million for Korea, $32 million for Jordan, and smaller but important amounts for several countries in Africa and Latin America. Moreover, it now appears that the Contingency Fund budget request of $50 million will not be sufficient even to meet requirements for the Dominican Republic and for Vietnam and Laos—let alone unexpected needs elsewhere.

Thus the appropriations from which transfers to MAP would ordinarily be made appear to be more than fully committed. In the last two years, it has been possible, late in the year, to transfer some funds from the Technical Cooperation appropriation (on the order of $15 million), but it is too soon to predict whether or not this can be done in the present fiscal year, and in any event the amount would not be large in relation to the likely requirements. Funds cannot be transferred, as you know, from the Development Loan and Alliance for Progress appropriations.

I conclude, therefore, that transferring funds from economic aid to military aid promises to alleviate the basic problem only to a small extent, if at all.

Moreover, in view of the requirements facing the Supporting Assistance and Contingency Fund appropriations, I believe it is preferable to let stand the agreement between you and Bill Gaud that the Defense Department and/or MAP will cover the Korean costs in Vietnam to which you refer.

Looking ahead, beyond the requirements which are already upon us, at the likelihood—virtually the certainty—that additional requirements will face us during the present fiscal year in Vietnam and elsewhere in Southeast Asia, it seems to me the only sensible way to conduct our foreign assistance financing is to anticipate the need for a supplemental appropriation, probably for economic as well as military assistance. We cannot estimate accurately the size of such a supplemental at present, but we should be able to do so by the end of the calendar year, in time to permit a request to be presented to the Congress at the beginning of the next session.

If you concur, I suggest that we prepare a proposal, for approval by Secretaries Rusk and McNamara and by the President, for proceeding to program MAP funds for Vietnam and Laos as the needs of the military situation require, and to program MAP funds for other countries at the minimum levels the U.S. interest will permit (including taking full account of the recent studies by Mr. Hoopes of DOD/ISA),3 recognizing that this will in all probability result in a request for supplemental appropriations in January.

Sincerely yours,

Dave

1 Source: Washington, National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, DEF 19 Military Assistance, FY 1966. Confidential. A copy was sent to Schultze.

2  Document 36.

3  Townsend W. Hoopes, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Secutiry Affairs. The studies have not been further identified.

39. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze) 39. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze)1

Washington, September 17, 1965.

This memorandum proposes a concept, a procedure, and a time schedule for this fall's review of the foreign aid program.

In summary, I suggest: —a rapid but thorough re-examination of the program, which will put before the President, by November 1st, sharply focused statements of the alternatives and the arguments concerning foreign aid in each major geographic area and with respect to each major aspect of the program (economic, military, P.L. 480);

—this work to be done under the supervision of a steering committee, with Bundy as executive secretary and coordinating staff work, and aiming at documents which, with appropriate redrafting and polishing, can be usefully put before the Congress as background for considering aid legislation next spring;

—the November 1st date being set both in the light of the budget schedule and in the expectation that the President would wish, after his own preliminary consideration, to have the issues discussed with appropriate Congressional leaders prior to sending his foreign aid message to the Congress early next year.

Concept

Both the Congress and the President have called for a review of the aid program this fall, preparatory to next year's legislative recommendations. Neither has specified in any detail the nature or extent of the review. The Conference Committee on the Foreign Aid Authorization Bill recommended “a review of the aid program as presently constituted, seeking to direct it more effectively toward the solution of the problems of the developing countries.”2 The President quoted this recommendation in his signing statement and said, “the Executive Branch will, this fall, undertake appropriate studies of the program” to “provide the basis for recommendations as to the future course of U.S. assistance policy.”3

Secretary Rusk added certain elements of specificity in testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on August 12th. The Secretary said that in conducting the review we will give “particular attention to the issues raised by this Committee: the number of countries receiving assistance; the requirements for assistance and the prospects for achieving our objectives and terminating assistance; the contribution of other developed countries; and the appropriate relationships between bilateral and multilateral asssitance.”4

Beyond this, the President has made one commitment with respect to next year's program. In his signing statement on the authorizing bill, he said, “I expect to request that the multi-year principle approved by the Congress in 1961 and 1962 for development loans be extended to the other categories of assistance.”

We have, therefore, a fairly clean slate to write on in determining what kind of review to make. I suggest that the following consideration should be controlling.

1. The fundamental question that should be addressed is: what kind of foreign aid program makes sense in terms of U.S. foreign policy as it is today and as it will be in the future. I think what is troubling the Congress (and the President?) most is whether our present foreign aid policy is in large part an anachronistic holdover from prior and different circumstances. We should meet this point head on, not by trying to defend what we have now, but by facing the question: what do U.S. interests require of us in the way of aid programs for the future.

There are in addition other questions that trouble the Congress and the President, some of which are simply reflections of the main question identified above, but others raise additional issues of method or objective: why do we need aid programs in so many countries? could we not accomplish more, at less cost in foreign and domestic criticism, by put-ting our aid through multilateral agencies? does it make sense in today's world for the U.S. to provide military aid against external aggression, as distinct from internal subversion? how can we better harness private efforts (here and in the developing countries) to the development effort? And so on.

2. These are primarily issues of policy, which need to be answered by the President this fall, in determining his budget and legislative recommendations and by the Congress next spring in reviewing same. We have little time for external research, although there may be aspects of the problem on which research should be undertaken for later benefit. At present, we need the best thinking that can be put together for the President's use this fall—and if possible the same materials, appropriately revised, should be made available to the Congress next spring.

3. Accordingly, I believe that what we want from this fall's aid review are analytical papers addressed to fundamental issues—as few papers as possible, and as little encumbered as possible with detail, with standard formulations and with clearances. Nevertheless, the subject is necessarily complex and many-sided. Subject to review by the steering committee suggested below, I suggest assigning preparation of the following papers: —a general overview, addressing the question how far is an aid program necessary to U.S. foreign policy, what should it objectives be, and roughly how soon can they be realized. This paper should concentrate on the relationships between aid and U.S. foreign policy, and undoubtedly should be organized on a regional basis (Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, Asia from Afghanistan to Korea), with brief annexes on the eight or ten key countries. It should cover all forms of concessional aid, and suggest the main outlines of a five-year forward program;

—a paper on military aid,5 summarizing the valuable recent work of Townsend Hoopes, addressing among others the question of arms against external aggression v. arms against internal subversion, and proposing the main outlines of a five-year forward program;

—a paper on the development problem, outlining what we have learned about self-help requirements, widespread private and local participation, and the nature and limits of our influence, addressing the question how rapidly could we expect progress toward self-sustaining growth, indicating the implications for trade and monetary policy, and suggesting the outlines of a five-year forward program;

—a paper on the world food problem (primarily a sub-category of the development problem, but warranting special treatment), summarizing the valuable recent work of the USDA-AID-BOB task force,5 and proposing the outlines of a five-year forward program ("The War Against Hunger");

—a paper on the number of countries problem—that is, primarily, the question of what to do about the fact of so many small countries—indicating the policy and administrative alternatives and proposing a course of action;

—a paper on multilateral versus bilateral aid, summarizing what we know about the relative efficiency of each, the Congressional attitudes thereon, and other considerations affecting our policy choices, and outlining a five-year forward program;

— a paper on the aid programs of other donor countries, summarizing recent trends and forward intentions so far as they are known, and proposing a U.S. policy position toward other donors both as a group and, for major donors, individually.

Procedure

I have suggested an ambitious objective and a tight timetable. Moreover several government agencies are necessarily involved. I suggest the following means for moving ahead: 1. The President to approve the establishment of an informal steering group consisting of: Secretary Rusk (with Mr. Mann acting for him as desired); Secretary McNamara (with Mr. McNaughton acting); Secretary Fowler (with Mr. Barr acting); Secretary Freeman; Mr. Schultze, Mr. Bell, and Mr. McGeorge Bundy as executive secretary and coordinator of staff work. The function of this steering group would be to lay out the work to be done, and to review and discuss the initial products before putting them to the President.

2. The steering group to assign the preparation of papers to individuals in one or another agency. I suggest this method as the most rapid way to obtain clear, hard-hitting issue papers, and not simply mushy institutional products. Individuals so assigned should have the help of people designated from other agencies as may be appropriate, and draw on outside consultants if that can usefully be done in the time available.

3. The main ideas in each paper should be discussed, at such time and in such form as may be convenient, with existing advisory groups such as the General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs (Perkins Committee),6 and the Advisory Committee on Economic Development (Mason Committee).7 Moreover, preliminary discussions should be held with key Members of Congress and Congressional committee staffs to make sure all the issues they consider important are being addressed. All this would be done in confidence, however; I believe any broad discussions with Congress or any public testing to ideas should only occur after the President has had an opportunity to consider the results of the work outlined above.

David E. Bell

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. II [2], Box 1. Limited Official Use.

2 N ot further identified.

3 President Johnson made this statement on September 6 on signing the Foreign Assistance Act of 1965. For full text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book II, pp. 978–979.

4 No record of this testimony has been found.

5 Not further identified.

6 See Document 32.

7 Not further identified.

40. Memorandum From the Acting Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 40. Memorandum From the Acting Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 1, 1965.

SUBJECT

Legislative and Administrative Accomplishments

The A.I.D. report on the legislative and administrative accomplishments of your administration is enclosed.

As requested, the report is a detailed, comprehensive record of a very active and successful period in the history of the U.S. Foreign Assistance Program.

While I believe we can be justly proud of every item in the report, I should like to underscore the following: —Congressional cuts in foreign aid budget requests are at an all-time low. Last year only $266 million was cut from your budget request. This year an even lower cut of $241 million set a new record in the history of the aid program.

—Private enterprise participation in the foreign assistance program is increasing rapidly. We have an active, many-pronged program underway to encourage U.S. private investment in the developing countries. We have doubled since 1963 the number of specific-risk investment guaranties in effect under the aid program.

—Economy and efficiency are prime objectives of the AID agency. We have reduced agency employment by over 2,000 since November 1963—a cut of more than 12%. Last year our cost reductions were estimated at $17.4 million; our goal for next year is almost double—$33 million.

William S. Gaud 2

Enclosure

LEGISLATIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE ACCOMPLISHMENTS BY A.I.D.

A. Legislative

1. Foreign aid has been pared down to a “bare bones” program with the result that Congressional reduction of proposed requests under this Administration have been the lowest in the program's history, less than 8%.

2. Congress this year eliminated or modified several restrictive provisions included in previous Appropriations Acts. a) Elimination of the Whitten proviso contained in last year's Act, which required that a review and determination be made by the President before the final $300 million of economic assistance funds could be obligated.3

b) Elimination of the restriction on reuse of loan repayments from past development loans and Alliance for Progress loans.4

c) Modification of Section III, which pertains to security clearances, that removes the mandatory requirement that all contract employees be cleared and allows the President to promulgate regulations that waive clearances for persons in non-sensitive positions.5

3. The Congress has shown a new awareness of the role the Executive Branch (A.I.D.) can play in promoting private investment in the developing areas of the world as it authorized doubling from $2.5 billion to $5.0 billion of the total face amount of specific risk guaranty contracts that may be outstanding at any one time. Such awareness reflects in part (a) expanded efforts by A.I.D. to promote such investment (the number of coverages outstanding has more than doubled since 1963) and (b) other private enterprise activities developed or supported by A.I.D. such as the catalogue of investment opportunities, Businessman's Information Center, and the Executive Service Corps.6

4. An amendment to the act governing the Food for Peace program (P.L. 480) provides that in programs administered by A.I.D., food distributed by U.S. voluntary agencies overseas shall be directed, insofar as practicable, toward community and other self-help activities designed to remove the causes of hunger. Able-bodied unemployed and under-employed recipients of these foods are strongly urged to contribute their energies toward helping to better their own and their community's economic position. Prior to this amendment commodities were distributed overseas only on the basis of need which is the same pattern as in the U.S. Government's domestic distribution program.7

B. Administrative

1. Participation in the Proposed Asian Development Bank—The U.S. has indicated its willingness to participate in the establishment of the Asian Development Bank. Discussions have been under way with other governments since last spring on the specific purposes and outline of such an institution, and approval of a Bank charter by interested governments is expected to take place at a ministerial meeting this winter. Primary responsibility for conducting necessary negotiations with foreign countries on the charter, and obtaining eventual Congressional approval of the charter now being negotiated rests with Treasury. Nevertheless, A.I.D. which has played a major role in these efforts from the time of the U.S. decision to join the proposed Bank as announced by the President last April is continuing to work actively with the Treasury on this project.8

2. A.I.D./University Relationships—A study group chaired by the then President of the Carnegie Foundation, John Gardner, has laid the framework for a series of actions designed to improve and promote better relationships. Actions taken along this line include appointment of a committee of university representatives to review periodically such relationships, creation of an office of Special Assistant for University Relations, and issuance of a new standard university contract.

3. Food for Peace—A.I.D. is now financing the vitamin fortification of non-fat dry milk and is arranging to fortify the flour and cornmeal sent overseas for feeding programs. A.I.D. is now also working closely with private industry in promoting the development and use overseas of grain based, protein enriched whole food products. In addition, comprehensive experimental programs involving nutrition, education, research in product development and marketing, welfare feeding programs and other actions, and which are designed to develop the best mix of methods for dealing with malnutrition in the pre-school child, are being developed in a selected number of countries.

4. Southeast Asian Development—In response to your pledge to seek $1 billion from the Congress to expand economic and social development in Southeast Asia,9 A.I.D. has: (a) developed an overall development program; (b) obtained U.N. support for fund raising and strengthening existing U.N. agencies to carry out various programs, including the immense Mekong River project to which we have recently pledged $17 million; (c) encouraged other countries, such as Japan and Thailand, to initiate programs in the fields of agriculture and development planning coordination; and (d) maintained pressure on advanced countries to make significant sums available to the region on a multilateral basis.

5. Encouragement of Multilateral Agencies and Coordination Devices—The U.S. has strongly supported the efforts of the World Bank to organize under its leadership additional consultative groups to aid donor countries for the purpose of improving the coordination of aid from the donors to specific countries. Although four such groups have been established since 1962, it is only recently that the Bank, with our support, has attempted to expand the coverage of these groups. In addition, the U.S. had strongly urged other donors to increase their assistance and the DAC member governments have agreed to take appropriate steps to attain assistance levels equivalent to 1% of national income as recommended by UNCTAD. The governments represented on the Development Assistance Committee have also agreed to targets for softening assistance terms during the coming three years and to tailor the terms of their assistance more realistically to the repayment capacities of individual recipient countries as well as to harmonize their terms to individual countries within consortia, consultative groups and other coordinating arrangements.

6. Relationships with and Use of the Rest of the Federal Community—A.I.D. has accelerated its efforts to utilize on a cooperative basis the facilities of other federal agencies in our programs. A recent example of such use has been an agreement with the Public Health Service to administer A.I.D.'s world-wide malaria eradication program. In this way, A.I.D. is able to tap the expertise already within the government in the administration of its programs.

7. Programs for Unsponsored Foreign Students—A.I.D. has inaugurated a program under contract with the Institute of International Education to assist needy foreign students from developing nations who are in the U.S. on their own resources and who possess leadership potential. Summer institutes and academic year fellowships have been established to provide a climate for a better education for these students who otherwise for lack of financial support might be unable to complete their educations properly and who might therefore return to their countries with misleading impressions of the American way of life.

8. Management Improvements—A.I.D. in response to President Johnson's call for tighter, leaner, more effective management of government programs, has brought to bear a wide variety of management techniques, resources, and approaches, and has focused the attention and concern of every employee on accomplishing this task.10 Results have been: a) A comprehensive manpower management system was developed: strong, central direction of Agency manpower resources has been established; control has been extended over all categories of Agency manpower; better manpower planning procedures have been installed; and a manpower reporting system has been designed.

b) Agency staffing levels have been reduced by 2,112—a cut of more than 12% since November 1963; additional improvement in manpower utilization are planned.

c) An impartial evaluation of A.I.D.'s Washington organizational arrangements confirmed their basic strength.

d) New organizational arrangements include: a single State-A.I.D. focal point for Latin American affairs and for each Latin American country; a new Office of Labor Affairs to strengthen free labor institutions in less developed countries; a new program to evaluate the operational performance and effectiveness of A.I.D.'s overseas missions; and new Operations Review Committee to speed decision-making on broad operating problems.

e) A.I.D./Washington organization structure was simplified through consolidation of the Communications Resources Division with the Office of Technical Cooperation and Research; merger of the International Development Organizations staff with the Office of Program Coordination; consolidation of two police training facilities in Washington; consolidation of four Far East country offices into two geographic area offices; and establishment of a regional A.I.D. mission in Washington to administer small assistance programs in 13 African countries.

f) Overseas, separate A.I.D. organizations in 18 countries were eliminated; increased authorities were delegated to selected missions to permit greater flexibility and quicker, more decisive and effective program implementation action; regional controller and audit groups were established to improve the utilization of scarce financial management expertise; and A.I.D. overseas administrative support operations were consolidated with State in 30 countries where manpower and dollar savings could be achieved.

g) An Agency-wide Management Improvement and Cost Reduction Program was inaugurated. Savings through cost reductions and cost avoidance actions totaled an estimated $17.4 million in FY 1965. Cost reduction targets for FY 1966 and FY 1967 have been set at $33 million each year.

h) A comprehensive reorganization of personnel activities and a thorough overhaul of the Agency's basic personnel policies and procedures was effected.

i) Applications of automated techniques to fulfill Agency data requirements and simplify paperwork operations continued to grow. Mechanized payrolling, automation of certain processing functions for specific risk guarantee applications; development of an automated skills inventory, automation of the communications routing system, and other applications were installed.

j) A long-range effort to develop a modern information system for A.I.D. and other foreign affairs agencies was undertaken. A.I.D. is presently concentrating on the development of an information system for its technical assistance programs.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, David E Bell (Speeches), FY 1966. No classification marking.

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Gaud signed the original.

3 The text of an amendment introduced by Representative Jamie L. Whitten is in the last paragraph to Title I, Economic Assistance, of the Foreign Assistance and Related Agencies Appropriation Act, 1965, P.L. 88–634, approved on October 7, 1964. (78 Stat. 1016)

4 78 Stat. 1016.

5 78 Stat. 1019.

6 These were introduced in President Johnson's special message to the Congress on foreign aid, March 19, 1964; see Document 4.

7 Not further identified.

8 On April 20, 1965, in a statement delivered following a meeting with Eugene Black, former President of the IBRD, President Johnson promoted U.S. participation in an Asian Development Bank. For text of his statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pp. 435–436.

9 Not further identified.

10 In President Johnson's special message to the Congress on foreign aid on March 19, 1964, he called for the AID Administrator “to embark on a major program to improve the quality of his staff—and to reduce the total number of AID employees by 1,200 by the end of fiscal year 1965.”

41. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary of Agriculture Freeman, and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 41. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Secretary of State Rusk, Secretary of Agriculture Freeman, and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Washington, October 6, 1965.

Because of the importance and difficulty of the problem of the world food situation and U.S. food policy, those of us in the White House who are concerned with the problem have been working on ways of making sure that the Administration does not step on its own toes in this area in the next few months. We have worked out the attached one-page statement of suggestions for the position to be taken by U.S. officials, and with the consent of my colleagues, Schultze, Califano and Reuter, I send it to you for your comment. If we can all agree on something along this line, I think we can do a better job for the President in protecting his decision-making responsibilities, but we would welcome comments as to the precise form these guidelines should take.

McGeorge Bundy 2

Attachment3

SUGGESTIONS FOR POSITION TO BE TAKEN BY U.S. OFFICIALS IN DISCUSSING THE WORLD FOOD SITUATION AND U.S. FOOD AID POLICY

I. The following topics can be usefully and appropriately discussed: 1. The seriousness of the problem of world hunger.

2. The problem of malnutrition.

3. The need for effective concern with the problem of population.

4. The accomplishments of our food aid program to date.

5. The need to relate food aid to the economic development of LDC's and to other forms of aid, particularly the need for LDC's to make a major effort to develop their own agricultural sectors and for many of them to increase the emphasis given to agriculture in their overall development planning. In this connection, it is appropriate to point out that the present food-exporting countries cannot feed the world indefinitely.

6. The continued careful attention and serious study given this important subject by the U.S. Government.

In these areas the existing record of the President and of other officers is strong and clear. We should not hesitate to refer to it.

II. The following topics should be avoided, as premature at this time: 1. Any indication of change in U.S. food aid policy.

2. Any comment on the Administration's view of next year's P.L. 480 legislation.

3. Any discussion of the implications of U.S. farm policy for food aid.

4. Any implication that this problem is one which is about to come to a point of major decisions at the White House. It is essential that the President's control over the timing and content of any new decisions and actions not be prejudiced by any member of his own Administration.

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central File, Confidential File, FO 3–2, 10/6/65, Box 47. Confidential. Copies were sent to Schultze, Reuter, and Califano. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “JAC[alifano] has seen.”

2 Printed from a copy that indicates Buddy signed the original.

3 No classification marking.

42. Minutes of Meeting 42. Minutes of Meeting1

Washington, October 12, 1965, 2 p.m.

GAC 3.8

SUBJECT

Meeting with Mr. McGeorge Bundy—White House 2 P.M., October 12

PRESENT

Members of the Committee:

Dr. James A. Perkins, Chairman

Mr. Dwayne O. Andreas

Mr. Eugene R. Black

Mrs. Everett N. Case

Dr. Luther H. Foster

Gen. Alfred M. Gruenther

Mr. William R. Hewlett

Dr. Franklin D. Murphy

Dr. Samuel M. Nabrit

Mr. David Rockefeller

Mr. William J. Zellerbach

A.I.D.

Mr. David E. Bell

Mr. William S. Gaud

Mr. C. Tyler Wood

Mr. Buddy began by saying that he would very much appreciate having the views of the Members as to the kind of problems which should receive priority attention in the review of the Foreign Assistance Programs which the President had ordered to be undertaken. He went on to say that the President was eager to have the review made promptly and did not want to have a long drawn out operation. He remarked that there have been some interesting and instructive developments bearing on foreign assistance policies recently. For one thing the developments in the Indian sub-continent should give us new light on how to handle military aid.

The review of the program is being made in the light of indications that many members of Congress feel a searching revision of the program is necessary and also because of the grave concern of President Johnson himself about some aspects of the program. It is important that the task be done in such a way as to be responsive to the views of Members of the GAC and others like them. Those responsible for having the review made are working in a tight time framework.

It is planned to lay before the President material which will enable him to consider clear-cut choices between possible courses of action and permit him to assess the various opportunities, hazards and costs involved in such choices. The President will not want to “try the case in the newspapers". He will wish to know what the Members of the General Advisory Committee think should be our courses of action and he will also wish to consult other knowledgeable people to obtain their views. The question will be asked frequently—is there any fresh way of carrying out the foreign assistance programs and of avoiding some of the risks involved in our present methods? The more competent advice that can be obtained, the better the product of the review will be.

Mr. Buddy said his own view is a very simple one. There is not enough foreign aid; he is aware of the powerful forces tending to limit the size of the program; there is a wide gap between requirements and avail-abilities; there is no particular virtue in filling this gap for its own sake, but it would be dangerous to allow it to get much worse and we should not be willing to accept any further deterioration.

Dr. Perkins said he agrees that the growing gap between the rich and the poor nations of the world constitutes a dangerous situation for the U.S., which has to be corrected, and the U.S. should do all it can to help correct this situation.

He said he would attempt to summarize the present views of the Committee as to the items which should be considered in the forthcoming review of the program and some of the changes which should be made: 1. We should increase the use of the leverage at our disposal. We should find a way to force the less developed countries for their own good, to take measures to improve their performance which they would not otherwise take. Even our food programs should be so used—e.g., to force India to increase her agricultural productivity. Any such use of our power must be done cautiously. Such a policy has hazards and the powerful and rich cannot do this sort of thing too publicly.

2. The Committee generally agrees with Senator Fulbright that we should move further in the direction of multilateralism in our aid programs. Among other advantages this course would tend to keep the heat off the U.S. and to make aid more acceptable to recipient countries. Technical assistance, particularly in such areas as education, should remain on a bilateral basis. There are, and probably should be, some brakes on too rapid a movement in the direction of multilateralism. It is felt that we should not go to a point where the U.S. is providing more than 50% of the resources of a multilateral agency. We are now over 40% in the case of some programs. One complicating factor is that any assistance we put through multilateral organizations can not be tied to purchases in the U.S. If the shift to multilateralism were to involve a large sum of money, its effect on our balance of payments would have to be carefully considered.

3. The Committee takes a very negative view of any proposals to support and finance Government-owned and operated industrial enterprises in aided countries. There are different shades of opinion on this point within the Committee but the consensus is that we should not look with favor on promoting the development of government-owned industrial enterprises, largely because of the fact that these are generally inefficient and badly managed and that they inhibit the effectiveness of the activities of private initiative.

4. The Committee does not look favorably upon setting any arbitrary limit on the number of countries we should aid. Senator Fulbright, at dinner on Monday evening, had stated his view that the number should be substantially reduced and that the “presence” of the U.S. in so many countries was not necessary and, in fact, not desirable.2 Messrs. Foster and Rockefeller were especially concerned that we not take an inflexible position on this question. They pointed out that small programs could be vital in certain countries where developments might be important to U.S. interests. The proposition that the number of countries should be substantially reduced should be examined very carefully before being accepted.

5. There should be a careful examination as to how assistance programs can best fit into U.S. domestic programs. Aid programs will suffer if they are out of phase with domestic agricultural or budgetary programs.

6. Among the most important elements in our assistance programs are education, population control, agriculture and health. The President has demonstrated a deep interest in education overseas, evidenced in his speech of September 16, 1965, at the Smithsonian Institute.3 The AID program is already doing a great deal in education. The Committee, whose Members have eminent qualifications in the educational field, is greatly interested in how the initiative of the President can be brought into close rapport with the existing programs in AID. These programs may perhaps not pay off immediately, but if we carry them out, we can not lose in the long run. The Committee is impressed with the President's proposal and will probably want to place the subject of overseas educational programs on the agenda for its next meeting.

Population control affects almost every aspect of our attempts to assist in improving conditions of life in the developing countries.

The Committee was appalled at the statistics the Secretary of Agriculture presented to it on the world food problem. It is shocking to learn that in the year 1980, additional grain requirements (compared with 1960 requirements) of the less developed world will be 4 times the increased amount, over and above present production, which the U.S. could make available,4 even if all diverted grain acreage were used.

The Committee would be greatly concerned if the review by the President did not take the above subjects into account.

Mr. Black reminded Dr. Perkins that he had not mentioned the subject of the separation of the military and economic assistance programs.

Mr. Buddy asked whether the Committee had had an opportunity to hear the views of Dr. Morgan, Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, on this subject. Dr. Perkins replied that the Committee had tried to meet with Dr. Morgan and Senator Morse but had been unsuccessful in these attempts. He went on to say that there is not much to be done in the Executive Branch on this subject since the Administration apparently does not much care whether the two programs are separated or not and is ready to accept either of these alternatives.

Mr. Buddy thought it important for the Committee to see Dr. Morgan and also Mr. Mahon, Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee. Anything the Committee could do to make it easier for Dr. Morgan to turn around on this issue would be all to the good and would simplify life. Dr. Perkins said he had come to the conclusion that this is purely a political problem and the focus of it is in the House of Representatives.

Dr. Perkins advanced the thought that it is imperative to re-establish the sense of high public purpose which had, in the past, characterized the assistance programs. Only if such a point of view and atmosphere could be re-created, would the vast effort, hard work and wide-spread support necessary to achieve success be forthcoming. Tactical questions like multilateral vs. bilateral aid and separation of economic programs from military programs do not really constitute the essence of the problem. Dr. Perkins is gravely concerned when he considers the amount of energy it takes to get the legislation through the Congress. There is a great need to make the purpose and importance of foreign assistance programs clear to those upon whose support its continuation at an effective level depends. These programs have no special interest groups to fight for them, such as the group that stands behind the appropriation for the agricultural university at Cornell.

Mr. Hewlett said he feels the case for aid could be presented more effectively. He thinks it harmful to make a great point of the magnanimity of the U.S. and the great credit we should receive and expect to receive because of our generosity and desire to help the world. It would be far better to be less flamboyant and more honest about our objectives. These can be stated better, more simply and more convincingly, as our desires to assist others to become strong and stand on their own feet because this would be better for us.

Mr. Buddy said there is one question which consistently arises concerning our aid and how we administer it. Aid becomes visible and attracts attention in the U.S. when it is being made available to some country which has just burned one of our libraries. Immediately a chorus arises and people shout “Why do we give that country any money?” He cited the example of Nasser. Then again great attention is attracted when countries receiving 1/3 of our aid suddenly take weapons in their hands and start fighting each other over Kashmir. The question which we have to deal with is whether we can ignore this sort of behavior. Perhaps we should try to find a way of insulating our aid programs from this kind of occurrence. George Woods, President of the IBRD, does not seem to be affected quite so directly by incidents of this kind—nobody seems to think of bankers as people engaged in wars.

Mr. Buddy said there seem to be alternatives in handling such cases: 1. We could stop our aid if our clients are behaving badly, or,

2. We could ignore their bad behavior and keep on helping with food and other aid required for their continued economic development.

Dr. Perkins said it seemed there should be at least some connection between the purposes we are trying to serve and the actions we take.

Mr. Buddy commented that Mr. Nasser is behaving much better since the “push-me-pull-me” episode. The pressure applied in this case would never have been applied if all food aid were being handled multilaterally through an international food bank. The IBRD does a good job of tying aid to economic performance, but does not tie it to political performance.

Mr. Bell said that the broad question seemed to be as to how best and most effectively and when to attach political conditions to our aid.

Mr. Buddy told the Committee that the Administration had not made the decision yet as to how far aid should be used as a political tool. He thinks the President would say that we do not want to make a hard bargain, but also we do not wish India, for example, to assume our food is their property no matter how badly they behave.

Dr. Murphy asked where the myth had started that the U.S. Government gives aid without strings. The Government certainly does not give public funds to American universities without strings. He would hope we can sweep the idea of philanthropy out of the thinking about aid, not only in the U.S. but in the recipient countries. We should take the position that our aid involves our own money; we don't want to conquer the world or seize power; but it is our money and we give it on certain conditions that seem fair and proper to us.

Mr. Bell said he felt that Dr. Murphy's statement indicated a goal on which there is general agreement. The problem that Mr. Buddy sets forth, however, is more difficult to solve—the immediate and specific political conditions that should be attached to our aid.

Mr. Buddy agreed and said the question arises in some such form as: How far are we going to require Nasser to back out of Yemen in return for continuing our food aid to him? We suspended economic assistance to India and Pakistan and put our food aid to them on a short-term basis. Both countries obtain their aid from us and others through a consortium, but that consortium depends very substantially on aid from the U.S. Both countries would prefer to have no aid if we placed conditions on them such as, India must give Kashmir to Pakistan or Pakistan must make no deal with the Chinese. To return to the main question: In the U.S. national interest is it wiser to separate entirely the basic economic part of our aid from political issues, like Kashmir, or to connect them. We and India and Pakistan have been ambiguous on this issue. Pakistan thinks that if we withheld all aid from the sub-continent the Kashmir issue would be settled. We have been inclined to think that it is more to our interest to have useful relations with India than to do justice in Kashmir, but Mr. Buddy said he is not sure whether we would not be better off if we would separate and, as it were, sterilize our economic programs from political considerations.

Mr. Rockefeller asked whether the real test in this particular instance as to which policy should be followed is not whether it would be effective to tie our economic aid to political circumstances—whether we think we would get a solution of the Kashmir problem by such means.

Dr. Murphy remarked he felt that Senator Fulbright was too romantic on this subject. His own view is that there are appropriate times when leverage is important and should be applied. To give all our aid through multilateral organizations, or to sterilize our economic aid so that it would have no relationship to political issues, would be naive. We will need to use our aid at times, and it is proper to do so, to advance the legitimate interests of the U.S. No doctrinaire or rigid position undertaking to avoid such action would be advisable. He feels Mr. Rockefeller is right when he indicates the issue often is primarily a pragmatic one. Our sins have not been those related to being too tough or to being arrogant. On the contrary we have exhibited too much timidity and caution, we have been influenced by a feeling of guilt which is self-generated. Mr. Black said he is skeptical about the political advantages we can get out of our aid. Our attempts to do so have not paid off, in his opinion.

Mr. Bell remarked that our Congress does regard aid as a political instrument and objects (whether rightly or wrongly) because they do not think it has been used effectively in this respect often enough. They are enthusiastic about what has been accomplished in Greece, Turkey and Taiwan. The Congress does accept the premise that political elements should constitute an important part of the aid philosophy.

Mr. Black remarked that if George Woods, President of the IBRD, were making the decisions, he would probably resume economic development aid to India and Pakistan sooner than AID would.

Mr. Buddy said he feels that if we were to insist that the Kashmir question be settled as a condition of resumption of and, instead of being ready to accept for this purpose a start on the process of discussion between the two contestants, such a policy would break down our relations with India.

Dr. Perkins commented that we cannot completely divorce large spending of aid funds from political purposes. There are times when aid should be viewed in a political context.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Perkins Committee—President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs—C. Tyler Wood Files—CY 66 thru CY 70: FRC 73 A 159, GAC Minutes (1st-4th Meetings). Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. The General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs met for the third time October 11–12./1/

2 Senator Fulbright's statement at the dinner on October 11 has not been further identified.

3 On September 16, President Johnson spoke on the Mall in front of the Smithsonian Institution to mark the 200th anniversary of the birth of James Smithson (for whom the Institution is named). In the course of his remarks, President Johnson announced the formation of a special task force, chaired by Secretary of State Rusk, which would “recommend a broad and long range plan of worldwide educational endeavor.” For text of the address, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1965, Book II, p. 1005. The recommendations of this special task force were later embodied in the President's message to Congress of February 2, 1966, on international education and health programs. For text of his message, see ibid., 1966, Book I, pp. 128–136.

4 This is the amount which the U.S. could make available on concessional terms after providing for its domestic and commercial export requirements. See also the Minutes of the meeting with Secretary Freeman for elaboration on this point. [Footnote in the source text.]

43. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 43. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 19, 1965.

SUBJECT

Finding under section 505(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, permitting military assistance to all American Republics other than Cuba and Haiti

The Foreign Assistance Act states that no further military assistance (other than for civic action) shall be furnished to Latin American countries except to the extent you find that the assistance is necessary to safeguard the security of the United States or to safeguard the security of a country associated with the United States in the Alliance for Progress against overthrow of a duly constituted government.

In FY 1966 it is proposed to provide $78.5 million total grant assistance of which $25.4 million is for training and defense services (including $6.9 million for supply operations costs) and $53.1 million is for defense articles. The last category of grant assistance is limited by section 511(a) of the Act to $55 million each year.2 In addition to these grants, it is estimated that credit assistance will be provided these countries for purchases of military equipment totaling $61.7 million in FY 1966 and additional amounts in subsequent years. For this purpose it is anticipated that MAP funds will be required in order to provide for the guaranty of repayment of private and/or government financing or to extend credit assistance. Funds permitting these grants and credit sales are included in the FY 1966 budget.

The Foreign Assistance Act of 1965 includes the “Fulbright Amendment” which, among other things, provides that “to the maximum extent feasible” military assistance will be provided to Latin American countries in accordance with joint plans approved by the OAS, and semiannual reports to the Congress are required on the implementation of this subsection.3 It is not clear to what extent joint plans are feasible, and, if feasible, to what extent they could be carried out in FY 1966. It is necessary, however, to move forward at this time with the Latin American program without waiting for the results of the feasibility study.

The findings requested would permit the furnishing of military assistance to all American Republics other than Cuba and Haiti. However, this assistance would be furnished (1) only when the conditions described in the Background Annex continue to exist, and (2) only to the extent that such assistance is necessary on a case-by-case basis to meet the needs there described.

It is, accordingly, recommended that you sign the attached finding. Department of Defense concurs in this request.4

William A. Gaud 5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. III [1 of 2], Box 40. Confidential.

2 Section 511(a) authorized the use of $25 million of military aid funds for assistance on a cost-sharing basis to an inter-American military force under control of the Organization of American States. The funds were subject to an existing limitation of $55 million in each fiscal year on the value of grant programs of defense articles of the American Republics. The provision replaced existing language permitting “a part” of the funds to be used “for assistance in implementing a feasible plan for regional defense,” provided that the cost of defense articles supplied for use of the Inter-American Peace Force in the Dominican Republic should not be charged against the existing $55 million limitation. For text of the amendment, see the Foreign Assistance Act of 1965, P.L. 89–171 (79 Stat. 658) approved on September 6, 1965, as amended.

3 Section 511(b), as amended.

4 Not found.

5  Gaud signed for Bell above Bell's typed signature.

44. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 44. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 21, 1965.

SUBJECT

Proposed New Aid Commitments Through December 31, 1965

In accordance with previous instructions, since July 1, pending passage of the aid appropriation bill we have been funding only ongoing projects and programs, or new ones when specifically authorized by the White House.2 Now that the appropriation bill has been approved,3 we need to resume more normal operations. Mr. Schultze has asked us on your behalf what new projects and programs we propose to fund between now and December 31. This memorandum and its attachment4 respond to that request.

This memorandum includes no proposals for new commitments in India, Pakistan, the UAR or Indonesia. Any proposals affecting these countries will be transmitted separately.

For the remaining countries where we have aid programs, our intentions are as follows: 1. To authorize $548 million in development loans—assuming in every case that, as we now expect will be the case, the borrower fully meets our standards, the feasibility studies are satisfactory, and borrowing countries agree to the self-help measures we deem appropriate.

Large amounts in this total include the following:

Brazil—$170 million. The Castelo Branco government has been firmly following the stabilization, development, and reform policies agreed with us a year ago. Progress in stemming inflation, improving the tax system, expanding exports and curtailing imports has been very good. We are now preparing to discuss with the Brazilians the policies that should govern their further economic progress. Assuming, as we fully expect, that we and the Brazilians reach agreement on a program of maximum Brazilian self-help, we would want to enter into a new program loan of $150 million, to finance commodity imports from the United States over the next year. The loan would be disbursed quarterly, against satisfactory performance by the Brazilians under their self-help commitments, as has been the case under the similar loan entered into in early December 1964. The amount of the loan has been calculated in the light of Brazilian import requirements under its stabilization, development, and reform program, taking into account likely earnings from exports, and the availability of other sources of capital (World Bank loans, aid from other countries, private foreign investment, etc.). The counterpart local currency received by the Brazilian Government for the commodities imported under the U.S. loan will be applied—as has been the case this past year—to jointly agreed development projects in transportation, education, housing, and other fields.

In addition to the $150 million program loan, we expect to complete action in this quarter on two loan applications, totalling $20 million, one for an electric power project and the other to a Government institution for feasibility studies. Assuming, as we expect, that the results are favorable, we would propose to authorize these loans before December 31st.

Chile—$75 million. The Frei government in Chile has made satisfactory progress over the past year on the stabilization and development measures to which that government and ourselves agreed a year ago. In terms of the political interests of the United States, the continued success of the Frei government is at least as important as that of the Branco government in Brazil, since the Frei government is a democratically elected reform-minded government of exactly the kind we hope to see emerge gradually in more and more Latin American countries. We are now preparing our negotiating instructions for reaching agreement with the Chileans on their stabilization and development program for the next year—including some raising of the self-help standards we asked last year. Assuming, as we expect, that our negotiations are successful, we would propose to enter into a new program loan of $75 million—with similar conditions regarding purpose and disbursement as described above for the Brazil program loan.

Colombia—$65 million. This country is in a somewhat different position from Brazil and Chile. For about the last year, the Colombian Government has not met what we considered proper self-help standards, and accordingly we have withheld major assistance. In recent weeks, however, the Colombian Government has reformed the exchange rate and taken other necessary steps to restore a sound economic basis for further progress. We have now prepared a specific set of self-help actions, including major measures in the fields of taxation and rural development, for discussion with the Colombians. Assuming agreement is reached, as we expect, we would propose to enter into a new $65 million program loan, similar to those described for Chile and Brazil.

Turkey—$95 million (plus an additional $45 million consortium pledge). U.S. aid to Turkey has been made available in recent years within the framework of a multinational OECD consortium which, after a rather faltering start has operated very well during the last year. Germany and the U.K. are the principal donors in addition to ourselves, and for the present year the other consortium members are providing about 50 per cent of the total economic aid to Turkey—which has meant a welcome reduction in the U.S. share from what it was a few years ago. The Turkish consortium will meet in November to discuss Turkish performance and prospects and in December for a pledging session.

Turkish performance has been very good for the past two or three years. Domestic savings and export earnings are both moving up in very healthy fashion. Prospects for continued economic progress are bright as a result of the recent elections which returned the Justice Party; the Prime Minister will be Suleyman Demirel, who is strongly development-minded and will be as favorable as any Turkish premier can be toward strengthening private enterprise and gradually reducing the area of the state-owned business enterprises. (Mr. Demirel, incidentally, was one of the first Turks to be sent to the United States for advanced training under the foreign aid program some fifteen years ago.) With continued good performance by the Turks and continued aid from the consortium, we can expect to see sufficient economic progress to permit the termination of aid in the early 1970's. Depending on adequate pledges from other donors, and on agreement with the Turks on further measures to strengthen the policies toward private enterprise, we propose to pledge up to $140 million in December for loans during the next year, and to authorize before the end of December, within the $140 million pledge, a new program loan of $70 million and three project loans totalling $25 million. The project loans are for a sintering plant at the Eregli steel mill, for the expansion of International Harvester's Turkish plant and for increasing coal production at Tuncbilek and Seyitomer, all of which are needed urgently and are expected to be ready for authorization by December 31.

Korea—$49 million. This represents six loans. Five of these are project loans—respectively for a thermal power plant, two synthetic fibre plants in the private sector, a cement plant in the private sector, and the Seoul waterworks—totalling $39 million. The sixth is a $10 million program loan. All six will be made against the $150 million pledge made by the United States when President Park was here last spring. The Koreans, under the spur of President Park (who reportedly has a progress chart on his wall entitled “Johnson Loans"), have already submitted project loan applications totalling around $90 million, all of which are now being reviewed. The five indicated above appear to be sound and high priority projects which will be ready for authorization before December 31.

The proposed $10 million program loan has special significance. We have been pressing the Koreans to adopt steadily better monetary and trade policies. The prospect of this program loan has been a strong inducement for the Koreans to pursue these policy reforms, especially in view of the continuation of the scheduled phase down of Supporting Assistance grants to Korea. In addition to its value as an incentive, the loan is needed to finance raw materials, machinery and equipment for the increasing Korean private industry.

Other countries—$94 million. The remaining loans we expect to authorize this quarter are itemized in the attachment. In summary, they include $46 million to Latin America (apart from Brazil, Chile, and Colombia), including $15 million to the Dominican Republic; $37 million to Africa, including $15 million to Tunisia; and $11 million to the Near East ($8 million to Jordan and $3 million to Afghanistan).

2. To commit $26 million to new technical assistance activities, including $4 million for Latin America, $4 million for the Far East, and $18 million for Africa. (The bulk of our technical assistance funds are used each year to carry forward ongoing projects.)

The proposed new commitments are itemized in the attachment. Each has been carefully reviewed in the field and in Washington for feasibility, urgency, and significant contribution to U.S. objectives in the country in question.

3. To commit $21 million to new supporting assistance activities, including $19.5 million for Southeast Asia and $1.5 for Africa. $13 million of this amount is for the Nam Ngum project, being the U.S. share of the first Mekong River project to proceed under the President's special program for Southeast Asia. Details are itemized in the attachment.

(As with technical assistance, the bulk of our Supporting Assistance funds are used each year to carry forward on-going activities.)

4. To commit up to $11 million to new military assistance activities. (Here again, the bulk of the funds appropriated each year are committed to carry forward on-going activities.) The new commitments, detailed in the attachment, represent the cost of financing credit sales of military hardware to Lebanon, Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Ecuador.

I should emphasize that these plans for committing funds are based on our present best expectations of when each project, loan, etc., will be ready for funding. Some may turn out to be delayed for one reason or another; a few others which are not now expected to be ready before January may reach the stage at which earlier approval is both possible and desirable.

With your concurrence, we will proceed along the lines outlined in this memorandum, keeping you advised of any significant changes in our present plans.

Please let me know if you would like any further information about any of this.

David E. Bell 5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. II [2], Box 1. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Orig Buddy 10/21.”

2 These instructions have not been further identified.

3 H.R. 10871, P.L. 89–273, was signed into law on October 20; it appropriated $3,218 million for foreign aid in fiscal year 1966, a figure $142 million below the amount authorized and just $241,470,000 or 6.9 percent below the administration's revised budget request. The final figure represented the smallest percentage reduction in the President's request in the program's history. (79 Stat. 1002)

4 The attachment, “Anticipated New Economic Aid Commitments Through 12/31/65,” is not printed.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

45. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 45. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 23, 1965.

This responds to your memorandum of October 6th regarding the world food situation and U.S. food aid policy.2

We agree with the guidelines and with the additions suggested by Secretary Freeman to points II.1. and II.2. to make them consistent with point I.5.

Dave

Attachment

Washington, October 11, 1965.

Memorandum From Secretary of Agriculture Freeman to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

SUBJECT

Comments on Guidelines Incorporated in “Suggestions for Position To Be Taken by U.S. Officials in Discussing the World Food Situation and U.S. Food Aid Policy”

These guidelines are helpful. I believe they would be even more useful if expanded somewhat in accord with the following suggestions. These suggestions do not change the principal impact of the guidelines presented, but I think they help to resolve some possible inconsistency between the items listed under I. and those under II.

Add to II.1.

Any indication of change in U.S. food aid policy, except for the increased emphasis on relating food aid to the economic development, especially agricultural development, in the LDC's.

(This would make this item consistent with Item I.5.)

Add to II.2.

Any comment on the Administration's view of next year's P.L. 480 legislation, except to note that the Administration is studying whether (and what) changes may be needed to meet Item I.5.

Item II.3. is not clear as it is now phrased, and should be either clarified or deleted. U.S. farm policy is obviously related to food aid at present if only because food aid comes from surplus stocks (primarily) and the volume of surplus stocks depends on farm policy. No official could deny this. The Secretary of Agriculture gets constant questions on this matter.

I would therefore suggest deleting Item II.3. Instead, a seventh item could be added under I. to indicate that it would be appropriate to note that, while policies relating to domestic agriculture and policies relating to food aid do complement each other, neither should be dependent on the other.

Item No. II.4. is acceptable as it is.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, U.S. Food Aid Policy [2 of 2], Box 15. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Francis: I seem to have got ahead of this last week (I promulgated a version not the one Ag suggests)—will you straighten out?” Attached to the source text are five additional documents; the first attachment is printed below. The second, not printed, an October 20 memorandum from Buddy to Secretaries Rusk and Freeman and Administrator Bell, states: “On October 6 I circulated to you a draft memorandum on the above subject. I have now heard from the Department of State that it is in complete agreement with these guidelines, and I have had no complaint from any other agency. Accordingly, I hope that we can all now agree to follow these guidelines until we get different instructions from the President.” A copy of the third attachment and its cover memorandum (the fourth attachment) are printed as Document 41. The fifth attachment, not printed, from Department of State Executive Secretary Benjamin H. Read to Buddy, is another covering memorandum to Document 41. It states: “The appropriate offices within the Department have reviewed your enclosed memorandum on the World Food Situation and US Food Policy. We are in complete agreement with the statement and the present guideline form.”

2  Document 41.

46. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze) to President Johnson 46. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 16, 1965.

SUBJECT

A New Food Aid Policy

Last Thursday, and again today, Mr. Buddy spoke to you about a new approach to food aid.2 Attached are: —a Presidential statement outlining a new set of policies3

—a Presidential memorandum to agency heads instructing them to proceed with those policies.

The new approach contains the following major elements: 1. A strong emphasis is given to self-help measures by recipient countries to increase their own food production. Food shipments will not be used as a mere “hand-out,” keeping these countries dependent on U.S. gifts.

2. Food aid and other economic assistance are to be tied together and made conditional on such self-help measures.

3. Food aid will be gradually shifted away from sales for useless local currency to long-term dollar repayable loans.

By issuing the attached statement you can: —take the initiative in this field before the World Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization starts in Rome on Monday4

—pre-empt the New York Times and other papers who have been trying to make our food policies for us.

Two other alternatives you may wish to consider are: 1. Tying this statement to a Thanksgiving Day announcement.

2. Waiting to incorporate it in the State of the Union Message.

Charles L. Schultze 5

Attachment

MEMORANDUM FOR

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Agriculture

The Administrator, Agency for International Development

The Director, Bureau of the Budget

SUBJECT

Food crisis in underdeveloped countries

I have announced a new three-point policy to help meet the mounting food crisis in underdeveloped countries. The gap between the food demands of the less-developed countries and their ability to meet those demands is growing rapidly. Our interest in the stability and security of the Free World requires that this trend be reversed. A copy of my statement outlining the new policies is attached.6

I request that you undertake the following steps to carry out these policies: 1. The Secretary of State, the Secretary of Agriculture, and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development should review their programs; determine what changes can be made, within existing legislative authorities, to redirect their programs along the lines outlined in the attached policy statement; and initiate those changes immediately. You should make sure that each official charged with responsibility for carrying out food aid and economic assistance programs is thoroughly acquainted with the new policies. In particular you should convey to them my firm intention that all of our assistance programs encourage a rapid increase in efficient agricultural production among aid recipient countries.

2. In cooperation with the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, you should develop for my approval procedures to insure: —that food aid and other economic assistance are closely integrated.

—that both forms of assistance are related to practical and vigorous measures to expand agricultural production in recipient nations.

—that our food aid program is administered in such a way as to minimize its impact on our balance of payments.

In this connection negotiations with aid recipient countries should, wherever possible, encompass both forms of assistance in a comprehensive program.

3. Public Law 480, the basic authorizing legislation for our food aid program expires next year.7 You should develop proposals for extension of this legislation, together with such amendments as you believe necessary to carry out my policies.

By December 15 you should report to me on the steps you have taken and the procedures you have developed to reflect the new policy directives I have announced. By January 15 you should present to me the legislative proposals which you have developed.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, U.S. Food Aid Policy [2 of 2], Box 15. No classification marking.

2  McGeorge Bundy and several other members of the President's staff were with the President at the LBJ Ranch on Thursday, November 11, but no other record of this meeting has been found. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary) On November 16, the President met with Buddy and Arthur Dean in the Oval Office from 5:16 to 5:45 p.m. to “discuss some matters affecting assistance programs.” No other record of this meeting has been found. (Ibid.)

3 Not printed. On February 10, 1966, President Johnson delivered a special message to the Congress on the Food for Freedom program in which the major points of this earlier statement were included and expanded upon. For text of his statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1966, Book I, pp. 163–169.

4 November 22. The 13th Food and Agriculture Organization Conference met at Rome November 8–December 9.

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Schultze signed the original.

6 Not printed. Regarding the final policy proposal, see footnote 3 above.

7 On October 8, President Johnson approved the P.L. 480 extension legislation, P.L. 88–638 (78 Stat. 1035), which amended the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act by providing a 2-year extension through December 31, 1966, for both Titles I and II. Titles I and II were to have expired on December 31, 1964. Under Title I, the principal authority for the Food for Peace Program, sales of agricultural commodities are made for foreign currencies. Under Title II grants of food and other agricultural commodities are made to needy people abroad.

47. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 47. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 31, 1966.

Your Cabinet Committee has reviewed every aspect of foreign aid—from principles to operations, country by country.2 As you instructed, we have asked ourselves whether the likely benefit to the United States from each program justifies its cost to the American taxpayer. We have made a serious attempt to separate the required from the merely desirable.

Our study has reinforced our belief in the basic proposition that a properly directed foreign assistance program is a vital instrument of United States foreign policy. Economic and military aid remain far and away the most powerful means at our command to influence the massive forces at work in the less developed nations. They are our primary source of influence on the economic and military evolution of most of the countries of the non-Communist world.

Foreign aid has an even broader significance. It is the factor which lends weight to U.S. views, interests, and advice which would never flow from military, diplomatic, and commercial activities alone. Thus, assistance programs not only serve our development objectives, but also underlie much of our ability to promote other interests. It would be folly to dispense with, or seriously to impair, these programs; what is essential is that they be managed in ways which serve our own true interests.

We have also concluded that there is no need for any major change in the current foreign aid administrative structure. We believe that David Bell and the Agency for International Development have put together an outstanding record over the past few years. It is always difficult to prove that crises have been avoided, dangers diverted, or the tides of history redirected. But we believe there is solid evidence that our aid programs have helped to accomplish these things in several critical countries.

Beyond these fundamentals, we believe that you should direct a new emphasis upon the following principles in planning and administering foreign aid:

1. We must make better bargains for the use of aid resources.

The direct economic effect of our assistance is important, but it is dwarfed in value by the influence it can exert on the economic and political policies of the recipient countries. We must not overestimate our bargaining power, particularly with regard to such highly-charged issues as Kashmir. But neither should we fail to obtain from each aid agreement every possible advantage to the common interest—and also to the legitimate interest of the United States. Fundamental to this purpose is a broader recognition at home and abroad that all forms of U.S. aid—food, technical assistance, capital loans, and diplomatic help with other donors—are elements in a single negotiating package. Representatives of the United States must present a united front as to what is worth bargaining for and at what price. Aid must be used as a carrot, and the possibility of withholding it as a stick. We must not allow our zeal to help the needy to obscure the fact that their long-term interests and ours require maximum lasting return from every aid dollar.

2. We must make it crystal clear that the basic principle of foreign aid is cooperation.

We should be prepared to insist that our aid is only available to countries which are not hostile to us, and which give convincing evidence that they are determined to help themselves. In a broad sense, every developing country must pull itself up by its bootstraps. We cannot do the pulling. We can only encourage and assist those who will. And we cannot permit our resources or our partners' to be wasted on political or military adventures.

Moreover, we cannot mount major development programs in every non-Communist country. More than 80% of our development aid is now concentrated in eight key countries. This concentration has been achieved through extended effort, and at substantial diplomatic cost. We believe that cost is fully offset by the value of focussing aid resources in the countries which matter most to us, and which can and will make the best use of our help. The number of countries in which we maintain “presence” programs to support our general interests should depend on a hard-boiled survey of those interests country by country, year by year. In Africa, we should move in the direction of regional administration of bilateral programs and maximum use of regional organizations. But the number of major development programs should be sharply limited.

3. We must make a concerted attack on the roots of world poverty—hunger, ignorance, and disease.

The overwhelming lesson of our experience in the developing world is that no amount of capital or technical training will result in sustained economic growth unless some progress is made against the basic conditions which dull the desire, sap the will, and destroy the capacity of most of the world's people to better their lives. We must take on these problems in the massive and relentless way we have dealt with them in the United States. We must adapt our attitudes, methods, and institutions to the conditions abroad. Most important, we must teach confidence that these ancient plagues can be eliminated.

With regard to hunger, we must face up to the fact that, while our food surpluses are dwindling, the developing countries are losing the battle to feed themselves—that, with some notable exceptions, per capita food production in poor countries has actually declined over the past few years. Anything less than an agricultural revolution in the next decade will result in food aid needs which will force us to choose between the politics of mass starvation and the immense costs and inefficiencies of restoring our huge acreage reserve to grain production. Eventually, even this costly step would not meet the need. Moreover, overall economic growth targets in most major countries cannot be met if the agricultural sectors which dominate their economies cannot grow even half as fast as their industrial sectors. Scarce foreign exchange diverted to food purchases to compensate for failures in local production is lost forever as investment to stimulate growth. This situation makes it imperative that we redirect our food aid program to (1) use food aid more aggressively as a bargaining lever to induce agricultural self-help abroad, (2) ensure that food aid is integrated with increased dollar aid to agriculture in a comprehensive U.S. aid strategy in each receiving country, (3) gradually substitute the disciplining effect of dollar-repayable food financing (with appropriate grace periods) for the current local currency sales program, and (4) move as quickly as our mutual interests permit toward harder financial terms, and ultimately, cash food sales.

To deal with ignorance, we must find new ways to harness the experience and expertise of our institutions to the enormous challenge of mass education in the developing countries. We need arrangements through which we can provide teachers and teachers of teachers. We need long-term relations between American schools and schools abroad. We must offer opportunities and incentives for American universities to apply themselves to the intellectual and practical problems of basic education on a huge scale in cultural circumstances very different from our own. We must develop means of broadening the perspectives and experience of able young people abroad through new and enlarged exchange programs and other such initiatives. We have more questions and fewer answers in this field than elsewhere, but this only adds to the urgency that we expand our knowledge and our activities.

A high priority in the health field must be assigned to population policy. The best efforts of the developing countries will avail them little or nothing if they are unable to deal with the population growth which is now consuming two-thirds of their economic growth. Although we cannot and should not force any country to take any particular measure in this area, we can and should use our aid to encourage each of our major partners to face up to the problem, and to help make effective whatever programs are begun.

But our health efforts should not be restricted to the population problem. We now have the capacity to help the developing countries eliminate smallpox from the list of man's natural enemies, and drastically to reduce malaria, yellow fever, cholera, rabies, and other age-old killers. In addition, in connection with the hunger initiative, we should take steps to reduce malnutrition which is permanently impairing the mental and physical development of 270 million children alive today.

4. We must stand ready to increase our support of multilateral lending agencies as soon as other donors will join us.

The United States should let it be known that it is prepared to increase the proportion of its aid channelled through multilateral institutions or procedures, subject to matching contributions by others and the effectiveness of the institution in question. In order to draw larger contributions to the aid effort from other donors, and/or to give the appearance of apolitical action, multilateral agencies can play a useful role. But we should not delude ourselves that it is to our advantage to get completely out of the bilateral aid business. In the major theatres of action there is no refuge in all-out multilateralism. The bilateral U.S. role is as essential to the Alliance for Progress as for the future of South Asia, and the case for bilateralism is stronger still where the Communist threat is more immediate—as in Southeast Asia.

5. We must increase the pressure on other donors to enlarge the volume and soften the terms of their aid.

Although our leverage on other donors has decreased in recent years as our aid has declined slightly in a world of growing need, we remain the largest aid supplier. The entire multilateral structure—from the IDA to the aid consortia—is largely a tribute to our arm-twisting. But there is still room for greater volume from others, and a vital need for softer terms. We must persuade every important donor that the aid need is growing, that quasi-commercial terms on development loans are self-defeating, and that decreases from existing aid levels are false economies.

6. We must develop ways to ease the growing burden of foreign debt now facing many developing countries.

We must pay greater attention to the net flow of resources to the developing world, the flow over and above repayments of foreign debt. We are fast approaching the point at which large increases in gross aid will be necessary simply to keep the net flow constant. A few rollovers and reschedulings have already been negotiated, mostly involving debt to Europeans. We must face up to the necessity of developing our own policy toward this problem.

7. We must sustain our intense efforts to assure that the foreign aid program and the balance of payments program do not conflict.

We have already applied the obvious remedies, and some which have been neither obvious nor easy. We have substantially exhausted the means of reducing the payments drain, but we must keep searching for ways to offset the remaining outflow, perhaps by encouraging recipients to use more of their free foreign exchange to buy American goods and services. More generally, we should so conduct the aid program as to maximize the growth of markets for American products in the less developed world.

8. The Military Assistance Program should continue its progress toward more sensible levels of conventional aid for the countries which face conventional threats (nearly all along the borders that contain the Communists), and toward counter-insurgency elsewhere.

MAP should be under the policy eye of the Secretaries of State and Defense, but otherwise separated from the economic aid program, and its legislative authorization should not be lumped with AID's.

9. We should seek five-year legislative authorization for economic and military assistance.

This does not imply that we intend to commit aid money for long periods in advance. Neither would long-term authorization reduce the power or the duty of the Congress to review aid programs frequently and in depth. But it would signify the solid commitment of the United States to use aid as an established instrument of foreign policy, and to help those who help themselves.

Beyond these recommendations lies the knotty problem of deciding upon a U.S. strategy for each major country, designed to put all of our policy instruments in effective service to the full range of our interests. We have undertaken to develop such strategies, which are submitted to you under separate cover. We believe that the unique set of circumstances, problems, and opportunities which apply in each major country must shape the final decisions on program composition and negotiating strategy. Thus, we have not included any recommendations at that level of detail in this memorandum.

The substance of our thinking is that we have been doing much that is right, and that most of the needed adjustments are new emphases, based on lessons learned on the job. But they are major new emphases, and will, we believe, result in major new benefits. We strongly recommend that you direct them at an early date.

Dean Rusk 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee], [3 of 3], Box 17. Secret. A stamped notation on the source text indicates that McGeorge Bundy's office received the memorandum on February 2 at 2:20 p.m.

2 See Document 32 regarding the formation and membership of this committee.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

48. Memorandum From President Johnson to Secretary of State Rusk 48. Memorandum From President Johnson to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, February 10, 1966.

SUBJECT

Determination under section 103(b) of the Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act2

Pursuant to Section 103(b) of the Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act of 1951 and in accordance with the recommendation contained in your letter of January 25, 1966, concurred in by the Department of State, the Department of Defense, the Department of Commerce, and the Agency for International Development,3 I hereby direct the continuance of United States assistance to Belgium, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal, and the United Kingdom.

You are hereby directed to inform the chairmen of the six Congressional Committees of this determination pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 103(b) of the Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act of 1951.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 6. Confidential. The memorandum was also directed to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, probably for action.

2 P.L. 213 was approved on October 26, 1951. (65 Stat. 645)

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, STR 6)

49. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 49. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 25, 1966, 9 a.m.

Mr. President:

I have no pretensions whatsoever to being an expert on domestic politics.

With that caveat I nevertheless suggest it will be necessary—and perhaps wise politics—to fight a major battle to save foreign aid this year. The battle would have two parts: —whatever can and should be done with the Congressional Leadership, individuals, etc.;2

—a mobilization of public opinion leadership in the country to help us maintain this essential tool of foreign policy.

I hold this view for these reasons: 1. The aid money available to us remains the most powerful single lever available to maintain our influence and to strengthen the forces of political moderation in Asia, the Middle East and Africa.

2. The continuity of your initiatives in the Baltimore speech;3 your Mexican trip;4 and your initiative tomorrow on Africa depends on at least holding the line in aid money.5

3. It might be helpful politically to be fighting a major political battle before the public on an issue other than Vietnam in the weeks and months ahead. On this matter we ought to be able to mobilize a considerable part of the liberal community and isolate Fulbright, Morse and Lippmann.

As a foreign policy aide, I have no doubt of the importance of maintaining the level of our appropriations. But, I repeat, my observations on the means and politics on this are strictly amateur; although, having worked with Eric Johnston in early 1958 to mobilize the business, labor, intellectual, religious, etc., leaders of the country, I know the job can be done.6

Walt

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 G 1866, LEG 6, Foreign Assistance Legislation FY 1966. Confidential.

2 President Johnson expressed his exasperation over Senator Fulbright's opposition to the foreign assistance bill during telephone conversations with Senator Russell Long on February 25 and Vice President Humphrey on March 2. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Records of Telephone Conversations, Tape 6502.07, PNO 9 and Tape 6603.01, PNO 12)

3 On April 22, President Johnson delivered a speech in Baltimore before a group of Methodist Ministers and laymen; for text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1966, Book I, pp. 446–453.

4 President Johnson made an informal visit to Mexico City April 14–15 primarily to dedicate a statue of Abraham Lincoln, donated to the Mexican people. For remarks by the President during his visit, see ibid., pp. 416–424.

5 On May 26, President Johnson spoke at a reception at the White House marking the third anniversary of the Organization of African Unity; for text of his remarks, see ibid., pp. 556–560.

6 Regarding the work of Eric Johnston on foreign assistance, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. IV, pp. 310, 407–413, 421, and 430.

50. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 50. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 1, 1966, 4:45 p.m.

Mr. President:

Here are the key points that Dave Bell would like you to make with Fulbright: 1. The reversal of the 5-year authorization

2. The rise in interest rates

3. The limitation on the number of countries

4. The imposed 15% transfer to the World Bank, which amounts to a reduction of development loan funds by $125 million

5. Other money cuts.

Walt

Attachment2

PRINCIPAL POINTS ON FOREIGN AID BILL

1. Five year authorization request reduced to one year.

—This represents a step backwards even from the present bill. In 1961 and 1962 the Congress authorized development loans and the Alliance for Progress for 5 years and 4 years respectively.

2. Raising the interest rate on development loans after the grace period (10 year maximum) from 2–1/2% to the long term Treasury borrowing rate (now about 4.8%). —If the developing countries could afford to borrow on commercial terms, they would not need economic aid.

—Our low interest rates were carefully worked out with the advice of such experts as Eugene Black and George Woods to meet the needs of developing countries during the early stages of their development. They have twice been increased by the Congress (in 1963 and 1964) and are already higher than they should be.

—While our rates are increasing, those of others are decreasing. The U.K. makes some development loans without interest and the Canadians, who have a minimum rate of 3/4%, have told us privately they intend to do likewise.

3. Limiting to 10 the number of countries to which development loans may be made, and to 40 the number of countries to which technical assistance grants may be made.

—Both this year and next we expect to make development loans to some 19 countries and give technical assistance to 48 or 49 countries.

—Decisions as to which, and how many, countries received aid should be made on grounds of policy and not arithmetic.

—If limitations such as these were absolute they would not only prevent the President from taking advantage of changing circumstances (such as in Indonesia), but would also severely limit his freedom of action—primarily in Africa but also in the Near East and South Asia.

It is understood that the Committee is prepared to relax these numerical restrictions by an amendment (as yet undrafted) permitting the President to exceed them if he presents specific proposed actions to the Foreign Affairs and Foreign Relations Committees for approval. This would be satisfactory if the proposal avoided constitutional questions by consisting merely of a requirement for notification and a waiting period by the President before he takes action.

4. Allowing 15% of available loan funds (up to $125 million) to be used only by transfer to the World Bank. —Such transfers are authorized under Section 205 of the Foreign Assistance Act, but that provision has never been effective because each year it has been blocked by a rider in the appropriations bill.

—Since there is no reason to believe that an appropriations rider can be avoided this year, this amendment is tantamount to a cut of $125 million in development loan funds.

—Even if the rider were eliminated, the amount of funds to be transferred to the World Bank should be determined by appropriate circumstances and not by a mathematical formula.

5. Money cuts. —The only cut so far has been $45 million in development loan funds.

—Other cuts are expected, especially as the Committee tentatively decided when it was considering the Vietnam supplemental to reduce the FY 67 program by the $275 million requested for Vietnam in the supplemental for FY 66.

—The President's budget request is lean and tight; it cannot afford substantial cuts.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, AID, Vol. III [2], Box 2. No classification marking. The handwritten notations “L[yndon]” and “Retd for Pres 6/2/66” appear on the source text. According to the President's Daily Diary, Senators Anderson and Fulbright met with President Johnson in the Oval Office from 6:20 to 8:13 p.m. to discuss Vietnam and the foreign aid bill. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary)

2 Prepared for the President by AID.

51. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 51. Action Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 19, 1966.

SUBJECT

Javits Amendment to the Foreign Aid Bill

Senator Javits has introduced a mischievous amendment to the AID bill (Tab A) requiring suspension of all assistance to any OAS government which came into power by unconstitutional means unless you find such action contrary to the national security interest.

The Javits amendment is mischievous because—

—It transforms the character of the Alliance for Progress from a multilateral program to a program subject to unilateral U.S. decision based on internal political factors.

—It sets you up as the sole judge of whether a coup in Latin America is good or bad and whether our aid should flow or not.

—It may stir up another hue and cry in Latin America equal to the reaction last fall to the Selden Resolution.2

—It could poison—if not kill—the present good climate for the OAS summit meeting.3

For the past two days State has been trying to get Senator JAVITS to modify his amendment to the point where the Administration can live with it. Yesterday the Senator accepted a “compromise” formula suggested by State (Tab B). The “compromise” formula in my judgment is not a good one because it is open to most of the same objections to the original JAVITS version.

It is academic anyway because JAVITS today switched back to the substance of his original proposal.

The time has come to move energetically against the Javits amendment. Among the things we might do are—

—Ask David Rockefeller to call Javits to request that he either withdraw or radically amend his proposal.

—Marshal our forces in the Senate to kill the amendment on the Floor.

—Come out publicly against it and induce the Latin Americans to raise a hue and cry with a view to putting added pressure for Senate defeat.

—As a last resort insure that the House opposes the amendment until the Senate conferees back down.4

Bill Moyers and I recommend that you ask Larry O'Brien to take to the field against the amendment.

Walt

Approve O'Brien working against the amendment5

Prefer to follow another course, speak to me

Tab A6

JAVITS AMENDMENT

No assistance shall be furnished under this Act to any member state of the Organization of American States, the government of which heretofore has entered or hereafter enters into power by the unconstitutional overthrow of a freely-elected democratic government which has been acting in accordance with its constitutional mandate, if after consultation among the members of the Organization of American States, the President finds that such government does not intend to take appropriate steps within a reasonable time for the restoration of constitutional government, the holding of free elections and the application of human and civil rights and liberties until (1) the President is satisfied that such government intends to take such appropriate steps, or (2) the President has determined that the furnishing of such assistance is essential to the national interest of the United States, and reports to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations and to the Speaker of the House within 30 days accordingly.

Tab B7

"COMPROMISE” FORMULA FOR JAVITS AMENDMENT

"No assistance shall be furnished under this Act to any member State of the Organization of American States, the government of which comes into power by the unconstitutional overthrow of a freely-elected, constitutional government, acting in accordance with its constitutional mandate, if, after consultation among the members of the OAS, the President finds a consensus among such members that said government does not intend to take appropriate steps, within a reasonable time, for the restoration of constitutional government, the holding of free elections or the application of human and civil rights and liberties, until the President is satisfied that such government intends to take such appropriate steps: provided, that the President may determine that assistance under the Act is nevertheless being furnished to such country when such assistance is in the national interest of the United States.”

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, [2 of 3], Box 16. Confidential. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Mr. O'Brien notified".

2 On September 20, 1965, the House adopted under suspension of the rules a resolution, H. Res. 560, sponsored by Representative Armistead I. Selden, Jr. (D.-AL), which in effect endorsed the unilateral use of force by any Western Hemisphere country to prevent a Communist takeover anywhere in the Hemisphere. This sense of the House resolution did not require Senate action or Presidential approval and did not have the force of law. Nevertheless, the resolution aroused strong opposition from many Latin American countries and officials.

3 An OAS Summit Meeting was scheduled for August 29 in Buenos Aires but was postponed indefinitely on August 5.

4 All of these items are checked.

5 This option is checked.

6 No classification marking.

7 No classification marking.

52. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Hamilton) to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 52. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Hamilton) to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, August 31, 1966.

SUBJECT

Foreign Aid Money for FY 1968

Attached is a good, tightly-reasoned letter which Bill Gaud has sent to Charlie Schultze stating the case for more foreign aid money in the 1968 budget. BILL wants you to see it, but he is anxious not to undercut Schultze. The BOB planning figure to which he is reacting is a very tentative “ball park” estimate developed in the annual budget preview proc-ess. It does not represent any final Bureau position and BILL is not suggesting that it does. If this could be made clear to the President, it might not be a bad idea to put the letter into his night reading.

Gaud's intent—which I strongly support—is to paint a clear picture of the overall foreign aid money setting in which all special requests for regional increases should be considered. He is worried, and rightly so, that such events as the Latin American Summit will tend to force decisions on pieces of the pie without regard to the whole. This is a particularly serious problem with regard to Latin America where he doesn't fully control channels to the seventh floor of his building. (He had a near-miss last week when Linc Gordon tried to push through a Rusk-President memorandum recommending a Fund for Economic Integration.2 The Secretary bounced it back for further staffing.)

As you see, BILL's basic point is that he will need at least $300 million more in FY 1968 assuming no increase in the Alliance. (Of course this is gross aid flow; if the net flow is to be maintained, this amount will need to be considerably larger or we will have to manage major debt rollovers.) Privately, Gaud thinks that a $300 million increase is probably as much as we can pull off in Congress. Thus, he has advised Linc to try sources other than the Foreign Assistance Act, primarily the Treasury/Banking and Currency Committee route we use to fund the IDA and the IDB. In Fowler's present mood, this is not a good bet. But it may be the only bet around.

Whatever the decision on the Latin American problem, however, Gaud's letter should be required reading for everybody close to the money decision. He is not saying that regional increases should not be considered. He is saying that they should be approved only after careful thought about world-wide requirements and prospects on the Hill.

EH

Attachment3

Washington, August 25, 1966.

Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze)

Dear Charlie:

I have your letter of August 13 giving me planning totals of new obligational authority to guide the preparation of our FY 1968 budget estimates.4

I would rather not comment on the military assistance figure until the Defense Department and ourselves have completed certain studies that are underway. But I do want to comment now on the planning figure of $2.5 billion for economic aid.

We in AID are not in a position to judge budget priorities between departments and agencies. I am therefore unable to say whether $2.5 billion is an appropriate amount for AID in terms of the overall budget situation. But I can tell you that such a figure would result in radical changes in our economic aid program.

Let us take a look at the various components of AID's proposed budget in order to see how they would fit into a $2.5 billion total.

First, there are the following relatively small items aggregating $292 million (the figures in each case being those now estimated for FY 1968): Millions

Administrative Expenses (State and AID) $65

American Schools and Hospitals 15

Investment Surveys 2

International Organizations (The sum total of 12 different requests) 210

Total 292

Second, there are the following security and emergency-related activities totaling $811 million: Supporting Assistance (Vietnam) $550

Supporting Assistance (other than Vietnam) 161

Korea, Laos and Thailand ($115)

Jordan (22)

The rest of the world (24)

Contingency Fund 100

Total $811

The $500 million figure for Vietnam is taken from your letter. The $161 million figure for other Supporting Assistance requirements was used in our submission of June 13, and is almost certainly too low. And I expect you will agree that the Contingency Fund could not be prudently fixed at less than $100 million.

Third, our present FY 1968 figure for Technical Assistance/Development Grants is $246 million. Roughly 90 per cent of this is for on-going programs, and approximately 70 per cent is for projects designed to carry out the President's initiatives in the fields of agriculture, education and health.

The above requirements total $1.349 billion. Although it may be that our fall review of these programs may result in some slight reductions, it is unlikely that any such reductions will be significant in amount. The $550 million figure for Vietnam is much the largest single item, and a substantial reduction in that item is unlikely to say the least.

On this premise $1.151 billion of the $2.5 billion will be left for (a) Development Loans, (b) the Alliance for Progress, (c) carrying out the President's regional development concepts in Southeast Asia, (d) any new initiatives in Africa, and (e) any new initiatives in Latin America such as a fund for economic integration, new multi-national projects or higher growth targets of the sort referred to by the President in his speech commemorating the fifth anniversary of the Alliance for Progress.5

To get some idea of whether $1.151 is enough for these purposes, let us first consider our requirements for Development Loans and the Alliance for Progress. In our submission of June 13 we estimated these at $990 million and $660 million respectively. Their combined total of $1.650 billion is clearly far out of reach if we are to come within a ceiling of $1.151 billion. So, instead of looking at the Alliance plus our overall requirements for Development Loan funds, let us look at the Alliance plus the four principal DL countries—India, Pakistan, Turkey and Korea.

In each of these four countries we are engaged in a long-term development effort linked on the one hand to self-help measures taken by the recipient and on the other to substantial assistance supplied by other aid donors. Past, present and planned DL programs for them are as follows: millions

FY 1966 (Actual) FY 1967 (Estimated) FY 1968 (June Submission)

India $300 385 485

Pakistan 120 188 195

Turkey 129 120 120

Korea 80 75 65

Total $629 768 865

The total for FY 1966 was abnormally low because of the Indian-Pakistani war. The FY 1968 figure is higher than usual because of expectations of increased requirements for India. India has already taken certain important reform measures at the urging of the World Bank and the United States and in reliance upon assurances that we and the Bank would provide a fair share of the financing necessary to carry out and capitalize on those reforms. If it were not for this, $750 million would be a fair figure to pick as being adequate for our programs for these four countries without any add-ons. But in view of the Indian situation, it is hard to see how we can estimate FY 1968 requirements for them at less than $850 million.

If we subtract this latter figure from $1.151 billion we are left with $301 million for the Alliance for Progress. But that is not enough. Actual Alliance obligations in FY 1966 were $593 million; estimated new obligational authority needed for FY 1967 is $543 million, and for FY 1968 it is $660 million. These figures average $600 million, which would have to be cut by $300 million (or 50 percent) if only $301 million were available for the Alliance.

To look at the other side of the coin, suppose first priority were given to the $600 million for the Alliance. This would leave $551 million for India, Pakistan, Turkey and Korea—$300 million (or 35 per cent) less than the $850 million requirement.

It is clear, in short, that a $2.5 million ceiling for economic aid will result in a reduction of at least $300 million in the programs of either the Alliance for Progress or the four principal countries in which our Development Loan funds are concentrated. I say at least $300 million because, unless those programs are reduced by more than that amount,

—we will be unable to make Development Loans to any countries other than India, Pakistan, Turkey and Korea;

—we will not be able to fulfill the President's promise to seek special funds for the Asian Development Bank;

—there will be no funds for new initiatives in Southeast Asia, Africa, Latin America or elsewhere, and

—there will be no funds with which to take advantage of political opportunities in the Philippines, Indonesia and other countries attempting to make a fresh start or significantly improving their self-help performance.

The inadequacy of a $2.5 billion planning figure may seem surprising in view of the fact that for FY 1967 we are asking the Congress for only $2.469 billion of new obligational authority. However, this seeming anomaly has a simple explanation. Because of the Indian-Pakistani war, we estimated our budget requirements for FY 1967 on the assumption that there would be a carry-over from FY 1966 of $197 million. There is no comparable carry-over from FY 1967 into FY 1968. That, plus the additional $100 million for India discussed above, accounts for the $300 million short-fall.

We will of course review our program intensively between now and November 1. At that time—or as soon thereafter as possible—I will submit a program which will be as lean as we can make it. But I hope you will agree that unless we are to change drastically the course of our foreign policy and the thrust of our aid program, we cannot stay within the planning figure of $2.5 billion.

Sincerely yours,

Bill

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Foreign Aid [2 of 3], Box 16. No classification marking. A handwritten note from Rostow to Hamilton on the upper right corner of the source text reads: “E.H. The battle must be fought for Bell's requirements: —a national balance of payments education for all hands; —could EX–IM be used more? —What about IDA? —What about more intensive use of IBRD regular loans? —What about accelerating country-by-country and otherwise private capital flows? Let's talk. W.”

2 Not found.

3 Limited Official Use.

4 Not found.

5 For text of President Johnson's March 14 speech, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1966, Book I, pp. 317–319.

53. Minutes of the Meeting of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs 53. Minutes of the Meeting of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs1

Washington, September 13, 1966, noon.

GAC Meeting 6.7

PRESENT

The President

Members of the Committee: Dr. James A. Perkins, Chairman

Mr. Dwayne O. Andreas

Mr. David E. Bell

Mrs. Everett N. Case

Dr. Luther H. Foster

Gen. Alfred M. Gruenther

Dr. J. George Harrar

Mr. William R. Hewlett

Mr. Sol M. Linowitz

Professor Edward S. Mason

Mr. David Rockefeller

Mr. William J. Zellerbach

White House Staff: Mr. Walt W. Rostow, Special Assistant to the President

A.I.D.: Mr. William S. Gaud

Mr. C. Tyler Wood

Mr. George P. Scurria

Dr. Perkins said that he wished to make a brief report on behalf of the Committee, and that all of the Members of the Committee were open to any questions which the President might wish to ask. He said that the Committee has been in existence for 18 months, has held six plenary meetings, and that its Members had visited 34 countries in which the U.S. conducts foreign assistance programs. It is the Committee's judgment that U.S. assistance programs abroad are being conducted with increasing efficiency and know-how and that the momentum for improvement is continuing. Efficiency of operation of the program appears to be at an all-time peak, and there is no present need for major reorganization. However, over the next decade the Committee foresees an increasing modification of the form of U.S. assistance from bilateral to multilateral.

Dr. Perkins then said he would like to make four main points: 1) The general level of U.S. assistance is too low, not drastically low but, nevertheless, lower than the Committee believes appropriate. At the same time, the capacity of the developing countries to use aid wisely is increasing. None of the Members of the Committee believes that the U.S. will be able to dispense with foreign assistance programs in less than a decade, and several Members believe that this requirement will extend to a generation and beyond. A Subcommittee under Dr. Mason is considering this question.

2) The Committee shares with the President his deep concern over the food and population situation in the world. It believes that this subject is increasingly important in the context of American foreign policy. He quoted a phrase, which he attributed to Dr. Mason: “food has become too important to leave to the farmers.”

Dr. Perkins said that the Committee would be submitting to the President in a week or two a report prepared by its Subcommittee on Food and Population, chaired by Mr. Andreas, which would deal with this subject. This report will make three main points: a) Although the importance of population restraint has been increasingly cited by the Administration, this subject needs to be moved up even higher in the list of priorities. The Committee will urge that the subject of population control in the context of assistance programs be reconsidered, including the present ban on financing by the U.S. of contraceptives and equipment to manufacture contraceptives. The Committee realizes that this question is a delicate one and does not recommend that family planning programs be a condition of U.S. assistance. However, the Committee believes that this subject should be reviewed with the developing countries at the time aid programs are planned and the discussion of it should be treated as a condition;

b) The efficient production of food in the developing countries is of paramount importance. U.S. assistance programs should be geared increasingly towards this goal;

c) Any plans developed for increased agricultural production in the U.S. should take into account the need for shipments of agricultural products to other countries. Accordingly, representatives of the Departments of State and Treasury should be included in decisions concerning authorization for an increase in acreage under production.

3) The Committee believes that elements of the private sector must be increasingly involved in programs which complement the official foreign assistance efforts of the U.S. A Subcommittee, under Mr. Rockefeller, has been studying this problem. It needs to be recognized that public money alone never will be sufficient to help the developing countries to become economically self-sustaining. The Committee has sent to the President, Dr. Perkins said, a suggestion for a Conference at the White House with representatives of the business community, which itself constitutes only a part of the American private sector. This suggestion is somewhere between Mr. Gaud's and Mr. Rostow's offices, he said, and he asked the President to consider having such a Conference at sometime convenient to him. The Subcommittee is also concerning itself with other elements of the U.S. private sector, such as universities, cooperatives, labor unions and others.

4) The Committee is greatly concerned about the development of trained manpower to deal with problems of economic development, both in the U.S. and overseas, and believes that the President's proposed International Education Act of 1966, if enacted, would be a great step toward dealing with this problem. It is understood that this Act is tied up in the Senate Committee on Labor and Public Welfare behind other legislation, but that its passage in this session of Congress is still possible. When and if this Act is approved, it will provide needed support to the universities in the U.S. for training Americans to work on problems in the developing countries. However, the most important aspect of this subject is the development of indigenous manpower and institutions in the developing countries; without this, all aid efforts may well be for naught.

Dr. Perkins noted that, besides those already mentioned, four other Subcommittees have been established: Africa, International Education, Multilateral-Bilateral Aid, and Military Assistance. With reference to the last Subcommittee, he said that the DOD is undertaking an in-depth review of all military assistance programs and that the Committee will attempt to follow this and provide any advice which may seem appropriate.

In closing, Dr. Perkins said he wished to note two other matters which concern the Committee: 1) Foreign assistance has no constituency in the U.S. The Committee intends to work hard, he said, to come up with ideas for informing the American people about the good which foreign assistance programs accomplish. For example, the job which A.I.D. is doing in Vietnam provides a great story, but most Americans are not aware of it.

2) The Committee believes that the accession of Mr. Gaud as Administrator of A.I.D. is an appropriate time to review how it may be most useful to the President and to the Members of his Cabinet. This coincides with what Dr. Perkins called “the end of the beginning” of the Committee's work and he accordingly urged that its purpose and objectives now be reviewed for any modifications which may be needed.

Dr. Perkins thanked the President for the opportunity to report to him and said the Committee would be pleased to receive any guidance he might wish to give at this time.

The President thanked Dr. Perkins for his report, noting that both he and the nation are indebted to the Committee for the work which its Members are contributing. The subject with which the Committee is concerned is as important as any matter with which the U.S.G. deals. He said that it would be “horrible to think of your disbanding,” adding that if anything, the Committee would be needed more in the days ahead, “if that is possible.”

He said that he and most Americans agree with the challenges their country faces in the world, but there is no clearly identifiable following in the Congress or in the country for the foreign assistance program. The Administration has tried to carry out these programs according to the criteria laid down by the Congress, but there is no agreement in the Congress about these criteria. Many Members of the Congress would like to cut foreign assistance appropriations, while others would like to go along but don't approve of the methods which are used.

He recalled that soon after he had assumed the Presidency, he had dined at the White House with 39 legislative leaders, all of whom favored multi-year authorization for the foreign aid program. The Administration's proposal for the Foreign Assistance Act of 1966 included a five-year authorization for the program, but so many Members of the Congress had changed position in the interim that the BILL has been passed by the Congress providing for only a one-year authorization, except for the Alliance for Progress and the Development Loan Fund.2 He said that the Committee could perform a valuable service if it could figure out how to persuade the Congress of the benefits of a multi-year program.

He said that the proposal for a multi-year authorization had been made by the Administration despite the opposition of Chairman Morgan of the Foreign Affairs Committee who maintained that the foreign aid bill is the only one which his Committee considers and without it the Committee would have little to do.

In considering the questions of the reasons for foreign aid and the amounts of foreign aid, the opposition in the Congress comes primarily from five men. There are serious problems with the Foreign Relations Committee, he said.

Congressional opposition comes from men who are sincere, but who simply view things through glasses of a different color. The Members of the Committee, who have no axe to grind, are in a position to help change the glasses of these men. He said, for example, that some Members of the Committee might appear on Meet the Press or Face the Nation, or write magazine articles describing the accomplishments of foreign aid.

He said he wished he knew how to find an area of agreement among 50 Members of the Congress, of whom five are key men, to do what is best for the country. There is no trouble about party differences in this connection. He receives the most comfort from the talks he has at the White House from time to time with former President Eisenhower, who is described as his “best Chief of Staff.” There is no indication of party differences between the two of them during these conversations. He said that it is quite necessary to “choose up sides” six weeks before an election and to fight it out, but that after the election, ranks should be closed to go on with the business of the country.

Story about Congressman Passman at the White House.

He said that it is difficult just getting Congress to understand the need for aid programs. How can we make a more effective case with the Congress and the country? The basic weakness of this Government at this time is in communicating to the people.

The President mentioned that he had just left a meeting with the Secretary of Agriculture who showed him a poll of farmers in a mid-western state indicating dissatification with surplus storage charges and low incomes. The facts are, however, that surplus storage charges have been reduced greatly as surpluses have been disposed of and that average annual income per farm in that state has risen from $10,000 to $16,000 in the last ten years. The people really do not understand the “farm picture.”

The President said that he was greatly disturbed about the problem of getting over to the country an education program on what foreign aid is doing. He wished he could gain just 1/100 of 1% of the country's attention to “something constructive.” Why do only bad things get head-lines? For example, he said, measles historically killed 1/4 of the children in Upper Volta until A.I.D. assisted with a measles eradication program there. As a result of this program, about 750,000 children have been vaccinated, saving perhaps as many as 200,000 lives. He said that he had been told by the President of Upper Volta that, regardless of any ideological differences which may exist between our two countries, the people and especially the women of Upper Volta would never forget the U.S. for what it did through this program.

The President mentioned the problem he faces in cutting the over-all budget. Because so many of the budget items, such as veterans' payments, social security, and debt service, are inflexible, he has only $30 billion from which to cut $3 billion. Many Members of the Congress think all of this should come from the foreign aid appropriation, which is not of concern to the people in their districts. One item in the budget which is not of concern to such people, but which has been authorized, is $1 billion for food shipments to India to keep people from starving to death. He said that he had been advised by Members of the Congress and by his own advisors not to offer this, but that he believed it was the only right thing to do and wished to have a vote on it in the Congress. When the vote did come, it was passed unanimously by both Houses.

He said that the budget each year includes approximately $60 billion for defense as an insurance policy, but almost nothing to eradicate the causes of worldwide disturbances and threats to peace. He listed the enemies in this regard as disease, ignorance, and poverty. It is necessary to convince the people of America that it is in their interest to invest in Upper Volta, for example.

He urged the Committee to reconsider and make a more effective case for foreign assistance. It is necessary to rethink the reasons for and purposes of aid. “How to sell the product is the basic problem.” He asked the Committee's advice also on the following three points: 1) How much foreign aid should the U.S. provide?

2) How should those funds be spent?

3) How can the story of foreign aid be conveyed to the people of America?

The President said that the conduct of the business community has been “generally very good” in this field, beginning with the Marshall Plan. However, as foreign aid moved away from individual interests, it lost a lot of its business support, e.g. when it became something more than shipping cotton from the South. He said he wished that he could get the business community to be concerned with “how to help its fellow man” and to “engage in some introspection,” without always asking only “What is in it for me?"

He described aluminum stockpile incident.

He said it is necessary to make business realize that “their profits are only as secure as the world is secure.” He said examples of unrest are caused by civil rights demonstrations in this country, by factionalism in India, and by diseases in many places of the world. It is necessary for teachers, preachers, labor leaders, and businessmen to realize this.

Dr. Perkins remarked that the President would be heartened by the enlightened and long-range views taken by the businessmen on the Committee, and that during the Committee discussions, it was not possible to differentiate between university professors and businessmen. The actions of the Committee disguise the origins of its Members.

The President said that A.I.D. has done a good job with the business community. Business has taken the lead and been progressive, but over-all it is still too self-centered. He said he would like to have businessmen review the files of the Wall Street Journal since its inception, asking themselves, “What has the Wall Street Journal done for its fellow man?"

The President said that he had just awarded the Medal of Honor posthumously to the wives of two soldiers killed in Vietnam. He described the heroics of these men, but went on to say that the Members of the Committee were, in some respects, more important even than these men because they are in a position to reach out and influence many other people. He said he believes that foreign aid is as important as the defense or space programs.

He closed by stating his belief that the Committee was as good a group of people as could possibly be assembled and urged them to continue their activities. The President said Mr. Rostow would provide a memorandum outlining some further thoughts he has about the Committee and its functions.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Perkins Committee—President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs—C. Tyler Woods Files—CY 66 thru CY 70: FRC 73 A 159, GAC Minutes (5th-8th Meetings). Limited Official Use. No drafting information appears on the source text. The meeting was held at the White House. The source text was attached to two covering memoranda. The first, September 27, from C. Tyler Wood, Gaud's Special Assistant, in part asks Gaud for permission to send the minutes to Rostow for his review and his advice as to whether they should be distributed to the Committee members. Gaud indicated his approval on September 28 with his handwritten initials. The second covering memorandum, September 30, from C. Tyler Wood to Rostow informs Rostow of Gaud's approval of the minutes and seeks Rostow's permission to distribute them to the Committee members.

2 As signed into law, H.R. 15750, P.L. 89–583 (80 Stat. 795), approved on September 16, 1966, authorized an appropriation for the Development Loan Fund of $685 million for fiscal year 1967 and $750 million for each of the fiscal years 1968 and 1969. (80 Stat. 796) The Alliance for Progress was authorized to receive appropriations of $696,500,000 for fiscal 1967 and $750 million for each of the fiscal years 1968 and 1969. (80 Stat. 799)

54. Memorandum From the President's Administrative Assistant (Manatos) to President Johnson 54. Memorandum From the President's Administrative Assistant (Manatos) to President Johnson 1

Washington, September 26, 1966, 11:50 a.m.

It has come to my attention via the grapevine that even our friends are becoming increasingly concerned about Foreign Aid. I have it on good authority, for instance, that in an “off-the-record” mood in Committee recently Senator Pastore was highly critical of aid to many of the emerging African Nations saying that it's impossible for him to defend some of our requests on the Senate Floor when he has doubts in his own mind. I am trying to get a more informative reading of that meeting.

For several weeks I have discussed Foreign Aid with friendly Senators, staff people who are our friends, and some of those engaged directly in the liaison end of the program. Out of this have come certain views which I submit in the hope they will provide a dialogue which could possibly reshape our AID program and make it more palatable to Congress. These views are not mine alone but represent the thoughts of seasoned observers.

Probably the most telling argument against Foreign Aid is that it is so fragmented that it is impossible to ascertain either the full extent of or the total expenditures which go into foreign assistance. These arguments, used effectively by Otto Passman (who claims 16 agencies now involved) and Wayne Morse, include the Peace Corps, P.L. 480, various banking and lending agencies, AID and the Department of Defense.

It is our judgment that the best way out of this problem is to give Foreign Aid a “new look.” This might be accomplished by: (1) Appointing an Assistant Secretary of State for Foreign Assistance Coordination charged with pulling together all facets of Foreign Aid into one office.

(2) Instead of Congressional Liaison efforts carried out by AID, State and Defense (with the temptation of each to undercut the other in playing on Congress for funds) one Foreign Aid Congressional Liaison Office could be established. That office could have under its jurisdiction and control possibly 3 liaison officers and staff, all under the new Assist-ant Secretary of State. All other Foreign Aid liaison personnel would be withdrawn, and the congressional committees notified. One real complaint of members of Congress is that a half-dozen liaison people will call them on the same Foreign Aid bill, all from different agencies. Machinery could be established which would insure representation at staff level at State of proper individuals from agencies concerned with every facet of Foreign Aid, but that agency staff would not work the Hill.

(3) The President's Foreign Aid message should encompass all elements of Foreign Aid now looked upon as such by Congress, regardless of the agency administering the program. Properly explained to the Congress, this “all my eggs in one basket” could better be sold even though initially the basket might appear larger.

(4) The new Secretary would absorb AID under instructions from the President to submit new Foreign Assistance legislation rather than to request additional amendment of existing law. Wayne Morse seems to get mileage out of this argument.2

(5) It is becoming increasingly difficult to equate Military Assistance to the mutual security of the United States, the argument being that this kind of assistance to Latin America and Africa, for example, does no such thing, or does very little.3

(6) Serious thought should be given to reducing the number of countries receiving grant military assistance, probably to not more than 10 in number. These should be countries on the periphery of the Sino-Soviets which can not maintain large military establishments.

(7) Eliminate grant military assistance to Latin America and Africa.

(8) Charge against the budgets of the services utilizing foreign military bases the rental price charged us—Rota into the Navy budget, etc.

(9) Transfer the entire remaining military assistance program into the D.O.D. budget by amending Title 10 of the U.S. Code.4 This would give the Armed Services Committee jurisdiction.

Such a transfer would remove the guilt-by-association abuse that the rest of the Foreign Aid program takes at the hands of critics over incidents like Cyprus (Greece-Turkey), India-Pakistan, the Latin American coups, etc.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid [1 of 3], Box 16. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text presumably by President Johnson to Rostow reads: “W—send to Schultze for comment—L"

2 A handwritten note to the right of this paragraph reads: “O.K.”

3 A handwritten note to the right of this paragraph reads: “except tg. [?]"

4 Title 10 of the U.S. Code covers the Armed Forces.

55. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 55. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 6, 1966.

SUBJECT

FY 1967 Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act2

The Conference on the Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act for FY 1967 met this afternoon and completed its work in 45 minutes.

The amounts appropriated for Foreign Assistance Act activities, compared with the budgets requests, are: Budget Request Appropriation

(in millions of dollars)

Economic $2,469 $2144

Military 917 792

TOTAL $3,386 $2,936

The $2,936 million, which is the same total as the Senate bill, is the lowest appropriation for foreign assistance since FY 1958. It is clear from our talks with Senator Pastore that if the House conferees had tried harder (the House bill was $110 million higher than the Senate bill), we could have done better.3

We are particularly squeezed in four appropriation categories: Budget Request Appropriation

(in millions of dollars)

Development Loans $665 $500

Supporting Assistance (including Vietnam) 747 690

Contingency Fund 70 35

Military Assistance 917 792

One other item of significance. The conferees agreed (a) to amend Section 205 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 so that it will permit—rather than require—the transfer of 10% of Development Loan funds to the World Bank family4 and (b) to drop the annual prohibition in the Appropriations Act on the use of load funds for transfer to the World Bank family.

William S. Gaud

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid [1 of 3], Box 16. Limited Official Use. A handwritten note on the source text by Rostow reads: “OK W"

2 P.L. 89–691 was approved on October 5, 1966. (80 Stat. 1018)

3 At the end of this paragraph a handwritten notation by President Johnson reads: “Why didn't you and your people live with these conferees? L"

4 Section 205 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended in P.L. 89–579, approved on September 16, 1966. (80 Stat. 797)

56. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 56. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 14, 1966.

SUBJECT

Future of Foreign Aid

I had dinner last night with Gene Black.2 In the light of our discussion, I wish to set down for you thoughts which have been forming in my mind in recent months on foreign aid and its future.

These thoughts are set down on the assumption that the burden in Vietnam will not diminish in, say, the next nine months. If it does, we must plan how to trap a part of the resources saved from Vietnam for foreign aid purposes. But that is an easier matter.

1. To back your commitments to Asian, Latin American, and African development, we need more development resources in the West next year than we have had available this year. The increase required is not extravagant; perhaps $500 million or even less. What is necessary is that the curve turn upward and continue upward modestly for some time.

2. To achieve this requires four things: —A fresh presentation of the development aid problem which will have more political appeal in the Congress, to our people, and throughout the potential donor countries;

—A purposeful man-by-man approach designed to bring around the key Senate and Congressional figures whose assent will be required to produce this increase in foreign aid;

—Mobilization of U.S. public opinion leadership to back this effort; and

—Mobilization of public opinion leadership in Western Europe, Japan, Australia, etc., to back this effort.

3. Elements for a new approach to foreign aid. Essentially what is required is to present with greater political effectiveness what we are now attempting to do pragmatically, step by step. Specifically: —Regionalism. In fact we have been moving towards a regional approach to foreign aid in Latin America, Asia, and Africa. This has two kinds of appeal if properly presented. First, economically it forces the local people to take greater responsibility for self-help; mobilize all the sources of aid more rationally around country programs; and makes clear to the Congress that many institutions and nations are in fact sharing the assistance burden. That is why we can do pretty well with the Alliance for Progress, Asian Development Bank, and countries where there are consortium arrangements. Politically—and this is a new element—regionalism holds the promise of gradually diminishing the political and military burden borne by the U.S. in the future. It is the half-way house we have discovered between endless U.S. leadership in bilateral relations and isolationism. If we can make this political dimension clear as part of our aid presentation and make our aid efforts not merely economic but clearly a part of building regional islands of order, we shall be ahead of the game.

—Our presentation to the Congress and to the public should make clear that from here on out we expect the development burden to be borne by the richer countries on a fair shares basis. Again, we have the advantage of facts on our side. It is simply true that the loan terms from Europe and Japan have been getting softer while ours have been getting harder. It is true that, as we move towards institutions like the Asian Development Bank, build up IDA, and use the device of debt roll-overs, the relative burden on the U.S. in the development business declines. And, if we can follow through on the DAC meeting on the world food supply—and force others to contribute more not merely in food but in chemical fertilizers, etc.—once again we can get a fair sharing of the burden.

—Finally, we must deal honestly and effectively with the question of the balance of payments effects of foreign aid. Our present arrangements are wrong in two respects. First, they impose cumbersome administrative burdens on the foreign aid program where those burdens are not really necessary; for example, in Latin America where the trade and financial patterns do not cause significant leakage to Europe. Second, they do not deal effectively with cases where trade and financial patterns do involve some leakage; for example, with respect to India and Pakistan who tend to buy more from Europe, naturally, than they buy from us.

I won't go into solutions here; but I am sure we should clear away the mythology and the underbrush and build a foreign aid program which honestly projects our balance of payments where such protection is truly needed by measures that really work. I believe it can be done.

4. In addition, we must, of course, carry forward and dramatize more effectively the four dimensions of the development problem where you have left a distinctive mark: —The food population problem, which gets more critical every day.

—Education.

—Health.

—Measures to enlarge the role of private enterprise and the flow of private investment to developing nations.

5. Out of these elements I am confident that we can build a fresh, honest, and appealing presentation of foreign aid, adding to it the simple moral fact that foreign aid has begun the declining proportion of GNP of the developing nations, including the U.S.

6. To formulate such a program, I suggest: a) A group be appointed inside the government right now, headed by Bill Gaud, to include representatives of the Budget Bureau; Treasury; White House (Bator); State (Bowie,3 whom Gene has already assigned to this); and Agriculture. The group should be put to work under instructions to produce this fresh presentation and get it to you within a month.

b) This group inside the government should be instructed to work closely with the Jim Perkins Committee which, I gather, is ready to help on advice and in persuading key members of Congress but does not wish to take on a big public information and persuasion effort.

c) We design man-by-man approaches to the half-dozen key Congressional figures who constitute the major block to an expansion in foreign aid. Larry O'Brien might head such a committee, working with Mike Manatos and others who might be appropriate. Gene Black assures me he can be recruited for the effort once a strategy and tactics are defined. I'm confident others could help.

d) We get a first-rate man to give life to the old Linowitz Committee and put it in business.4 From my experience with Eric Johnston's committee in the 1950's,5 I'm sure this country is full of businessmen and labor leaders, church folk and professors, women's organizations and foreign policy groups that would back us if: —we have a program;

—we have an organization;

—we mean business.

In February 1958 we had a whale of a team moving. But it got turned off by Sherman Adams just because George Humphrey & Co. thought it might be effective. It's no substitute for man-by-man work in the Congress; but I'm convinced it's an important supplement.

e) Finally, encourage Gene Black to set up his proposed private international committee on economic development with Europeans, Japanese, etc., to include parliamentarians as well as public figures. This is, I believe, now possible and important. It could have a wholesome effect on: —foreign governments;

—U.S. public opinion;

—the Congress.

Therefore:

Set up government foreign aid planning group as suggested in paras. 3 a. And b. to report in a month.

Set up group to plan man-by-man approach to key Congressional figures, with action to await formulation of substantive strategy.

Suggest a first-rate substitute for Linowitz, bring his name to me, and plan to crank up that committee by mid-November.

Encourage Black to go forward with his proposed international committee.6

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid [1 of 3], Box 16. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text indicates the memorandum was received at 12:40 p.m. Another handwritten note by the President reads: “Walt—See me L".

2  Eugene Black, former President of the IBRD, was a member of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs.

3 Presumably Robert R. Bowie, Counselor of the Department of State.

4  Sol M. Linowitz, Chairman of the National Committee for International Development, was asked by President Johnson in an address to this Committee on January 11, 1965, at the White House to examine the AID program and “insure the widest possible public understanding of this constantly changing and improving program.” For text of the remarks, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1966, Book I, pp. 22–23.

5 President Eisenhower in a letter of January 11, 1958, to Eric A. Johnston, Chairman of the International Development Advisory Board, asked Johnston to convene a committee of business and organization leaders “to explore means of conveying to our citizens a fuller flow of information on the foreign aspects of our national security.” For text of the letter, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, pp. 16–17.

6 Just below each of these four paragraphs are approval lines, as follows: “Yes,” “No,” and “See me.” All are blank.

57. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 57. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 10, 1966.

SUBJECT

Effect of Congressional Cuts on AID's Program for FY 1967

We are now reviewing our FY 1967 program to adjust it to the amount of funds actually made available to us by the Congress.

We requested $2.469 billion of NOA for economic aid. The Congress gave us $2.144 billion, a reduction of $325 million. However, as you might expect, this cut was not distributed evenly across the board. Some categories of funds suffered more than others.

The Alliance for Progress. The Alliance funds were cut from $543 million to $508 million. This 6% cut was the smallest in any of our major programs. Compared to the rest of our program, the Alliance was not badly hurt.

Development Loans. We asked for $665 million and got $500 million, a cut of 25%. By skimping wherever possible, and deferring to 1968 all funding that can safely be postponed, we can probably get through the year. But it will be a tight squeeze.

Technical Assistance. Here we took a 14% cut—from $231 million to $200 million. This was a shocker, as the Congress does not usually cut deeply into technical assistance. Nearly all our available funds will be needed to continue existing projects. We will be able to start fewer new projects. This will seriously interfere with our plans to expand our activities in the fields of agriculture, education and health. It will also make it impossible to carry out our new authority to make institutional grants to universities in order to build up their capacity and resources in the development field.

Supporting Assistance. Our $747 million request was cut 8% to $690 million. Not counting the $550 million requested for Vietnam, the cut was 29%: from $197 million to $140 million. Such a cut would be hard to absorb under any circumstances. It is particularly tough because our original $747 million request did not include supporting assistance requirements for Indonesia, Panama and the Dominican Republic which developed after the FY 1967 budget was presented to the Congress.

The Contingency Fund. We got $35 million rather than the $70 million we requested. Fortunately, the Congress reappropriated $35 million of Contingency Funds which remained unobligated at the end of FY 1966. This gives us a Contingency Fund of $70 million (as compared with $105 million we hoped for). To meet the shortfall in inescapable Supporting Assistance requirements, we have already programmed or reserved all of the Contingency Fund.

The big question is whether we can avoid a supplemental request for Supporting Assistance and the Contingency Fund. As things look now, we have no margin of safety in these funds. Only time will tell whether we can get by. We have two new elements of flexibility that should enable us to live within our means in Vietnam: —The Department of Defense has agreed to fund the military-related part of our Vietnam program, amounting to about $90–$95 million;

—the Government of Vietnam has agreed to use part of their foreign exchange reserves to pay for a larger share of the Commercial Import Program; however, we promised to put our savings back into their development program.

If we do have to go up for a supplemental, we may be able to avoid going to the authorizing committees. We now have unused authorizations of $25 million for Supporting Assistance and $75 million for the Contingency Fund. Hopefully, a supplemental request would not exceed these amounts.

I am sending a copy of this memorandum to Charlie Schultze and will keep him posted on developments.

William S. Gaud

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. III [1], Box 2. Confidential.

58. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 58. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 16, 1966.

I recommend your approval of this determination permitting the internal transfer of AID funds in support of expanded administrative expenses in AID's Vietnam program.2

The amount involved is $5 million. Congress authorized AID to transfer up to that amount from its Supporting Assistance account to its Administrative Expenses account in FY 1966; in compliance with the Foreign Assistance Act you approved a determination in June, 1966 that the transfer was necessary for the purposes of the act.

Congress authorized the same procedure for FY 1967, subject again to your determination that it is necessary.

BOB has verified AID's continuing need for this internal transfer.3

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. IV [2 of 2], Box 40. No classification marking.

2 The determination attached to the source text has not been found.

3 A November 14 memorandum from Schultze to President Johnson reads in part: “Our review indicates that AID will need the authorized $5,000,000 for administrative expenses to carry out expanded programs in Vietnam.” He recommended that the President sign the determination. (Ibid.)

59. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistants (Rostow and Califano) and the President 's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) 59. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistants (Rostow and Califano) and the President 's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator)1

Washington, December 1, 1966.

Attached, as promised, are my thoughts on new steps in foreign aid—from program substance to Agency management. I hope they are of use to you.

If the President is to get a real shot at such proposals as these, it is clear that he—or you in his name—will have to put real pressure on Bill Gaud to look at them seriously and thoroughly. My notion of proper tactics is as follows: 1. Rostow and Califano discuss new proposals with the President at the Ranch this weekend.

2. President asks Bill Gaud to come to Texas for brief visit (or sees him in Washington if his return is imminent. This would be a good idea in any event).

3. President (a) gently outlines his Congressional problems, (b) impresses on Gaud the necessity of immediate steps to establish close and continuing contact with new and old members of Congress, and (c) asks Gaud for a rapid staffing out of as many ideas as have appealed to him in principle.

I suggest this procedure because I think Gaud is entitled to give the President his case for the status quo, and because I do not think he will seriously consider major innovations without direct guidance from the top. I may, as often happens, be wrong.

EH

Attachment2

Washington, December 1, 1966.

FOR

Francis M. Bator

Walt W. Rostow

Joseph A. Califano

SUBJECT

Initiatives in Foreign Aid

Let me begin with my own basic convictions on the state of the aid program: 1. With some notable exceptions, AID consists of people two cuts above the average civil servant, but three cuts below what is required to cope with the development problem—the most complicated single problem we face.

2. With all its faults, AID has managed to put together the conceptual and administrative basis of an effective program. No radical change in concept or organization is worth its probable costs. (We should keep firmly in mind the side effects of the 1961 reorganization—the Agency did virtually nothing for a year, and nothing well for three. The 1961 shakeup was worthwhile because there was a new and superior philosophy to install. That is not the situation now.)

3. No substantive or organizational changes in the program will revolutionize its public image. Except for a few bright young people in the House, the Congress is largely ignorant of what is being done and what has been accomplished. This is doubly true of the electorate. Best approaches to the image problem are: (1) a much fuller flow of information on present operations, (2) closer and much more personal care and feeding of key Congressmen and Senators, and (3) a high-powered attempt to marshal the bread and butter lobbies in favor of the bill. (The first is within present Agency capacities; the second would be best served by a short session between Gaud and the President; the third we have recommended to the President elsewhere. Thus, I shan't dwell on these items here.) If we do not do these things, no amount of organizational or program change will have much effect. If we do, I would bet that the current thrusts are fundamentally salable.

4. The need for more money in FY 1968 is real.3 This is no cry of wolf. A stable AID budget will stagnate the program—and cut the leverage it provides—in our major client countries. Despite the Congressional problem, this has to be the year to ease off the downward-sloping plateau we have occupied for several years.

5. There are, in my judgment, some options which could be put before the President as initiatives which would give promise of major improvements in the Agency and the program while putting an indelible Johnson stamp on both in ways which would help on the Hill.

My suggestions follow. Gaud has seen none of them. At first blush, it is very likely that his healthy skepticism will produce a negative reaction. Thus, they will be considered seriously only if suggested from above. My advice on the tactics of presentation are on the route slip covering this memorandum.4

Regionalism

We will have an important string to this bow in the economic integration drive at the Latin American Summit. In addition, we might: I. Propose an African Development Bank Act. The Bank is in the early stages of formation. It has $250 million in subscriptions—entirely from Africans—a Board of Directors, a site, and the beginnings of a staff. It is precisely the kind of spontaneous regional initiative we want. The Africans have not asked for a subscription from the United States, but it would be a useful and welcome gesture if we were to offer a modest contribution to a special soft-loan fund for projects in health, education, and agriculture. It would also be cheap—say appropriations of $10–20 million each year for 3–5 years beginning in FY 1969. If we could get a public champion of the Eugene Black caliber—David Rockefeller might be willing—we might manage another love feast of the kind connected with the Asian Bank. Moreover, the hard fact is that unless we do get involved with the African Bank, its prospects are meager. It would take some careful diplomacy beforehand, but with George Woods' help it should not be impossible to work out an arrangement in which we can make a contribution without threatening the Bank's independence. This would also put us in a position to hit the Europeans for matching funds.

II. Announce a major effort to assure Safe Conduct for Development in Africa. The arms race in Africa is growing, ridiculous from a great-power security standpoint, very dangerous to fragile African politics and a waste of scarce African resources. We know this; we have a number of indications that the Soviets agree; and African leaders from Nyerere to Bourguiba to Selassie have indicated they agree in principle. The guts of our initiative would be an unconditional offer to stop sales of sophisticated arms to African countries if the Soviets, the French, and others will agree. We could also announce that our economic aid policies in Africa will be very sensitive to the amounts of local resources being wasted in large military establishments. We would encourage the Africans to band together to develop means of controlling arms traffic and to establish regulations on size and equipment of standing armies. We might offer to consider helping to finance the administrative costs of such regional or subregional organizations. We could urge the OAU to take leadership—giving that semi-moribund group a new lease on life. Meanwhile, we should try to work out with the Soviets the specific rules each of us would follow, with or without a formal agreement. (The Soviets have already made one informal feeler on this score.) If we were able to work something out, it would be (1) a major arms control triumph in the tradition of the Test Ban Treaty and the Non-Proliferation Treaty, and (2) a model for the rest of the developing world. Again, it would take a good deal of diplomatic work beforehand. But it is very much worth a try.

III. Propose a study of South Asian economic cooperation. In large part, the major development problems of the day—political, economic, and public relations—boil down to visible progress in India and Pakistan, particularly joint progress. It is just possible that we could, after careful diplomatic preparation in which the President's name were mentioned, convince the Indians and the Paks to join in a study of possible constructive steps on the economic front, beginning with the lowering of tariff barriers. Since food is the overwhelming immediate problem for both countries and most of their trade with each other is agricultural, we might be able to peg our suggestion to their common war on hunger. We might even use broad hints of the value of such movement in connection with our Food for Freedom programs to both countries. The proposal might also be appropriate for presentation to the Second UN Conference on Trade and Development in the Spring—where we will be hard-pressed for other constructive suggestions. (This should not be done before the Indian elections in February.)

Self Help

I firmly believe that the major problem here is publicizing the current facts. We do insist on self help. We do cut off aid where it doesn't happen (e.g., Brazil, Colombia, India). We are the principal cause of major advances in economic policy (e.g., India, Pakistan, Colombia, etc.). But few people know it. The job is to structure the system so that they have more chances to find out—and to testify to what they learn: I. Establish by law a National Committee on Overseas Self-Help. This group should consist of 12–15 prominent people, perhaps two each selected by the Foreign Relations and Foreign Affairs Committees, the Business Council, the AFL/CIO, the American Association of Universities, and the Council on Foreign Relations. It should be chaired by the AID Administrator. Its function should be to review and advise the Secretary of State and the President concerning our proposed program in each of the nine countries which, together, receive 85% of our aid. The Committee reports should be classified, but fully available to interested members of Congress. In addition, it should make an annual unclassified report to the Congress. It should receive as much publicity as possible. The selecting organizations should be leaned on to produce people who have the time to do a serious job. With luck, the Committee could become a considerable help on the Hill, as well as a fount of public information and confidence. There is a case that its existence would restrict the flexibility of the President and the Secretary in the conduct of foreign affairs, but that restriction is minor compared to the alternative—a major reduction in the resources available for the principal instrument of that foreign policy in the developing world.

II. Make an informal offer to provide full briefings on EVERY proposed program loan to the appropriate regional subcommittee of the Foreign Affairs and Foreign Relations Committees. These people should be told that their permission will not be asked, but that their views will be solicited and carefully reported to the President. Of course, we must make it clear that we often have to move quickly and cannot allow this step unduly to delay the process.

III. Make it known informally that the President has passed the word that every AID project loan must be matched by equal contributions to the cost of that project from the recipient. This is not a great change from the present practice. But we have not succeeded in getting it through to the Congress that this is present practice. Thus, we can make some points by putting it this way. We can also offer to give any doubter chapter and verse in the countries in which he is interested.

Multilateralism

Our largest initiative in this area will be the Korry Report push in Africa,5 where the World Bank will get increasingly involved as we bow out of bilateral aid to 25 countries (except for a small ambassador's self-help fund). This is discussed in the Task Force report. In addition, we might consider the following: I. Propose a legal requirement that no less than 85% of AID's money must be used in a multilateral framework—where “multilateral” means any grouping of donors from an ad hoc consortium to a formal organization such as the Bank. Again, this is no great change in the present situation, but it will dramatize a little-known fact.

II. Make a real push for transformation of the unused European Monetary Fund into a source of financing for private ventures (fertilizer plants, etc.) in the War on Hunger. This is a $350 million pot of money (into which only the U.S. has actually paid its share—$123 million) originally designed to tide European countries over short-term monetary problems, but now almost totally unused. This proposal is approved in the State Department. It was briefly mentioned in Paris recently by Eugene Rostow, but was buried in the press. It won't be easily negotiable—the other countries will need new appropriations. But it is the only sizeable source of critical foreign exchange for the War on Hunger which does not involve the political costs of a new appropriation. The key to success will be escalating the issue—at least initially—from the Finance/Foreign Ministers to heads of government.

Private Enterprise

Convene a White House Conference on Private Enterprise and Overseas Development. The accent should be a search for imaginative answers to the two questions critical to a new Government understanding of the precise factors which influence private behavior in this realm: 1. What public policy would induce significant amounts of new U.S. private investment to flow to each region of the less-developed world?

2. What incentives would be required to induce private U.S. managerial talent to get involved with publicly-financed projects abroad?

It is possible that this would yield nothing but the same old Watson Committee brand of cardboard prose.6 If so, we have lost nothing and gained a useful gesture. But—particularly if some operating-level people can be roped in—it might yield some real breakthrough in an area where our best efforts have produced nothing of much consequence.

Management

I. Announce a three-year program to turn AID into a team of crack development specialists. At a minimum, it should include: 1. A Peace Corps-type entrance examination system which, among other things, would insure that each entrant knows enough elementary economics to pass a Freshman final exam—or agrees to begin the requisite course immediately.

2. A training program to insure that every professional employee overseas has a working knowledge of the local language when he arrives.

3. Special incentives to continue with part-time graduate work leading to advanced degrees, particularly in economics. We might shoot for a 25% increase in the number of employees with advanced degrees by the end of the period.

4. Working agreements with a wide variety of corporations and universities through which a steady stream of people with special skills serve temporary tours with AID with the understanding that such experience will be counted as a plus in the promotional scales in their home institutions.

5. Encouragement of regional specialties.

6. Elevation of the Directors of the AID Missions in the nine largest recipient countries to the rank of Deputy Ambassador.

7. A personal review and out-placing of low-quality staff as ruthless as can be managed short of complete severance of relations with the employee unions. As a token of good faith, we might promise a 10% cut in non-Viet Nam employment in fiscal '68. (This should be possible as a result of the new aid policy in Africa.)

Congress should be given a definite schedule for these moves and progress reports at least annually. The AID recruiting drive should get as much publicity as possible, particularly at the universities. In particular, the Secretary of State should be asked to lend his personal and institutional prestige to the campaign for applicants.

II. Set up a small general staff to the Administrator—with systems analysis capacity—headed by a new Special Assistant. AID has two kinds of problems made to order for an energetic, fast-moving group of “whiz-kid” analysts of the type McNamara has used to such advantage: (1) standard bureaucratic sprawl and constipation, and (2) a great gap between the number of problems susceptible to systematic quantitative analysis and the number where it is used. (ADP is a virtual stranger to AID, though it should be applicable to everything from development plan analysis to keeping track of procurement benefits to Congressmen.) Such a group would probably earn its keep in terms of pure economy and efficiency—identifying duplication, excess paper work, and inferior staffing. Such people are also often useful in keeping the Administrator well armed for trips to the Hill, developing vivid and imaginative methods of presenting the Agency story. (Indeed, their first task might be the redesign of the AID Congressional presentation.) But their real task would be to provide the Administrator with a needling, trouble-shooting, innovating, internal intelligence-collecting, supervisory tool he does not now have and badly needs. I can think of no better cure for the aid of stodgy lassitude that now pervades many parts of the Agency.

III. Merge the State and AID African bureaus on the model of the Linc Gordon operation for Latin America. This could be announced as the next step in the “speak with one voice” philosophy which underlay the Latin America move. In my view, the Latin America experiment has worked well and is worth trying elsewhere. The time is opportune—the AID Assistant Administrator for Africa is leaving next month and a replacement has not been recruited. The African bureaus in both State and AID are far and away the weakest units in their respective agencies; a merger might provide enough good people to start rebuilding. It would be difficult to avoid making Joe Palmer the head of the combined operation—not a very exciting choice for a brave new era. But a good deputy on the AID side could probably get the job started. (Gaud would oppose this, as would all opponents of eventual AID-State amalgamation. I think that issue was largely foreclosed with the Latin America merger.)

If the President decides to do some new things—or perhaps even if he doesn't—he should give thought to a personal presentation of the Foreign Aid message this year. If he proposes enough change, it could be as historic an occasion as the Marshall speech in Harvard Yard. It certainly would be the most auspicious possible start for the new bill. Obviously, the President must weigh his priorities—and I am aware that there are many other claimants. Nevertheless, I believe the bleak prospects now facing the program make an appearance before a joint session to lay out his own vision and plans in the proper ballpark [sic]. In my judgment, it would be a net plus, in the Congress, in the international arena, and in terms of its effect on our Viet Nam posture.

EH

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret; Sensitive.

2 Secret.

3 For FY67 the administration had requested $2.5 billion for economic assistance and Congress appropriated $2.1 billion (see Documents 55 and 57). As the administration looked to the economic assistance program for FY68, the President, in a 3:26 p.m. telephone conversation with Senator John Pastore on December 27, discussed the strategy to obtain the administration's needs in the budget that would be sent to Congress in January 1967. In view of the outcome for FY67 the President wondered if he should request $2.8 billion in the hopes of getting the $2.5 he felt was absolutely essential. The President and the Senator went back and forth on this matter and the bottom line of Pastore's recommendation was to request what the administration felt was absolutely essential and than go all out to defend and obtain that level. Joseph Califano, William Gaud, and Charles Schultze were with the President during this exchange with Pastore, and Gaud and Schultze joined the discussion. Gaud explained he had actually spent $2.5 for FY 67 because of carry-over funds from the Indo-Pakistan war. Pastore advised that the administration should request $2.5 billion and defend that amount as what was spent wisely this year and is absolutely essential for the coming year. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a Telephone Conversation, Tape 6612.10, PNO 4)

4 Not found.

5 The Korry Report was written by Edward M. Korry, Ambassador to Ethiopia. Documentation is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XXIV.

6 Not further identified.

60. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 60. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 5, 1967, 9:45 a.m.

SUBJECT

AID “Number of Countries” Determinations

In the two attached packages (Tabs A and B),2 Bill Gaud and Charlie Schultze recommend that you determine it in the national interest to: —make development loans during FY 1967 to 29 countries outside Latin America;

—provide technical assistance in 40 countries, also excluding Latin America;

—furnish modest technical assistance to the UAR. (This requires a special determination.)

Substance and Procedure

You will recall that Congress amended the Foreign Assistance Act last year to limit to 10 the number of countries outside Latin America to which we can make development loans without a Presidential determination of national interest.3 A similar limit of 40 countries was enacted for technical assistance.4 In both cases, Senator Fulbright and Speaker McCormack must be notified and 30 days must pass between notification and action. We strongly opposed both limitations.

Gaud and Schultze have carefully winnowed prospective development loan recipients to 29. These are the ten major AID clients, plus Israel, Thailand, the Philippines, Ceylon, and 15 African countries. An identical operation for technical assistance yielded 48 countries, 35 of them in Africa. I am satisfied that these totals reflect real requirements; the specific arguments are contained in Gaud's memoranda.

Strategy with the Congress

The country limitations presented us with three options: 1. Select a “core” list of countries (10 for development loans, 40 for technical assistance), and ask you to make determinations only for other countries.

2. Request Presidential determinations covering all countries which will receive these kinds of aid, identifying no “core” 10 or 40.

3. Use the slots within the limitations for controversial countries, asking for determinations on the relatively safe ones (Israel, Turkey, etc.).

There is no question about the legality of any of these options. Procedure #1 is fairly clearly what the Congress had in mind. But it would (1) cause us serious political problems with the “non-core” countries, and (2) give us a poor basis for proposing that the limitations be removed in 1967. Procedure #3, on the other hand, could subject you to the charge of subverting the will of Congress.

Thus, we are recommending procedure #2—determinations covering all the countries we plan to aid in each category, with no indication of which countries we consider within the limitations and which we do not. It seems to me that this reflects the foreign policy realities—every AID loan involves an explicit finding of national interest—and complies with the law and the intent of Congress in a most defensible manner.

Even so, Gaud feels—and I agree—that he should explain these determinations to Senator Fulbright before they are announced. Together with the new approach on Africa (described below), they shouldn't be an overly bitter pill. If you approve, Gaud is ready to approach Fulbright immediately.

Special Note on Africa

As you know, the “number of countries” problem fundamentally concerns Africa. Most criticism that we are spread too thin does not focus on the Alliance or the Near East/South Asia, or the Far East. It zeroes in on the fact that we help 35 countries in Africa (neglecting the more interesting fact that total aid to Africa is less than 10% of AID expenditures—much less if food is included). This criticism is by no means totally without merit. As Ed Korry pointed out, we have great difficulty trying to run separate country programs in so many—often fundamentally unviable—separate states.

Thus, in accord with the Korry report,5 and your NSAM of October 5, 1966,6 we plan to move gradually to: —limit bilateral development loans in Africa to 10 “concentration countries";

—limit bilateral technical assistance to the same group, maintaining small self-help funds in the others;

—operate in non-concentration countries only through multilateral donor groups and/or in connection with regional and sub-regional projects.

The practical effect of this will be to reduce the 19 African countries included in the development loan determination to 10 by FY 1969. It would also lower the total of 35 African recipients of bilateral technical assistance to 10 in about the same period. (Under present law, however, even the small self-help funds we are establishing would count against the limitation. Thus, the number of technical assistance recipients would not fall so dramatically.) These steps are precisely in the direction the Congress favors. They should sweeten the medicine for Fulbright. In terms of the merits and the politics, I think they are worth taking.

However, these changes will be very hard to sell to many Africans. You should know that Joe Palmer—while fully committed to the general outlines of the policy—thinks we are moving too fast and with too little flexibility. He is worried that (1) we will not be able to present a sufficiently real multilateral alternative—the proposed World Bank Standing Groups on African Transportation, Communications, and Power; the African Development Bank; etc.—to convince Africans that we aren't simply pulling out; (2) there are some countries (e.g. Somalia, Malagasy) which will have a hard time developing multi-country projects, and (3) we may appear—whatever our protestations to the contrary—to be imposing political unity on countries hypersensitive about their newly-acquired sovereignty.

While Joe's concerns are valid, the rest of us—Gaud, Katzenbach, Schultze, Bator and Rostow—believe that the present changeover formula is as gradual as we can manage while maintaining a persuasive case to the Congress that we are making real changes. However, we would certainly agree with his further argument that a great deal depends on our ability to get the full AID budget request appropriated and to get special authorization to help the African Bank.

Recommendation

I recommend that you sign the determinations.7 If you approve, we need two signatures—one under each signature tab.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. IV [1 of 2]. Box 40. No classification marking.

2 Tabs A and B were not attached and have not been further identified.

3 Section 201(b) (2) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1966; P.L. 89–583 was approved on September 19, 1966. (80 Stat. 796)

4 Section 211 (2).

5 See footnote 4, Document 59.

6 Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XXIV.

7 Not found, but see Document 61.

61. Presidential Determination No. 67–14 61. Presidential Determination No. 67–141

Washington, January 5, 1967.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE ADMINISTRATOR AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

SUBJECT

Determination under Section 201(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (the “Act"), to permit the making of Development Loans to certain countries in FY 19672

In accordance with the recommendations in your memorandum of December 3, 1966,3 I hereby determine pursuant to Section 201(b) of the Act, that it is in the national interest of the United States to make Development Loans in FY 1967 in the following countries:

Afghanistan

Cameroon

Ceylon

Chad

Congo (Kinshasa)

Dahomey

Ethiopia

Ghana

Rwanda

India

Israel

Jordan

Kenya

Korea

Liberia

Malagasy Republic

Mali

Morocco

Nigeria

Pakistan

Philippines

Sierra Leone

Somali Republic

Sudan

Tanzania

Thailand

Tunisia

Turkey

Uganda

You are requested on my behalf to give notice of these determinations, together with the reasons therefor, pursuant to Section 201(b) of the Act, to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House of Representatives.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, LEG 4–1 Presidential Determinations FY 1967. Confidential.

2 The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, P.L. 87–195, was approved on September 4, 1961. Under Section 201(b) of the Act funds made available pursuant to its provisions could not be used to make loans in more than 10 countries in any fiscal year, except that loans could be made to additional countries after at least 30 days had elapsed following the submission by the President to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives of a report stating that the making of loans in such additional countries was in the national interest and giving his reasons therefor. (75 Stat. 426)

3 Not printed. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, LEG 4–1 Presidential Determinations FY 1967)

62. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 62. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 11, 1967, 6 p.m.

SUBJECT

Executive Order on Food Aid

As you directed, I have asked Charlie Schultze to go slow on the Food Aid Order now in preparation. But he will need more specific guidance soon. The relevant facts are as follows: 1. There must be an Executive Order of some kind if the program is to operate at all. Authorities must be delegated, procedures established, administrative arrangements revised to fit the new Act, etc.

2. Most of the provisions in the draft Order are agreed among the relevant agencies, including Agriculture. (There seem to be some differences between Orville and his people on this; but it seems clear that his objections do not extend to the minor authorities and technical details of the Order.)

3. The Order does not divest Agriculture of a leading role in formulation of policy and administration of programs. It does strengthen State/AID. Many of your advisers—including Schultze, Katzenbach, Gaud, Califano, Bator and myself—believe that we should move in this direction if we are to maximize our leverage on recipient countries and give any substance to our promise that food aid will be more closely coordinated with other economic aid.

Thus, Schultze and I believe it makes sense to get the relevant senior people together and try to thrash out an Order—without prejudice to your decision, and with clear notice to any Congressional or press questioners that no decisions have been made. If agreement is impossible, we would plan to come to you with a full presentation of the issues and options.

None of this is meant to ignore the very real Congressional problem which concerns Orville. Any hint of movement to strengthen State/AID in the food aid business raises some hackles on the Hill—but it also pleases some people. On balance, I am convinced that the substantive case for some movement is strong enough that you should have an opportunity to hear it before making up your mind.

Walt

You and Schultze go ahead with meeting as above2

Revise the Order to take out the passage to which Freeman objects

Stop work on the Order

Speak to me

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, U.S. Food Aid Policy [1 of 2], Box 15. No classification marking. Sent under cover of a January 11 note to Rostow from Hamilton who wrote: “Attached is the memorandum to the President on food aid which we discussed yesterday. I checked it out with Charlie Schultze. He concurs. The sentiments ascribed to Califano and Katzenbach represent their views as of about a week ago. Schultze particularly hopes that Katzenbach will weigh in heavily on this one.” A handwritten “L” appears on the source text.

2 This option is checked.

63. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) and the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 63. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) and the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, February 6, 1967.

SUBJECT

How to Handle the “Number of Countries” Limitations in the new Foreign Aid BILL

As you know, the President has decided to propose a new Foreign Assistance Act. AID plans to describe the new bill as a clarification of the old—which had become hopelessly cluttered—rather than an overhaul of the program. Indeed, the basic authorities in the new bill will be precisely the same as in the present version.

To maintain this position, the AID draft bill contains all of the old Act's restrictions (except the prohibition of aid into Indonesia), even though the Administration opposes many of them—e.g., 50–50 shipping. The question Gaud raises is whether the Administration's bill should include the worst of the present Act's restrictions—the limitations on the number of countries which can receive supporting assistance (limited to 13 countries), development loans (limited to 10 countries), and technical assistance (limited to 40 countries). These provisions were new last year. They were inserted by the Senate, opposed strongly by the House, but finally included in the Conference bill—with a Presidential waiver. The President was most unhappy with them, regarding them as part of a general legislative attempt to encroach upon executive prerogatives. He made an obvious allusion to them in his signing statement in a way which strongly suggested that he would propose their removal this session.2

Last month the President waived all three limitations for FY 1967, approving supporting assistance programs in 17 countries, technical assistance programs in 48 countries, and development loan programs in 29 countries. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee called Gaud in to testify on these actions, and Senators Fulbright, Hickenlooper and Morse gave him a very rough time. Morse told the press afterward that he would propose an amendment to divest the President of his waiver authority.

In the face of this, Gaud recommends that we (1) keep the limitations in the proposed bill, but (2) raise the development loan limit from 10 countries to 20, (3)lower the supporting assistance limit from 13 to 10, and (4) plan to make waivers this year for a few DL and TC countries. Basically, he feels that this approach may appease Fulbright and help to head off an attempt to remove the President's waiver authority.

My own view is that the President should have a better feel for the specifics of this horse trade before he goes along with Gaud's suggestion. The country limitations are indefensible as a matter of policy; the Administration made that crystal clear last year. The President should be in the business of proposing them only if he receives some clear quid pro quo. Moreover, the bargaining situation suggests that the further back we start, the less likely we are to end up losing the waiver authority. And there can be no serious argument that by leaving the limitations in we avoid opening the provision to further amendment; the proposal of a new bill by itself opens it to any and all amendments, and Morse is absolutely certain to try to remove the waiver authority. Finally, in the real world it will be harder for Morgan to get his reconstituted House committee to knock out these provisions than to go along with the draft bill which does not contain them.

Thus, I think Gaud should be asked to try to swing a deal with Fulbright. If he can get a commitment from the Senator to support the bill—and perhaps manage it on the floor—we would go ahead with a bill including the limitations. If not, we would take the limitations out and adopt the line that the bill is a clarification except for the elimination of these serious shackles on the President's flexibility. I don't think Fulbright will agree to this transaction (though there is some sentiment in AID that he will). But I also don't think he will soften his attack if we make Gaud's proposal. On balance, I think the President should back away from his earlier position only if there is a reasonable chance that he will gain some explicit benefit thereby. It should be up to Gaud to prove that he will.

EH

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Confidential.

2 On September 19, 1966, upon signing the Foreign Assistance Act of 1966, President Johnson stated in part: “I strongly urge the Congress next year to recognize the need for greater flexibility in the administration of a complex program that must be responsive to the rapidly changing circumstances of our world. Undue restrictions on the form and timing of our actions can significantly diminish the benefits we seek from the program.” For full text of his statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1966, Book II, pp. 1037–1038.

64. Letter From the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright) to President Johnson 64. Letter From the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright) to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 8, 1967.

Dear Mr. President:

This letter concerns your determinations of January 5, 1967,2 received by the Committee on Foreign Relations on January 17, increasing the number of countries eligible for development loans from ten to twenty-nine and for technical assistance and cooperation grants from forty to forty-eight.

The Committee has heard Mr. William Gaud's justification of the action. Unfortunately, because of the press of other business there has not been an opportunity for the Committee to meet to take formal action since his presentation. With the Lincoln Day recess now upon us, the thirty day waiting period will be over before the Committee can consider the matter further. In view of this, I feel that I am obligated to advise you that I personally deplore this action and I believe that many members on both sides of the aisle are also seriously concerned.

Sincerely yours,

J.W. Fulbright 3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, LEG 4–1 Presidential Determinations FY 1967. No classification marking. A copy was sent to Gaud.

2 See Document 61.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

65. Letter From President Johnson to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright) 65. Letter From President Johnson to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright)1

Washington, February 15, 1967.

Dear Bill:

I have your letter of the 8th2 with reference to my determinations of January 5, 1967, increasing the number of countries eligible for Development Loans from 10 to 29 and for Technical Assistance from 40 to 48.3

As a general proposition, I believe the exercise of Presidential discretion should be rare and only on the strongest facts. And I think that in connection with the Foreign Assistance Act of 1966 the discretion which I exercised is proper.

The numerical limitations on the number of countries to which the United States could give aid were introduced by the Foreign Relations Committee into the legislation over the strong objections of the Administration. We believed, as a matter of principle, that an aid program could not be sensibly limited in this way, that some flexibility is necessary, and that any assistance program has to be capable of responding to changing world circumstances.

Equally importantly, we pointed out to your Committee that numerical limitations on the number of countries would force abrupt and uneconomic termination of present programs in a number of countries.

While your Committee, and the Senate as a whole, rejected these arguments, the House of Representatives agreed with them. The House Committee strongly took the position, as did the House Managers in the Conference Report, that numerical limitations were unwise. The result of differences in this respect between the House and Senate was the compromise permitting Presidential determination to exceed the statutory limits whenever the President determined it was in the national interest to do so.

In this connection I believe that it was widely understood by the Congress, for the reasons expressed to the Committee and to the Conference, that this discretion would have to be exercised in a number of instances. I do not believe, therefore, that my determinations of January 5 came as a surprise to the Congress. They were entirely consistent with the compromise which Congress arrived at in enacting the legislation. And each determination was the result of a careful review which led me to conclude that the national interest indeed required the action that I took.

More specifically, as you know, I have determined that our Technical Assistance programs should number 48 rather than 40. Seven of these are in the Near East and South Asia. Six are in the Far East. The remaining 35 are in Africa. If we suddenly reduced the number of our Technical Assistance programs from 48 to 40, Africa would suffer most—if not all—of the loss.

We share your view that some of our bilateral aid should be replaced by multilateral and regional aid. As recommended in the Korry report, we have decided to terminate our bilateral aid programs in a number of African countries and deal with them only on a multilateral or regional basis. But we cannot make this change overnight. It would not make sense to abandon Technical Assistance projects which are already under way. Accordingly, although we will not start new Technical Assistance projects in a number of countries, I have determined that it is in the national interest to complete those projects which have already been begun. As they are completed, the number of countries in which we will have regular Technical Assistance programs will decline to less than 40.

Let me now turn to Development Loans. Last January we stated in our presentation to the Congress that in FY 1967 we definitely expected to make Development Loans to 10 specific countries, that we considered three other specific countries eligible for Development Loans, and that Development Loans would also be made to a number of additional African countries depending upon whether particular projects proved feasible and were ready for financing during the course of the fiscal year. The Senate bill limited us to making Development Loans to 10 countries only. In Conference, there was added the clause permitting the President to exceed that number.

We now propose to make Development Loans to 29 countries. Of these 8 are in the Near East and South Asia, 2 are in the Far East and 19 are in Africa. If we were limited to 10 countries only, the burden would again be borne by our African program.

As recommended in the Korry report, we propose to make no further bilateral loans to a number of African countries, and to provide assistance to them on a multilateral or regional basis. We do, however, propose to complete projects which are now under way, and to go forward with Development Loans for which joint planning has reached an advanced stage even though loan authorizations have not yet been entered into. Ultimately, this will mean that we will be making Development Loans to 20 countries, 10 in Africa and 10 elsewhere. But for this year and next—while we are finishing unfinished business—the number will be more than 20. And under no circumstances can I see the wisdom of reducing the number to 10 in the foreseeable future.

There are two other numerical restrictions contained in the Act bearing on the number of countries to which we can give aid. One limits to 13 the number of countries to which we can give Supporting Assistance.4 As you know, I have determined that the national interest requires increasing this to 17. The Act also limited to 40 the number of countries to which we can give military assistance.5 We are living within that restriction.

I know that you have differences with the Administration with respect to the aid program, and particularly with respect to Development Loans. But there is no disagreement between us as to the importance of foreign aid. During the past few months we have made important policy changes in the foreign aid programs, and which will increase its multilateral and regional aspects. I would hope very much that you would be able to support the Administration's efforts to move in that direction.

If arbitrary restrictions are imposed the victims will be a number of African countries where the programs are small, the needs great, and the consequences to our foreign policy important. I believe it is in the national interest for this Government to support—even though the dollar amounts are relatively modest—these new nations in their struggle to achieve equality and economic development.

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. IV [2 of 2], Box 40. No classification marking.

2  Document 64.

3  Document 61.

4 Section 401 as amended by the Foreign Assistance Act of 1966, P.L. 89–583, approved on September 19, 1966. (80 Stat. 801)

5 Section 504(a), as amended. (80 Stat. 802)

66. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 66. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 29, 1967.

SUBJECT

The Consequences of a $2.5 Billion Foreign Aid Appropriation

This memorandum is submitted in response to your request for information on the consequences of a $2.5 billion foreign aid appropriation (covering both economic and military aid) for FY 1968.

The President's budget request was originally $3.126 billion. After Punta del Este, it was increased $100 million to $3.226 billion.2 Recently, both the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Foreign Affairs Committee imposed on the Foreign Assistance Act the burden of financing the $84 million U.S. share of NATO infrastructure and certain international military headquarters—items which the President had included in the DOD budget. The effect of this is to increase the over-all requirement to $3.310 billion.

In separate telephone conversations with Sol Linowitz (8:35 a.m.) and Henry Jackson (10:14 a.m.) on April 4, 1967, President Johnson discussed Senator Fulbright's opposition to the foreign assistance program because of his dislike of Vietnam, and regretted he would not have the appropriation in hand when he traveled to Punta del Este. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recordings of Telephone Conversations, Tape 6704.01, PNOs 1 and 3)

To reduce this to $2.5 billion means a cut of $810 million—just under 25%. Last year's budget request of $3.386 billion was cut by $451 million to $2.935 billion, a 13% cut.

Roughly $250 million of the total budget request represents relatively small items which will remain about the same regardless of the size of the total appropriation. Cuts will come in six fund categories. Our present rough guess as to how the Congress would apportion a cut of $810 million among those fund categories in order to arrive at an overall figure of $2.5 billion is as follows: (in millions of dollars)

Budget Request "Estimated” Cut Resulting Appropriations

Alliance for Progress 643 -103 540

Development Loans 774 -344 430

Supporting Assistance-Vietnam 550 -60 490

Supporting Assistance-Other 170 -40 130

Technical Assistance 243 -43 200

Military Assistance 680 -220 460

The $540 million figure for the Alliance for Progress would constitute a 16% cut from the post-Punta del Este budget request of $643 million. While it is $32 million above the FY 1967 appropriation, it does not provide the extra Punta del Este $100 million. Even so, this is a much lighter cut than the much more severe Development Loan cuts contemplated for Asia and Africa.

The $430 million Development Loan figure represents a severe cut of 44% from our budget request of $774 million. The appropriation for FY 1967 was $500 million. But it is misleading to compare that figure with the $430 million figure. Due to the suspension of aid to India and Pakistan following the outbreak of war in the fall of 1965, $320 million of FY 1966 Development Loan funds were obligated for loans to India and Pakistan late that fiscal year to meet FY 1967 requirements. So that the $430 million for FY 1968 is actually more comparable to $820 million for FY 1967.

We carried over no Development Loan funds from FY 1967. But we estimate loan repayments, refunds and deobligations during FY 1968 at $88 million. This plus $430 million would give us a total of $518 million of Development Loan funds for FY 1968. The following table shows our present plans and the levels we would have to go to at $518 million: (in millions of dollars)

Presently Planned Program Cuts Reduced Program

India 400 -152 248

Pakistan 165 -50 115

Turkey 100 -40 60

Africa 90 -50 40

Korea 50 -15 35

Indonesia 20 0 20

Philippines 16 -16 0

Others 21 -21 0

Totals 862 -344 518

The World Bank has estimated India's requirements at $900 million of non-project aid and $300 million of project aid. These requirements have been accepted by the consortium. The U.S. has regularly supplied 40% of India's requirements for non-project aid and has financed some projects. A level of $248 million would eliminate all project aid and would come nowhere near enabling us to supply 40% ($360 million) of the non-project aid. Such a drastic reduction in our support is likely to lead to cuts by others—this in a year in which India will get nothing from IDA because of the delay in IDA replenishment. As your PSAC Report pointed out, India is the most critical battleground for the War on Hunger. India is introducing miracle seeds and with a return to average monsoons is in a position to make a real agricultural breakthrough if she gets the fertilizer our program loans would provide.

A $115 million aid level for Pakistan is less than our normal share of the consortium non-project loan requirement. It allows nothing for project lending. If aid continues at its present levels Pakistan has a good chance to be self-sufficient in food grains by 1970. Our failure to help Pakistan which has been following good self-help policies with good results would deprive us of a stunning example of a U.S. aid success story within the next decade.

A $60 million program for Turkey compares with $135 million in aid provided during FY 1967. Such a deep cut would undermine the consortium and reduce contributions from other countries. This would have to mean abandoning the economic reform package on which Turkey had been making outstanding progress and delaying Turkey's “graduation” from aid, now anticipated in 1973.

A cut in development loans for Korea coupled with a cut in supporting assistance would come at a time when we are committed to continuing economic assistance as part of the bargain for obtaining Korean troops in Vietnam. It would cast a pall over the international consultative group on which we are counting for contributions from other countries to Korea's remarkable economic development.

The program for Indonesia had already been recognized as too small to meet our share of the stabilization support in 1968. A $20 million A.I.D. loan level compares with an expected foreign aid requirement of about $250–300 million in 1968.

Inasmuch as our development loans for Africa aggregated $98 million in FY 1967, a $40 million program for FY 1968 would give the Africans real reason to wonder whether our new Korry Report-based aid policy for Africa calling for emphasis on regionalism and multilateralism isn't just a fancy word for pull-out.

The $100 million cut in Supporting Assistance consists of $60 million from Vietnam and $40 million from other programs. For Vietnam this means holding the line on major expansions of pacification/revolutionary development programs that the new U.S. team may propose, and postponing some development projects that could mean a great deal to the new Vietnamese Government. The $40 million cut in other programs would have to come from Korea, Jordan, the Dominican Republic, Panama and the Congo—programs which are already very closely budgeted. Furthermore, these cuts would leave us with even less flexibility than we now have to meet new political and security problems in Southeast Asia and elsewhere. This is particularly true in view of the fact that we are requesting an appropriation of only $31 million for the Contingency Fund.

Technical Assistance already badly cut last year is heavily mortgaged to on-going activities. A reduction from $243 million to $200 million in these funds will prevent us from carrying on increased programs in agricultural development, education, health and family planning. These are the highest priority items in our economic aid program.

On Military Assistance, a cut of approximately $220 million—35% of our original request and about the same as the $205 million cut of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee last week—would, as explained in my memorandum on the SFRC actions, hit very hard both the grant and sales programs.3 In sum, $60 million for sales would be out. Grant programs for such forward defense countries as Taiwan, Greece, Turkey and Iran would have to absorb cuts of up to 30%. Modernization of the equipment of these countries would be virtually wiped out. And there would be serious political problems created by cuts in such smaller programs as the Philippines and Latin America.

Conclusion:

This analysis shows that —an appropriation of $2.5 billion is clearly not enough to do the job;

—it would have severe political and economic consequences and substantially weaken U.S. influence in the less developed world;

—it would cause others to do less as well and thus have a cumulative effect on the development business;

—it would make it impossible for us to reward good self-help performance and to sustain the momentum generated by past investment in foreign assistance;

—it would gut our War on Hunger effort.

We must do all we can to keep the appropriation at a level as close as possible to our budget request.

WSG

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret; Eyes Only.

2 On March 13, 1967, President Johnson delivered a special message to the Congress on the upcoming Latin American Summit Meeting, April 11–14, in Punta del Este, Uruguay. In this message President Johnson called for an increase of $1.5 billion, or $300 million per year over the next 5 years, to the Alliance for Progress program. For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1967, Book I, p. 323.

3 Not further identified.

67. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 67. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 31, 1967, 1 p.m.

Mr. President:

At Tab A is the paper you requested outlining the effects of a $2.5 billion foreign aid appropriation (compared with a $3.3 billion request).2 Gaud has tried to hold the argument to a minimum; the facts speak quite eloquently for themselves. The paper has been approved by Secretaries Rusk and McNamara.

We don't know precisely how the Congress would get down to $2.5 billion. The memorandum reflects Gaud's best guess of how they would distribute the misery—not how he would like to see it distributed. The major effects of an $800 million cut, each of which is discussed briefly in the memorandum, are as follows: 1. Even if Latin America does better than the rest—which is likely—we could not provide the $100 million increase you discussed at Punta del Este.

2. Even a small cut in Supporting Assistance would rule out any increase in AID programs in Vietnam.

3. The bulk of the cut would have to come in Development Loans. (We would estimate a 44% cut in our D.L. request.) This would mean: —a 40% cutback in India. Much of this would come out of program loans for fertilizer. At a time when new IDA money is not in sight and the Europeans are in a stingy mood, the cut in our contribution could well shake the whole consortium framework.

—a 30% cut in Pakistan.

—a 40% cut in planned aid to Turkey, probably forcing a delay in Turkey's “graduation” from AID loans, now scheduled for 1973.

—a 30% cut in loans for Korea.

—a cutback of over 50% in loans to Africa, reinforcing charges that the Korry Report was a smokescreen for American withdrawal.

—no more than $20 million for Indonesia.

4. Military Assistance would also be sharply cut back—probably on the order of 35% of our request. This would end credit sales altogether and require cuts of up to 30% in such countries as Greece, Turkey, Taiwan, and Iran.

5. Technical Assistance would probably be cut about 20%, eliminating the planned expansion of programs in health, agriculture, education and family planning.

These estimates reflect a careful judgment as to what we would have to do to live with cuts of this size. I think your priorities have been faithfully observed. The simple fact is a $2.5 billion appropriation would, for the first time in AID history, make it literally impossible for us to move forward with planned programs in our major client countries. In other years, greater concentration and windfalls created by world events (e.g., the Indo-Pak war) have allowed us to squeeze out enough for the critical programs even though appropriations had been cut. This year is different.

I don't mean to say the world would end if we got $2.5 billion. As realists, Gaud and the rest of us are aware that a cut of $800 million is not unlikely. If the axe falls, we will push on as best we can. But it is certainly worth every effort we can manage to minimize the cut.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, vol. IV [2], Box 2. Confidential. A handwritten “L” appears on the source text. A handwritten note indicates the memorandum was received at 4 p.m.

2  Document 66.

68. Summary Notes of the 576th Meeting of the National Security Council 68. Summary Notes of the 576th Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, October 11, 1967, 12:10–12:40 p.m.

U.S. Food Aid

The President: The PL-480 program was initiated as a surplus food program in an attempt to raise the price paid U.S. farmers for their products, principally wheat. It has become an AID problem because we must now substitute bushels of wheat for those dollars which the Congress is not giving us to use in assisting foreign countries economically.

AID Director Gaud: The PL-480 program has gone through three stages. The first stage involved disposal of surplus commodities. Our agreements provided for very easy terms. In the second stage, we made our conditions tougher. In the third stage during which surpluses became shortages, we were unable to do what we wanted to. The present stage involves the usage of the surpluses we have while retaining specific self-help actions we require of countries receiving assistance.

There are four identifiable issues: 1. Do we insist on specific clauses covering marketing requirements or should we be flexible on this point, deciding on a case-by-case basis? It is recommended that we stretch the marketing requirements and keep the clauses covering this issue flexible.

2. Without jeopardizing our long-term objectives, we must decide whether we can increase food aid to fill the gap left because of the reduced AID funds appropriated by Congress. Specific countries involved are Ceylon, Colombia, and Chile.

3. Should we use food aid to build up buffer stocks in the recipient countries?

4. Should we soften the terms and the amount of downpayment now being required in existing agreements? Two countries particularly involved are Brazil and Colombia.

The President: Why doesn't Brazil want our wheat?

AID Director Gaud and Secretary Freeman: Our terms are too high in their opinion. They believe our wheat will cost them too much.

Secretary Freeman: The wheat situation in the U.S. has turned around. Availabilities may well be down if current crop estimates are correct. Food agreements have been tightened up with a view to forcing recipient countries to carry out self-help measures. Our wheat exports dropped because the worldwide harvest is good. The wheat market overreacted. We now have checked the downward price trend. The bushel price may be $1.50. Our policy should be to move out PL–480 wheat rather than to force commercial wheat sales.

The present estimate is that we will have to move 400 million bushels to get a domestic price of $1.40 to $1.50 a bushel. Current sales are estimated at 300 million bushels. The only place to sell additional quantities is in India.

The President: If India goes out in the open market to buy wheat, it should buy from us.

Secretary Fowler: The question boils down to the Indian problem. Given the domestic supply situation, if we push wheat sales, we face the prospect of eroding the self-help provisions in our agreements and affecting the commercial market. Among the options listed in the Freeman-Gaud paper (copy attached),2 an option not listed would provide that the condition of our sale would depend upon agreement of India to purchase 500,000 tons of U.S. wheat. We would insist on other countries matching what we did. In general, we should insist that food aid be included in the total aid picture insofar as matching is concerned. Our present domestic supply problem should be handled in such a way as not to weaken the matching principle in future years.

Walt Rostow: We have a chance to break down zonal restrictions involving the movement of food in India. To do so would be a real plus and is worth a try. When the Indian Consortium is negotiated in November, we should try to get our food aid counted as part of our contribution.

Secretary Rusk: We should ask the Senior Inter-Departmental Group to look at our various food and AID policies.

The President: Recommendations should be sent to me. If food recipient countries must buy wheat in addition to the amounts they are receiving from donors, they should buy from the United States.

Bromley Smith

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security Council Meetings File, National Security Council Meetings, Vol. 4 Tab 58, 10/11/67, Discussion of U.S. Food Aid. Confidential; Sensitive; For the President Only. A list of attendees at the meeting was attached to the source text; they were: McNamara, Rusk, Anthony Solomon, Helms, JCS Acting Chairman General McConnell, Fowler, Freeman, OEP Director Daniel, Schultze, Gaud, Rostow, George Christian, Bromley Smith, DeVier Pierson, and Edward Hamilton.

2 Not found.

69. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 69. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 20, 1967, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Talking Points for your meeting with Messrs. Perkins, Black and Rockefeller—12:15 PM today2

This is a delegation from Jim Perkins' General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs (membership at Tab A).3 They will give you a memorandum proposing that the Perkins Committee do a complete restudy of foreign aid—problems, programs and presentations—with a report to you after next year's election. If you want them to do the study, they will ask you to issue a press statement appointing them to this task, and they will ask then to direct the Bureau of the Budget to find $500,000 or so to finance the study operation.

You know my views on this proposal. I think this group is first-rate on all counts, professional and political. They would do at least as thorough a review as any blue-ribbon panel you could name and they are probably the only bipartisan group you are going to find which will be willing to look constructively at the aid program in an election year. Thus, I think it would be very useful for them to do the study.

But there is another side of the question. If you select them publicly as a chosen instrument to do your thinking on foreign aid, it could (1) cut down your flexibility on this issue during the campaign, (2) make the 1968 Aid Program a lame duck and a target for cuts even deeper than this year's, and (3) get you into a public rather than a private argument with the Committee in January 1969 if you decide not to buy the recommendations. I am told that, with the Commission on Civil Disorders sopping up most of the money around town, the Budget Bureau would also have a problem dunning agencies for contributions to an independent budget for the study group.

Therefore, Joe Califano and I recommend you take the following line with the Perkins group: 1. You have enormous respect for the group and you want very much to have their views on foreign aid.

2. You hope that the Committee will proceed with the study immediately, and that it will be the most comprehensive job they can manage. The President will be an enthusiastic customer for their product, though of course he cannot guarantee he will accept the recommendations therein.

3. However, the public announcement aspect of the problem pre-sents real problems. It might well hurt the AID appropriation bill in the Senate, it might be used as an excuse to slash the aid appropriation even more deeply next year, and it would damage morale and operating efficiently in AID during the fourteen months between now and January 1969. (These gentlemen know how ICA and DLF suffered during the reorganization task force operation in 1961.)

4. There is a similar problem with setting up and announcing a separate budget for the study group in terms of both of the requirements (Commission on Riots) and the atmosphere on the Hill.

5. Moreover, the Perkins Committee is already established to do jobs precisely of this kind. It has a public mandate from the President. The beauty of it is that, unlike some other advisory committees, it can take on this big and difficult job without forcing the President to a public announcement which inevitably discredits the present program.

6. Therefore, you suggest that the Committee: —Go ahead with the study. (You might promise to direct Gaud and Katzenbach to beg, borrow and steal the people and the administrative money necessary to run it. This should be workable for them.)

—Do so on a quiet, business-as-usual basis.

7. This low-key procedure does not represent any lack of Presidential interest in this enterprise. The Committee has the President's absolute assurance that he will support the study while in progress and give a full and sympathetic hearing to the recommendations which emerge.

8. You know that this is not a decision the delegation can make on the spot—they will have to check with their cohorts. You hope they will let you know their decision.

W.W. Rostow 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee] [2 of 3], Box 17. Confidential. Drafted by Edward K. Hamilton.

2 President Johnson met with Perkins, Black, and Rockefeller from 12:17 to 1:02 p.m. in the Oval Office. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary) No formal record of this meeting has been found.

3 Not found. For a list of the Committee members, see Document 32.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

70. Report of the Task Force on Foreign Aid 70. Report of the Task Force on Foreign Aid1

Washington, undated.

The Foreign Aid Program faces two main problems: —to provide sufficient resources to meet minimum foreign policy objectives in priority countries;

—to present the AID program to Congress in such a way as to command adequate support.

We would all like to avoid a major foreign aid fight next year. We would like to approach the Congress for as small a budget request as possible and with as few legislative changes as possible.

We have, therefore, investigated all feasible substitutions … Export-Import Bank, P.L. 480, debt rescheduling … that might allow us to get by in FY 1969 without an increase in AID appropriations.

We find, however, that no package of substitutable resources will do the job without AID funds on the order of $2.6 billion—approximately as much as we requested by FY 1968, but substantially more than will be appropriated this year.

We need the larger program in FY 1969 in large part because the Congress has cut so sharply for two years in a row. There is no slack left; key countries have run their reserves down to dangerously low levels; and we shall be scrounging in this fiscal year to put together a package in major countries that will enable us to hold the policy gains we have made.

It will not be easy to get more from the Congress next year. But we believe it is important to try. We should, and we will, expand our efforts to tell the AID story to Congress, how AID works and what it is achieving in major countries. We will aim at Congressmen who are key to enactment, at new members, and at others likely to be receptive. Our efforts will include as many Congressional trips to selected countries as can be arranged, consultations on developments in major countries, and selected briefings by senior officials and Cabinet members. With this effort, we hope to get the support we need.

Our principal conclusions are: 1. Major U.S. foreign policy interests would be seriously threatened if the AID appropriation is not significantly higher for FY 1969 than FY 1968. We will need $2.6 billion to maintain our programs in Vietnam, Thailand, Laos and Korea; to be responsive to the Latin Americans in our pledge made at Punte del Este; and to continue our share in the major multilateral development efforts going on in India, Pakistan, Turkey and Indonesia.

2. India is the country that is hardest hit by an aid cut. It will require special efforts this year, and substantial additional funds next year, to put together a package for India—including a large P.L. 480 program to build buffer stocks, multilateral debt rescheduling, resumed IDA financing and increased aid from other donors—that will enable India to move ahead. These are the critical years. The ability of India to hold together as a viable political entity is at stake, with implications for the stability of all of Asia.

3. A successful and timely replenishment of IDA is critical to our aid program around the world, and crucial in South Asia. A substantial increase in IDA resources must be promptly negotiated with other donors and passed by Congress in the next few months.

4. For the last several years, the Export-Import Bank has been taking more money out of the developing countries than it has been lending to them for development. It is important to reverse this trend. In order to keep the AID budget request at $2.6 billion, the Export-Import Bank will have to provide more funds next year to key countries that meet the Bank's lending criteria, such as Korea, Turkey, Pakistan and Brazil.

5. We must do our part in multilateral debt reschedulings for Indonesia, India, Turkey, and Ghana. These countries are paying off excessively high amortization and interest on past loans. Relief from part of this burden is absolutely essential.

6. P.L. 480 will be used as an AID substitute wherever possible, but there are only few and limited possibilities to offset AID requirements.

7. We should request limited authority—on an experimental basis—to provide a U.S. guarantee on public and private borrowing in the U.S. capital market for countries and projects approved by AID.2 If successful, this technique could be used in future years on a more substantial scale as an alternative to AID funds for selected countries.

8. To meet Congressional concern about excessive military expenditures by LDCs, military credit sales should be separated from the Foreign Assistance Act; and in the presentation of the FAA, the Administration should make clear its intent to enforce the policy expressed in the Symington amendment.3

9. We considered the advisability of shifting all or most of the Military Assistance Program out of the Foreign Assistance Act. This matter has been discussed with Chairman Morgan who will consult Committee members early in January. Given disagreement within the Task Force and the uncertainty about the Committee's reaction, we will forward our recommendation as soon as possible in January.

The AID program has been quite successful in recent years. The development process has been greatly strengthened in almost all the countries to which we have given substantial support. Other donor countries are now contributing as much of their national product to this effort as we are, and a growing proportion of this total is being channeled through international institutions. The impact of our aid programs on the U.S. balance of payments is now minimal. To falter now would jeopardize the progress we have already made.

AID Requirements

The Task Force and the Senior Interdepartmental Group have reviewed in general terms the AID Budget Proposal for 1969, which analyzes the needs for external capital and the probable effects of reducing proposed U.S. aid levels. Because of the priority that must be given to Vietnam-related programs, a high proportion of any reduction would have to be absorbed by the major development loan programs in which the remaining funds are concentrated. The most serious effects would be of two sorts: —to hamper seriously the effective development efforts of countries such as Korea, Pakistan, Turkey, Chile and Colombia, where our aid has had a catalytic effect in eliciting and supporting self-help policies.

—to jeopardize political stability as well as economic recovery in India and Indonesia, which are critical to our over-all foreign policy in Asia.

Further reducing aid to the effective users would not only jeopard-ize the large investments that we have already made in the development of those countries but it would seriously weaken our over-all posture toward the underdeveloped world. A cornerstone of this policy, reiterated with increasing force in every Presidential aid message of the past six years, is our willingness to help countries that are taking effective steps to help themselves. The credibility of that policy cannot be maintained at aid levels significantly below those recommended in this report.

The Task Force has given particular attention to the aid requirements of India and Pakistan and to the broader effects on South and East Asia of not meeting them. It is clear that the $300 million increase since 1965 in Supporting Assistance for Vietnam and related programs has been matched by a corresponding reduction in development lending, which falls very largely on South Asia. Until this year this reduction has been partially justified—and its effects masked—by the Indo-Pakistan war of 1965 and the droughts of 1965–66. The Indian economy and political structure have been greatly weakened in this process with adverse effects on national unity.

The minimum needs of India for external capital from the IBRD consortium in calendar 1968 and 1969 and a proposed negotiating strategy are summarized in Tab A.4 It is urgent to conclude the IDA negotiations early in the year and to schedule debt relief for both 1968 and 1969 to meet minimum requirements for current imports and to forestall a weakening in development policies. AID development lending of about $420 million will be needed for 1969 in addition to maximum contributions from IDA and other donors to support an acceptable rate of economic recovery. In political terms, this may well be the last good opportunity for the West to salvage sensible development policies and relieve the pressures undermining the Indian political system. A failure in India would seriously call into question the massive investment that we have made in Vietnam.

For Pakistan, it will require $180 million of development lending to provide the U.S. share of the IBRD consortium and maintain the promising development effort that is under way. Obligations of these amounts for India and Pakistan are needed to reverse the downward trend of assistance to the subcontinent and reap the benefits of our large investments in South Asia.

In Latin America the importance of economic assistance to our over-all relations is clearly established in the context of the Alliance for Progress and is supported by the Congress. Equally clearly, we must continue to rely on European donors to bear the main burden of assistance to Africa, where we cannot do much more than maintain on-going high priority programs during the present period of acute budget stringency.

The main questions of both economic and military aid strategy arise along the rim of the Communist world. Here we must not allow our concern with the immediate threat to 50 million people in Vietnam, Laos and Thailand to divert so much of our resources from the 800 millions in Korea, the Philippines, Indonesia, India, Pakistan and Turkey that their continued security and development are seriously hampered. We should be prepared to support effective self-help efforts in these key countries more adequately than we can at present whenever military expenditures in Vietnam decline. We must reenforce the effort to get increased contributions for a number of these countries from other donors.

Increased Use of Non-AID Resources

Given the pressures on the U.S. budget, it is necessary to reexamine sources of financing economic development that have a lower budget cost per dollar of resources transferred, even though these alternatives may be less desirable than AID funds in other respects. Alternative ways of transferring resources should be judged on the basis of their effects on the U.S. budget and balance of payments, their impact on Congress, their cost to the recipient country over time, their effectiveness in promoting development, and their effect on other U.S. programs.

Although it sees no major substitutes for appropriated aid, the Task Force considers increased Export-Import Bank lending, debt rescheduling, P.L. 480, and a U.S. Government guarantee of LDC private and public borrowing in the U.S. capital market5 to be the most promising sources of modest aid increments. Our conclusions on these four sources are given below. We have also taken into account the probable IDA replenishment and the amounts likely to be available from bilateral programs of other DAC members and the multilateral institutions. Several other possibilities have been rejected for the next fiscal year, including interest subsidies on LDC borrowings in the U.S. market and further tax incentives to U.S. private investment.

Debt Rescheduling. Underdeveloped countries now pay $2.8 billion per year in amortization of past debt and $1.2 billion in interest. Debt service therefore takes nearly 30 percent of gross capital flows to them. Payments to the U.S. account for nearly $700 million of the total (see Tab B).6

Debt rescheduling is the equivalent of untied aid when it permits the debtor to use the amount of rescheduled debt for other purposes. From the creditor viewpoint, it can be made subject to self-help conditions and scheduled for one or several years in advance.

Although debt rollovers have usually been regarded as a sign of bad financial management, in a number of cases they result from the past unwillingness of donors to provide loans on appropriate terms for the financing of development.

There are two serious limitations to the regular use of debt resched-uling as a supplement to appropriated aid: —indiscriminate use would vitiate efforts to obtain adequate self-help;

—rescheduling that looks like back-door aid would invite Congress to impose controls on it or reduce aid appropriations.

Despite these limitations, multilateral debt rescheduling offers possibilities for selective use in situations where it will not appear as a reward for bad financial management. The probable recipients in the next two years are Indonesia, India, Ghana and Turkey, where changes of governmental policies and favorable judgments as to current performance make it possible to avoid setting an undesirable precedent. Rescheduling possibilities for these four countries amount to perhaps half of the current annual debt service of $625 million. The U.S. would contribute less to a proportionate rescheduling because its past loans have been on more favorable terms. Although the Export-Import Bank and IBRD may not formally reschedule their debt, they can make new loans at least equivalent to the amortization due them.

We recommend that the U.S. continue to encourage multilateral debt rescheduling in selected countries where the result will be to increase the net flow of assistance.

P.L. 480. Although efforts are being made to maximize the use of P.L. 480 commodities in substitution for appropriated aid, the special group set up to study this problem has concluded that the additional prospects for 1969 are quite limited. The main obstacles to expanding P.L. 480 above the levels currently anticipated in the AID Budget Proposals are: —the loss of commercial sales by the U.S. and other suppliers;

—the need to maintain food prices at levels that will provide adequate incentives to local producers.

The principal opportunity for increased use of P.L. 480 lies in the benefits to be gained from building buffer stocks—especially in India and Pakistan—to adequate levels. This measure has already been recommended and incorporated into the basis for AID programming in the countries concerned. It will make possible a major breakthrough in South Asian agricultural policy, but it will not affect the need of these countries for foreign exchange.

Export-Import Bank. The role of the Export-Import Bank in financing underdeveloped countries has changed dramatically in the past five years. Until 1961 the bulk of the Bank's long-term loans went to less developed countries and it was the main source of U.S. aid to Latin America. Since then the share of LDCs in Export-Import Bank lending has dropped to one-third and their debt service now exceeds new lending. As a consequence the Alliance for Progress has not caused an increased flow of U.S. capital to Latin America, since AID lending has merely replaced previous Export-Import Bank lending. On balance, the Bank is becoming a net importer of capital from the developing countries instead of contributing to the financing of development. (See Tab D)7

The causes of this shift lie in the relative emphasis that the Bank gives to its two objectives: (1) promoting U.S. exports and (2) supporting development. There are several hundred million dollars per year of projects in AID priority countries that would be eligible for Export-Import Bank financing except for the unwillingness of the Bank to increase its total portfolio in the countries concerned. The Bank's export promotion objective would also be served by these loans, since they can be fully tied to U.S. procurement. The Bank has currently $1.3 billion in uncommitted lending authority, which is expected to be increased by Congress by $4.5 billion when the Bank legislation is re-enacted (probably early next year).

Since the Export-Import Bank is an autonomous agency responsible to the President and Congress and since it is being urged to extend its operations in other directions, the increased contribution that it should make to development lending must be weighed in this context. From an AID standpoint, highest priority should go to increased lending in its priority countries in 1968, since Development Loans and Alliance Loans have been sharply cut. The principal countries that should meet both AID and Bank criteria for increased lending are Korea, Peru, Turkey, Pakistan, Colombia and Brazil. Of these the current Bank “exposure” is high only in Brazil.

Because of the need to reconcile priority aid needs with other Bank objectives, we propose that the agencies concerned explore with the Export-Import Bank how it might achieve increased lending to qualified developing countries of greatest foreign policy interest. It is only by a reversal of recent trends that the U.S. can meet its legitimate share of aid requirements for 1968 and fulfill the President's commitments to the Alliance for Progress.

United States Government Guarantee of LDC Bonds.8 We propose that Congress authorize U.S. Government guarantees of long-term borrowings in the U.S. private capital market by public and private bodies in developing countries that have reasonable prospects of repayment. Such borrowings would be for economic development purposes approved by AID and the funds tied to U.S. exports. To carry out this proposal, Title III of the FAA would be amended to authorize guarantees on loans to credit-worthy LDC governments as well as private entities for approved development purposes.

The ceiling for such guarantees would be modest, perhaps $30–$50 million in FY 1969. The proposal would be acknowledged to be pilot and experimental. (Further details of the proposal are given in Tab E.)9

The purpose of the proposal is to begin the transition to the use of private, rather than of public, U.S. funds for countries able to begin that transition because of their favorable development prospects and debt servicing capacity. A few LDCs—notably Mexico and Israel—are able to borrow now in the U.S. private market without a U.S. Government guarantee. There are several other countries that are now quite good risks—e.g., Korea, Thailand, Chile, Taiwan, some Central American countries—which have not entered the U.S. capital markets. A U.S. Government guarantee of long-term borrowings should facilitate the entry. As the relationship proved mutually rewarding, the U.S. Government guarantee might become redundant and could be withdrawn.

The principal merits of the proposal are (1) Such borrowing wouldnot be a charge on the U.S. Government budget. The budget would be affected only if the borrower(s) defaulted. (2) We may want to move in the direction of using private rather than public U.S. funds in a much more substantial way in FY 1970 and beyond—with an interest rate subsidy where needed. The FY 1969 proposal would be presented as a trial run. It would introduce Congress to the idea, as well as LDCs to Wall Street. (3) It is a new initiative, modest but sensible and forward-looking.

AID would supervise operation of the program. Proceeds could be used either for a specific project, e.g., municipal waterworks, or for more general development purposes, e.g., raw materials and spare parts to promote industrial development. These proceeds could be tied to U.S. exports in the same way as extended risk projects are now tied or, where the proceeds are for general development imports, in virtually the same way as program loans are now tied. Specified self-help measures could be required—where this was indicated—as a condition for receiving U.S. Government guarantees.

The guarantee would be “Full Faith and Credit", like the guarantees now given for specific and extended risk.

Although in principle guaranteed borrowing could replace AID funds in certain cases—e.g., Chile, Korea, Peru—the proposal should be put forward as a supplement to, rather than a substitute for, the FY 1969 Development Loan request. The reason is that the program, if approved, would take time to get underway and we cannot be certain that anticipated needs would be met by this route.

Legislative Changes

It was agreed that 1968 will be a poor year to propose major legislative changes: they will be either brushed aside or lead to delay and deadlock in an election year session. The main objective should be to get the FAA in and out of Congress with a minimum of controversy, reserving major restructuring for the first year of the new Presidential term.

The changes considered by the Task Force are discussed in Tab G.10

Military Credit Sales.

It was agreed that divorcing the contentious military credit sales program from the aid bill is essential to secure quick passage of the FAA. Separating out military sales would not only speed action on the FAA; it would also increase support for the AID bill among opponents of arms expenditures by LDCs without weakening support for aid among defense-oriented members of the House. The Task Force recommends, therefore, that a Military Sales bill covering cash and credit sales of military items be presented to the Congress as a separate piece of legislation.

The Task Force was divided on the question whether credit for military sales should be financed by the Defense Department from funds appropriated in full for this purpose (direct credit sales) or by the Export-Import Bank and other sources on the basis of Defense Department guarantees.

Most Task Force members favored full appropriation for the following reasons. The guarantee program is highly controversial. It has already prejudiced the Export-Import Bank's position on the Hill and might further delay passage of the Export-Import Bank bill which will probably be carried over to the next session. Moreover, to secure guarantee authority would probably require separate hearings before several Congressional Committees, and the delay in securing authorization might well delay the foreign assistance appropriation. This would be the case if, as is likely, jurisdiction over appropriations for military sales were assigned to the Passman Subcommittee and lumped by him with the AID appropriation. Finally, the guarantee program would increase, not decrease, the new obligational authority in the President's budget to the extent that the Export-Import Bank is involved.

Support for the guarantee route rests on the fact that the appropriations required thereby would be only a fraction of the authorized program, and, if lumped with the foreign assistance appropriation, would swell that appropriation by a correspondingly lesser amount. Moreover, Chairman Morgan assumes that the separate military sales bill under consideration would involve guaranty authority.

Military Assistance Program.

The Task Force considered the advisability of shifting all or most of the Military Assistance Program out of the Foreign Assistance Act. The matter has been discussed with Chairman Morgan who will check with Committee members early in January. Given the uncertainty about the Committee's reaction and the divergent views of Task Force members on the restructuring of MAP, this matter cannot be resolved until January. A working group of State, Defense, AID, and the Bureau of the Budget is considering the alternatives discussed on pages 5 and 6 of Tab G.

P.L. 480.

The Food for Freedom program—P.L. 480—expires on December 31, 1968. To minimize controversy, we should seek a simple extension of the expiry date. However, in order to resume P.L. 480 sales to Yugoslavia, we should consider at the appropriate time the necessary modification of those provisions of the Act excluding countries trading with Cuba.

Regional Banks.

We regard it important to get authorization to contribute $200 million over four years and, to the extent that other donors pledge their share, first year appropriation of no more than $50 million for the Special Funds of the Asian Development Bank. The authorizing bill is now before the Congress.

Should the President of the African Development Bank, Mamoun Beheiry, meet our conditions in good time (that is, provide information on how the special fund of the African Development Bank would be administered and used, and a schedule of expected contributions from other donors), we should be prepared to consider seeking authorization to contribute up to $20 million a year for a 3-year period to the special fund of the African Bank. The odds are high that he will not do so. We would not, in any case, ask for an appropriation.

The Task Force considered and rejected the following proposals: (1) Transfer of AID/CORDS Vietnam programs to DOD . The advantages of reducing the AID request by $100 million and relieving AID of some criticism by opponents of the Vietnam war seem more than offset by the operational difficulties of the change and the likelihood of charges of increased “militarization” of civil programs.

(2) Creation of a separate Vietnam Civilian Aid Agency: This would reduce the AID budget by about $500 million and relieve AID of criticism on Vietnam “failures". However, there are substantial disadvantages, including costly administrative duplication of AID, reduced funding flexibility, lessened support for AID bill by hawks, and little likelihood of increased appropriations for remaining AID programs.

(3) Revising the Structure of AID Appropriations: Alternatives considered included authorization and appropriations by region; or breakdown of development loan request into functional sub-categories to show uses—such as fertilizer—which command popular support. Both plans have considerable cost in terms of administrative flexibility and neither seemed to offer clear gains in Congressional support.

Presentation

The Task Force recommends against gathering together in one message to the Congress the AID request, P.L. 480 renewal, and IDA replenishment. Lumping the three programs would encourage the view that the programs are substitutable for each other rather than supplementary and invite deeper cuts than usual because the total of the three programs would appear large. Some reference would, of course, be made in the AID message to other relevant programs.

Regional Focus.

The Task Force considered the merits of giving India a central place in the AID presentation to point up the high political costs of a reduction in aid. However, given the negative attitude of the Congress toward India, and the ever present possibility that, during the course of the AID presentation, the Indian Government might embarrass the U.S. by actions or statements offensive to U.S. opinion, the Task Force concluded it would be best to follow the pattern of previous presentations, highlighting the India story in the regional context, but with no greater stress on South Asia than on other key country programs.

Military Expenditures.

The Task Force believes the presentation must take into account the general concern of the Congress about excessive military expenditures by AID recipients. A clear indication should be given of new and more stringent review procedures to deal with this issue, while at the same time, decisions should not be prejudged by the establishment of arbitrary criteria.

Thus, it might be stated that the President: (1) Shares the general concern of the Congress about excessive military expenditures by AID recipients, as reflected in the Symington Amendment (Sec. 620(s)).

(2) In that connection, and to enforce that part of the law, has asked the Secretary of State to develop procedures, consulting in the Senior Interdepartmental Group and through the Interdepartmental Regional Groups as appropriate, for the continuing review of military expenditures by AID recipients.

(3) Has directed that periodic reports be made to him, with important cases being submitted to him for review.

At Tab F is a draft statement along which lines testimony could be developed for use in Congressional hearings on the bill.

Private Investment.

The presentation should emphasize the critical role of private effort, indigenous and U.S., in the development process, and the desirability of strengthening the capacity of AID's new Private Investment Center to encourage and assist U.S. private investment in the LDCs. (See Tab on suggested themes for AID presentation.)11

Other.

The presentation should show that the AID program constitutes a minimal drain on the balance of payments and that effective efforts are being made to achieve balance of payments additionality. Note should also be made of the importance of reenforced efforts to achieve increased contributions from others.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Central File, FT 600/Task Force on Foreign Aid, Box 36. Confidential. The report was transmitted to Joseph Califano by Nicholas Katzenbach under cover of a December 11 memorandum that noted that the report, which represented the consensus of the members of the Task Force, did not cover the program for military assistance. The agencies represented on the Task Force were the Departments of State, Treasury, Defense, Agriculture, Health, Education and Welfare; Agency for International Development; Council of Economic Advisers; Bureau of the Budget; and the White House.

2 Treasury opposes this proposal “unless and until a study can show the benefits outweigh the very considerable risks.” [Footnote in the source text.]

3 Debate over arms sales was a major issue during Congressional consideration of the foreign aid authorization bill, P.L. 90–137, approved on November 14, 1967 (81 Stat. 445), which involved in part the adoption of an amendment sponsored by Stuart Symington (D.-Missouri) requiring the President to terminate all foreign assistance to any nation that diverted such assistance to military expenditures or diverted their own resources to “unnecessary” military spending “to a degree which materially interfered” with their own development.

4 Tab A, “Working Group Report on Aid to India.” None of the tabs is printed.

5 See Treasury comments in footnote on page 3. [Footnote in the source text; reference is to footnote 2 above.]

6 Tab B, “Debt Rescheduling as an AID Presentation.”

7 Tab D, “Export-Import Bank.”

8 Treasury feels that the statement in this section does not reflect the important risks on both policy and technical grounds. [Footnote in the source text.]

9 Tab E, “Guarantee of Bonds.”

10 Tab G, “Legislative Changes Considered.”

11 Tab C, “Themes for AID Presentation.”

71. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 71. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Warnke) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, December 15, 1967.

SUBJECT

Restructuring of the Military Assistance Program

1. Following your conversation with Chairman Morgan of the House Foreign Affairs Committee concerning the restructuring of MAP from the Foreign Assistance Appropriation into the DOD budget,2 we have examined possible approaches for implementation and propose the following concept.

2. Basic Concept A. Transfer to DOD budget the Forward Defense countries (China, Korea, Greece, Turkey, Iran); Base Rights countries (Ethiopia, Spain, Portugal); Philippines; International Military Headquarters; all training; MAAG support and administrative costs.

B. Transfer to State/AID the material programs for the remaining MAP recipients (Latin America, Africa, Middle East and Asian internal security, civic action, and political influence programs).

3. Budgetary Approach

The general approach that could be followed would be to integrate total grant aid MAP requirements into the established budget and appropriation accounts of the Military Departments and other DOD components. Shift the responsibility for Congressional presentation and MAP budgeting to the respective departments and DOD components with support from ASD (ISA).

4. This would completely integrate MAP and its related appropriations within the budgets and appropriation accounts of the Military Departments and other DOD components. Military Departments, with the assistance of ASD (ISA), would incorporate MAP requirements into their current computations to determine budgetary requirements for appropriation purposes for the fiscal year and defend the total package before the Armed Services Committees of Congress. DOD would not seek authorization or appropriations from the Foreign Affairs/Relations Committees. It is to be expected that DOD would be required to inform these committees of intended value of aid to be delivered to a given country in a current or projected fiscal year. DOD control would be effected by ISA providing the Military Departments with annual MAP requirements, supervision of deliveries and major reprogramming activities.

5. Authorization Alternatives A. The necessary continuing grant aid authorizing legislation could be drafted in one of two ways: (1) As a new separate self-contained chapter of Title 10 of the United States code (the existing basic authorities for DOD military functions), or

(2) As new added sections to several existing chapters of Title 10, thus splitting up the various MAP authorities.

Note: It is assumed that Laos, Thailand and Vietnam would continue to be treated under existing authorizing legislation.

B. Procedurely, each of these two alternatives could be proposed to Congress for enactment as continuing law either in the form of: (1) A one-time separate bill, or

(2) A one-time separate title of the FY 1969 Section 412(B) authorization.

6. Whichever approach is taken to secure the substantive continuing authorizing legislation, it may be anticipated that the Armed Serv-ices Committees will want to pass annually on the amount of NOA to be appropriated. The Assistant General Counsel (International Affairs) recommends that the continuing grant aid authorization be added as new sections to the several existing chapters of Title 10. Procedurely, this would be proposed to Congress as a one-time separate title of the FY 1969 Section 412(B) authorization. This course is favored because it would assure priority treatment of MAP authorizing legislation.

7. From a budgetary and managerial point of view, the OSD/Comptroller urges that if the MAP program is to be transferred, it be done in toto to the DOD budget with no part being transferred to AID.

8. The Joint Chiefs of Staff oppose splitting the MAP program between DOD and AID and including MAP programs in the Service budgets. They favor transfer of MAP as a single line item to the DOD budget.

9. Decision3 A. Integrate MAP program into appropriate accounts of Service budgets in accordance with the basic concept, paragraph 2.A.

B. Draft the authorizing legislation as new added sections of several existing chapters of Title 10.

15 December 1967

Note: The above subject discussed this date between Mr. McNamara and Mr. Warnke. Secretary McNamara approved as indicated.4

LCH
Vice Admiral, USN Director of Military Assistance

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 71 A 4546, 091. 3 MAP. Confidential.

2 This conversation has not been further identified, but a copy of the talking points, dated December 7, prepared for McNamara's meeting with Chairman Morgan is ibid.

3 The handwritten notation “OK per RSM” appears on the approve lines following paragraphs A and B.

4 This note from Heinz seems to indicate that Warnke initialed the approve lines for McNamara after the two discussed the memorandum.

72. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 72. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, January 18, 1968, p.m.

SUBJECT

Taking MAP out of the Foreign Aid BILL

As you know, McNamara has long favored separating MAP legislation from economic aid. He has a long list of reasons, ranging from the severe and repeated cuts in MAP appropriation requests to DOD annoyance that State/AID now has a final (albeit little used) say on MAP policy and operations. He has made several attempts in past years to get the Congress to go along with a split, but he has always been undone by Doc Morgan who (1) hasn't wanted to give up jurisdiction over MAP to the Armed Services Committee and (2) has shared the old Rayburn position that military aid in the same bill is what gets economic aid through the House.

As MAP has declined and become more concentrated in countries less central to AID concerns, the merits of McNamara's case have become more and more accepted. Only the Budget Bureau now debates the substance. Katzenbach and Gaud would go along with the separation if it made tactical sense on the Hill.

This year's DOD proposal is more violent than usual. It proposes not only that military and economic aid be separated, but that military aid be abolished as a separate appropriation and buried in the service requests in the Defense budget. MAP funds would be dispersed among nine separate appropriations, except those for credit sales—which would be provided for in a new bill—and those for grant aid to Latin America and Africa not related to base rights ($26 million), which would stay in the Foreign Aid BILL.

Warnke made this proposal in the Katzenbach Task Force.2 Katzenbach and Gaud did not differ on the merits, but suggested that it is a bad year to pick a fight with Morgan on this old chestnut. It was agreed that Warnke and Gaud would talk to Morgan to test the water.

McNamara showed up for the meeting with Morgan. Morgan did not give a direct answer, but agreed to give McNamara an informal hearing before the full Committee. (He said he was less hostile to the proposal than in previous years, but that not everybody on the Committee would agree.) McNamara said he would think about this procedure. Katzenbach's Task Force Report told the President that this issue would be held in abeyance until these consultations were over and that we would then return to the President for a decision. Meanwhile, the budget was locked up on the old basis.

We now hear that the Committee wants McNamara on Tuesday or Thursday of next week. He hasn't yet decided definitely whether he will go. His staff prepared a memorandum to the President proposing that he make a strong Administration pitch for the split. But yesterday, he told his staff that there was no need to go back to the President and instructed them to put together the figures necessary to back up the proposal. They are now doing that.

Charlie Schultze will try today to head off McNamara. He will argue that this would subject us to the charge of scurrying to hide MAP in the face of last session's criticism; that our “low profile” approach to aid would not benefit from a jurisdictional struggle on the Hill; that we have an understanding with Morgan that we will let him know before we make a decision; that the $26 million which would be left to AID would be the most unpopular part of MAP and a real drag on the Foreign Aid Bill; that McNamara specifically promised the Committee last year that he would not make such transfers; and that this action would hurt the chances of passing the new separate credit sales bill. Charlie will suggest McNamara go ahead with his soundings now, but with a view to making the change next session.

I drag you through all this because (1) I think this decision should be made by the President, and (2) I think Schultze's tactical arguments are sound. What we don't need in this year's debate on the aid bill, in the wake of last year's arms sales uproar, is a plausible argument that the Administration is trying to get MAP out from under the scrutiny of the foreign affairs committees. I judge this cost much greater than the principal benefit—a lower foreign aid figure ($2.5 billion rather than $3.1 billion).

I recommend you call McNamara and suggest that this decision needs clearance with the President before an Administration position is announced. (I can't be sure, of course, that he hasn't already checked with the President privately. If so, so be it.)

EH

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret.

2  Document 70.

73. Summary Notes of the 581st Meeting of the National Security Council 73. Summary Notes of the 581st Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, February 7, 1968, noon.

Conte/Long and Symington Amendments—Vietnam

In the absence of the President, Secretary Rusk asked Under Secretary Katzenbach to present the issues confronting the government in providing military aid under the limitations imposed by the Conte/Long and Symington Amendments.2

Under Secretary Katzenbach: State Department officials failed to convince members of Congress of the advantages of a flexible policy in dealing with military aid to poor or underdeveloped countries. The result is a series of amendments requiring the Executive Branch to limit military assistance and economic assistance if recipient countries refuse to hold down their levels of military spending.

The Vice President: We should get people in business and the labor unions to work on the sponsors of the restrictive amendments—i.e., Conte, Symington and Long. The Latin American Council, headed by Mr. Rockefeller, should be enlisted.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: Representative Conte and Senator Long won't listen to our statements concerning the effect of their amendments to the aid bill.

Secretary Rusk: The value of the amendments is as a threat to invoke on them. Once invoked, they are no longer useful.

The Vice President: We should get groups in local areas to put pressure on Congressmen. This is an election year. We should also lay it on the line with the Congressional leadership.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: Peru is the prize case. President Belaunde will fall if he says no to his military leaders' demands for modern jet fighters—Mirages or F–5's.

Secretary Fowler: The Treasury Department has kept a $40,000,000 loan off of the agenda of the Inter-American Bank because if it comes up for action we will have to vote no. We can delay no more than thirty days at which time we will have to fish or cut bait.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: We could send a special envoy to talk to Peruvian President Belaunde. Belaunde could give a little and with this we could then explain to Congress how we intend to proceed.

The President entered the Cabinet Room at 12:25 accompanied by Mr. Clark Clifford. He asked General Wheeler to discuss the military situation in Vietnam following the Tet offensive.

[Here follows discussion of the military situation in Vietnam and the state of negotiations between the U.S. and North Korea over the Pueblo incident.]

The President: At 1:30 P.M. the President turned to consideration of the Conte/Long and Symington amendments. The Vice President and Assistant Secretary Oliver should visit Latin America. Following Senator Gore's trip to Latin America he took a constructive attitude toward Latin American problems. We should send several Senators to Latin America within the next 60 days. Under Secretary Katzenbach should also go.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: Summarized the origin of the Conte/Long and Symington amendments citing the Indian-Pakistan war, the Arab-Israeli problem, and the request for F–5s. The most serious problem arises with Peru and other Latin American countries. If we act to limit the sale of sophisticated weapons to Peru, they are liable to end up with a military dictator. Every other Latin American country will be against us. Serious problems also arise with Jordan and Morocco. Lesser problems arise with Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Nigeria and the Congo.

The President: Why don't you call in the legislators who are the roughest on this problem and talk it out with them.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: We are taking Congress seriously but some of our problems are summarized in the paper you have.

The President: Secretary McNamara and Clark Clifford should work on Symington.

Secretary Fowler: The Peruvian loan must be kept off the agenda of the Inter-American Bank for the present.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: The Symington amendment creates a situation which is liveable but put together with the Conte/Long amendment, we face an impossible problem.

The President: Get the Cabinet officers together with those House and Senate officials most concerned. A list should be made of those who would be most helpful and perhaps Clark Clifford should be added to those meeting with the legislators.

Bromley Smith

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 5, Tab 63, 2/7/68, Conte/Long and Symington Amendments to Foreign Assistance Act, Box 2. Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith. The source text is misdated September 7, 1968. Another account of this meeting was prepared by Tom Johnson. (Ibid., Tom Johnson's Notes of Meetings)

2 Sponsored by Representative Silvio O. Conte (R.-Massachusetts) and Senator Russell B. Long (D.-Louisiana). For text of amendment, see the Foreign Assistance and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of 1968, P.L. 90–249, approved on January 2, 1968. (Title I Military Assistance (81 Stat. 937) and Sec. 119 (81 Stat. 940)) The Symington amendment introduced by Senator Stuart Symington (D.-Missouri) required the President, when furnishing development assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and making sales under the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, to take into account (1) “the percentage of the recipient or purchasing country's budget which is devoted to military purposes, and (2) the degree to which the recipient or purchasing country is using its foreign exchange resources to acquire military equipment.” (The Foreign Assistance Act of 1967, P.L. 90–137, approved on November 14, 1967; 81 Stat. 459)

74. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistants (Califano and Rostow) and the Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Zwick) to President Johnson 74. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistants (Califano and Rostow) and the Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Zwick) to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 16, 1968, 6:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Thinking about Foreign Aid

You will recall that Jim Perkins told Bill Gaud he would be writing you to acknowledge your decision against a general study of foreign aid and to ask you what you would like the Perkins Committee to do next. His letter has now arrived (Tab A). He puts the alternatives quite clearly: the Committee can disband, or it can proceed to study whatever you want it to.

We need to decide (1) how to answer Perkins' letter, and (2) how to do some serious thinking about a 1969 foreign aid package.

We believe that there should be a hard, quiet look at foreign aid in preparation for the campaign and your 1969 legislative program. But we also think it important to keep the Perkins Committee in existence and relatively happy. This combination will require both a reasonably interesting assignment for the Perkins Group and careful camouflage of any quiet general study you authorize.

Reply to Perkins

At Tab B, for your signature, is a reply to Perkins' letter.2 Besides pleasantries, it suggests that the Committee address itself to one or two major questions in the foreign aid area and that Perkins and Gaud work out the precise issues to be chosen.

The real question is what you want to authorize Gaud to offer. Perkins' own preference would be to study the administration of technical assistance. This is a worthy enterprise, but there is a good chance that (a) he won't be able to convince people like Eugene Black and David Rockefeller that it is worth their time; and (b) he would emerge recommending that technical assistance be split off from AID and operated by a new government corporation. What Black and the others would probably most like to study are possibilities for faster movement toward multilateral aid. Here again, there is the risk that the Committee might recommend something radical, e.g., elimination of bilateral lending in favor of a much-expanded IDA.

We have examined alternative topics and we can find none which is likely to satisfy the Committee which does not present some risk. On balance, we would recommend that you authorize Gaud to offer the study of technical assistance that Perkins prefers. Gaud would emphasize that the Committee's deliberations must be absolutely confidential and that their report should go to you and no one else. This offer would also give us the strongest basis on which to argue that you don't want the Committee to disband.

How to Put Together a Real Study

Our review of the possible alternatives suggests that we should set up a very small (4–5 members) task force to study foreign aid, headed by somebody like Mac Bundy. (It might include such people as Francis Bator and Charlie Schultze.) Each member would be absolutely dependable from the standpoint of security.

The group should be assigned to study the full range of foreign aid issues—philosophy, techniques, Congressional tactics, and public relations—with a preliminary report to you by June 1 and a final report by December 1. It would be staffed by a hand-picked group installed in the Budget Bureau under cover of the Bureau's Program Evaluation Staff. If the press noticed, we could say that these people were working on stand-ard program analysis, which is the ongoing job of that staff. The operation would be covered very much in the way the wage-price task force was handled. We think there is an excellent chance we could manage the study without publicity.

The question remains whether we could do this job without the knowledge of the Perkins Committee. We think Buddy—or whoever is Chairman of the study group—might handle this by quietly seeking the advice and counsel of the individuals on the Perkins group who care most and have the most to offer. But this will take a very delicate touch.

I have signed Perkins letter; go ahead and sound out Buddy

I have signed Perkins letter; come back to me with list of names for quiet study group

Califano call me3

Tab A4

Ithaca, New York, January 31, 1968.

Letter From the Chairman of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs (Perkins) to President Johnson

Dear Mr. President:

I have, of course, been informed that you did not wish to proceed with the full-dress critique of our foreign assistance programs. In the circumstances, I am not completely clear as to how your advisory committee can be of help to you.

As an interim measure, I have asked Mr. Tyler Wood of the AID agency to prepare a synopsis of our deliberations to date. This summary will be the basis for our next meeting on Monday, March 4.5 At that time the committee must decide its future course.

We can disband. Or we can await further instructions. Or we can proceed on a limited basis to round out our recommendations calling on private sources of funds where necessary.

If you have any advice to me as the chairman of this committee, I would surely welcome it.

Very respectfully,

James A. Perkins

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee], [2 of 3], Box 17. Confidential.

2 Not found.

3 None of the options is checked.

4 No classification marking.

5 No record of this meeting has been found.

75. Draft Memorandum for President Johnson 75. Draft Memorandum for President Johnson 1

Washington, May 21, 1968.

SUBJECT

Negotiating Package for Foreign Aid

As you know, foreign aid and related bills are in deep trouble on the Hill. There is widespread talk of a one-year “moratorium". Mr. Passman has spoken privately of a $1.7 billion foreign aid appropriation, a cut of $1.2 billion below your request. Amendments have been introduced in the House which would decimate the program at the authorization stage, perhaps driving the appropriations committees to even deeper cuts. The vital IDA replenishment (Bob McNamara's soft-loan window) and regional bank bills are faring no better. Last Wednesday2 we were forced to ask the House Banking and Currency Committee to defer consideration of the IDA bill because a poll showed only 13 (out of 33) votes in favor of our share in the replenishment schedule painfully negotiated with other donors.

It now appears virtually certain that if events are allowed to take their natural course these bills will be left until the last frantic days of this short session. The pressures of time and fiscal concern may then be overwhelming and force deferral of some items and massive cuts in others. The odds will favor deferral of the IDA Bill and a Passman-type slash in the Foreign Aid Bill, both of which would have disastrous effects on our image and policy in the poor countries.

We continue to believe that the requests in the present budget represent the absolute minimum necessary to sound foreign development programs. But it is also clear that major cuts are going to be made. Our best tactic is to try to limit those cuts and influence their distribution among the foreign aid elements. It is terribly important, for example, that the Congress pass the full IDA authorization; a reduced amount would force us to reopen negotiations with the seventeen other donors—delaying the flow of IDA funds to countries that desperately need it to maintain economic momentum.

We are persuaded, therefore, that the President ought to consider trying to strike a bargain on foreign aid—after the tax bill is passed—with the leadership and the chairmen of the relevant committees of the Congress. The Executive Branch would reluctantly accept major cuts on the understanding that there would be an all-out effort to keep them to agreed levels and that they would be applied in accord with agreed priorities. We are not at all sanguine that this approach will work. But we have concluded that, at least in terms of legislation on foreign affairs, there is less risk to a package approach than to inaction. We are all aware, of course, that you have a much broader sweep of legislation to consider.

Below is a package which would commit us to accept a cut of about $1 billion in appropriations from the full complex of aid legislation. We believe that a package offer must be in this range to be credible. Our priorities are clear: (1) to avoid any cuts in your requests for IDA and the Inter-American Bank; (2) to limit the cuts in foreign aid; and (3) to get some authority and money for military credit sales.

There also follows a possible negotiating scenario for dealing with the important people on the Hill. It assumes prior passage of the tax bill, although we may have to think again if the tax bill drags into July. The most immediate problem is whether to ask Chairman Morgan to hold up final mark-up and floor action on the Foreign Aid Authorization Bill pending a package negotiation. Obviously, we would not want to urge him to fight for every dollar in the authorization request and then pull the rug out by agreeing to large appropriation cuts. We will need your guidance on this question soon.

The Bills

We have the following aid-related bills before the Congress: 1. Foreign Aid (authorization and appropriation)

2. IDA Replenishment (3-year authorization, 1-year appropriation)

3. Inter-American Development Bank—soft-loan window (appropriation only)

4. Asian Development Bank—soft-loan window (4-year authorization, 1-year appropriation)

5. Military Credit Sales (authorization and appropriation)

6. PL 480 (2-year authorization, no direct appropriation required)

There is one further bill—authorization of callable capital for the Inter-American Development Bank—which is not in this list because it is not controversial. We hope to have it passed very soon.

The PL 480 extension has passed both Houses and is going into conference. Hearings have been held on all the other listed bills except the Military Credit Sales BILL and the appropriation bills for IDA and the Asian Bank. The Asian Bank authorization bill has been reported favorably by House Banking and Currency. None of the others is out of committee, although the House Foreign Affairs Committee is in mark-up on the Foreign Aid authorization bill.

Together these bills involve appropriations of about $3.8 billion.

The Package Offer

We would propose to offer a package cutting appropriations by $1.056 billion as follows: (In Millions)

Element Cut Final Appropriation

Economic Aid $700 $1,795

MAP 80 340

IDA 801 160

IDB -0 300

Military Credit Sales 96 200

PL 480, Title II (Donations) 502 —

Total $1,056 $2,795

These are extremely deep cuts. Economic aid would amount to more than $100 million less than the current year, inflicting serious damage on development programs in critical countries. For example, we could not provide anything close to the level of aid to Latin America that you spoke of at Punta del Este; nor could we take full advantage of excellent economic opportunities in India and Pakistan. (The probable geographic distribution of the cut in economic and military aid is at Tab A.)3

Negotiating Tactics:

A bargain of this kind in the present atmosphere will be difficult and dangerous. There is a serious risk that any new Administration proposal, however quietly proposed, will be rejected but will at the same time become a new ceiling from which the Congress will make its cuts. Moreover, it is hard to find anyone on the Hill today who can deliver on the Congressional end of the bargain. Still, we believe it is worth a try.

We believe the key man is Chairman Mahon. If he thinks the package approach is sensible and our concessions significantly enough to be negotiable, it is worth trying to persuade the leadership, Chairmen Fulbright, Morgan and Patman and other key people. If Mahon rejects the proposal out of hand, we should probably drop it. We believe it is hopeless to try to bargain with Passman, but it is important to maintain protocol by talking with Passman at an early stage in the conversations with Mahon. The chances of success with all of these people are heavily dependent on very high level Executive Branch representation.

Our scenario would proceed as follows: 1. Chairman Morgan would be quietly asked to put off final mark-up and floor action on the Foreign Aid authorization bill until after passage of the tax bill and possible negotiation of a foreign aid package. (We should talk to Morgan this week if possible.)

2. The President might have a private conversation with Mahon to sound him out on the general notion of a package.

3. If Mahon sounded receptive, the President, accompanied by the Secretaries of State, Defense, and Treasury and the Budget Director, would receive Mahon and Passman and lay out the proposed package.

4. Assuming Mahon were still interested, the President might convene a larger meeting including the leadership, the chairmen of all relevant committees and subcommittees and perhaps the Republican leadership and ranking members.

5. The Foreign Aid authorization bill and the Military Credit Sales bill would be amended to the agreed amounts and put on the floor of both Houses. The IDA, IDB, and ADB authorizations would be passed in full.

6. The Foreign Aid and Related Agencies appropriations bill—which includes money for all the elements except PL 480 and possibly military sales—would be passed at the full authorized levels.

Clearly, the weakest link in this scenario is passage of the appropriations bill with no cuts from the authorization level. This is unprecedented and obviously risky to try, but it would be our hope to let Mahon and Passman handle the publicity in such a way as to get credit for the cuts reflected in the authorization bill and avoid the “obligation” to add to the misery in the appropriation process.

A Possible Alternative

There is another approach which seems to have some popularity in the Congress and which could possibly bring us out as well as the above package. Essentially, it involves ducking the problem by passing simple 9-month extensions of the present Foreign Aid authorization and appropriation bills. The authorization bill would extend expiration dates and authorize nine months' worth of appropriations (hopefully at 90% of this year's rate). The appropriation bill would do the same. A variant now being pushed by Carl Marcy would be a single continuing resolution to cover both authorization and appropriation through only one vote in each House. In all of these cases the justification would be to put off serious substantive action on the foreign aid program until the new Administration takes power.

The House Foreign Affairs Committee has instructed Doc Morgan to check out the continuing authorization idea with the House leadership. They will undoubtedly be asking our view soon.

We think this solution looks less attractive now than the package approach, but that it will look better and better as and if the session drags on with no action on foreign aid. The main problem is that it would not suffice for IDA and the regional banks. Still, it is at least worth mentioning to Mahon if the package idea does not appeal to him. If he prefers it—and has some means of handling the Bank bills—we should probably go along.

Recommendation:

We recommend that you: —authorize Bill Gaud to tell Doc Morgan that we are thinking about a foreign aid package, and that we would suggest he hold off final mark-up and floor action on the Foreign Aid authorization bill until after the tax bill is passed and we reach a definite decision on whether to proceed with the package.

— that you instruct us to prepare a case for the package to be made to Chairman Mahon when and if he seems receptive.

—that you approach Mahon as soon as the tax bill is through and sound him out on the package approach.

(Signatures:)
The Secretary of State 4
The Secretary of The Treasury
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Agriculture
The AID Administrator
The Budget Director
Eugene R. Black

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret; Sensitive. The source text bears no drafting information. No record of whether it or a revised version went to the President has been found.

2 May 15.

1 This is a paper cut and the weakest item in the package. Your budget showed a request for $240 million for IDA because we were trying to negotiate the Europeans up to a substantially higher replenishment level than was actually achieved. The “cut” to $160 million simply reflects our share of the bargain we were able to strike as opposed to our initial objective. We should not try to hide the fact that this cut is unreal in the sense that we could not use the full budget request if it were appropriated.

2 This is actually a cut in expenditures, not appropriations. (It is above and beyond the $300 million in PL 480 expenditure cuts we have already told the Congress we will absorb.) However, it would reduce CCC appropriations in future years.

3 Not found.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed signatures.

76. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 76. Memorandum From Edward K. Hamilton of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, May 27, 1968, a.m.

SUBJECT

Status report on foreign aid legislation

I thought you might want to catch up on events since our situation room meeting. You will recall we concluded then that we should try to put together a foreign aid legislative package—including all the relevant elements—which the President could use if he felt it might stave off something worse. The following events have occurred since: 1. On May 18 I convened a group which worked out a package involving a cut of just over $1 billion in appropriations below the President's budget request. The major item was a $700 million cut in economic aid, but there were cuts also in all other elements except the IDA and the regional banks. These cuts and our negotiating priorities were agreed all around at the staff level.

2. That afternoon, after a report from the Treasury representative at the meeting, Fowler instructed his people to tell me that he wanted no part of any proposition which linked IDA and the regional banks with foreign aid. He said he understood and sympathized with the objectives of the exercise, but he felt the “foreign aid meatgrinder” would not do his programs any good regardless of how we approached it.

3. On May 21, I drafted and circulated a memorandum (copy at Tab A)2 which tried to set out all the complexities in as clear a form as possible. It did not assume that Treasury was irreversibly out of the package approach because I had hopes of demonstrating to Fowler that the first objective of the package approach would be to keep his wards—the IDA and the regional banks—untouched.

4. Meanwhile, growing Congressional sentiment in favor of a stop-gap approach to both foreign aid authorization and bills produced an instruction to Doc Morgan to discuss a stop-gap approach with the House Democratic Leadership. The proposal, as far as we understood it, is that the Committee would report and recommend a short-form authorization bill which simply extends the expiration date and author-izes appropriations at 90% of this year's appropriation level. This would be followed by a continuing resolution which would make appropriations available at this level through fiscal year 1969. The theoretical rationale would be that a new President should have a clear shot at reshaping the program as he wishes and that it is not worth the Congress's time in this short session to get into the details. The practical rationale is that it will be much easier to get these bills through than the standard complicated Foreign Assistance Act and Appropriation Bill. As of May 21, Morgan planned to adjourn the mark-up of the Foreign Assistance Act while he (a) checked out this approach first with the Democratic leadership and then with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the House Appropriations Committee, and (b) wait to see how things look after the tax bill.

5. At the same time, apparently independently, there was a somewhat similar stop-gap approach aborning in the Senate. We are told it is the brainchild of Carl Marcy. It involves the same approach as Morgan's except that the authorization and appropriation would be only for nine or ten months, and at only 80% of this year's level. (This would cut about $380 million from current economic aid levels.) We also understand that Marcy's scheme may be to merge the authorization and appropriation bills so as to get away with only one foreign aid vote in each House. Fulbright, though not anxious to have any aid bill this year, seems taken with this proposal.

6. The draft package memorandum was approved with minor amendments by AID, Defense and the Budget Bureau. State agreed with the substance but wondered whether so complicated a proposition could work. Treasury and Agriculture did not respond, though I think Freeman was sympathetic.

7. Gaud and I met with Katzenbach on May 23 to talk about the package. We found ourselves of one mind, that the package is a rather rickety collection of partially conflicting interests and objectives which has only a minor chance of success. But we also found ourselves barren of any better alternatives with the possible exception of the Morgan stop-gap approach. In any event, we agreed that we had been somewhat overtaken by events and that the immediate question was whether the Administration should oppose the Morgan approach. We concluded that it should not, provided the coverage is a full 12 months and includes continuation of the authority to use the Revolving Fund for Military Credit Sales. (Defense is prepared to live with the latter.) We also concluded that it is worth trying to get Morgan to try to make some provision for IDA in his dealings, since IDA would not be covered at all in the stop-gap scheme. Meanwhile, we decided to leave the package-approach in abeyance rather than cross Morgan's wires by trying to introduce it now.

8. The plot thickened on May 24 when Gaud was informed that Morgan (a) had not done anything in the way of checking out the stop-gap approach, but (b) had decided to reconvene the Foreign Affairs mark-up session on the Foreign Aid BILL beginning tomorrow. We have yet to interpret these entrails.

9. Senator Fulbright has just called Tom Niblock to report the Foreign Relations Committee's conclusions after two days of executive session on the IDA and Asian Bank Bills. To put it bluntly, the Committee has decided to defer action on both bills indefinitely. Fulbright claims that there were only two votes this morning (of 12) to report out IDA favorably, and that a motion to report out the Asian Bank BILL failed on a 6–6 deadlock. He added that these bills could be brought up again any time, but that he doubted there would be any change in sentiment unless and until there is progress on Vietnam. In response to Niblock's question, he speculated that passage of the tax bill might help a little but not much. The net result is that the substantive committees—in both Houses—have taken conscious decisions to table both bills.

I know this is a convoluted story, but I thought that you would want to know what is going on. It is pretty clear to me that if we are forced to fall back on a package approach, it will take the President himself to get Fowler to sign up. More important, there is a real question whether any tactical scenario on the Hill can hold together the authorization and appropriation committees, let alone multiple interests on the Floor. Nick Katzenbach remains horror-struck by the number of bills, committees, personalities, etc. involved in the package-approach. But I think he would agree to some such line if the Morgan-type tack failed.

The weakest link in both the package and stop-gap approaches is the need for identical action by the substantive and money committees. You know the historical pattern; the authorizing committees cut $500 million or so and then the appropriations committees do the same. But there is a strong movement in the substantive committees in both Houses this economy-minded year not to fight to the death for amounts which the appropriations committees slash further. On the other hand, Passman & Co. are certainly no less anxious for economy kudos than in previous years. Our more difficult problem is to find a way to let Morgan and Fulbright make full money cuts while Passman and Mahon get a good share of the credit. This is the problem we will be addressing as we move along.

EH

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Aid, Box 16. Secret; Sensitive.

2  Document 75.

77. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 77. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 7, 1968, 6 p.m.

Mr. President:

One of the results of last year's furor over arms sales to poor countries was the Reuss Amendment to the Ex-Im Bank Act.2 It stipulates that Ex-Im can finance such sales only when the President has determined that each sale is “in the national interest.”

In the attached, Charlie Zwick (Tab A)3 and Nick Katzenbach (Tab B)4 recommend that you sign a Determination covering about $85 million in military sales to 8 countries—7 in Latin America, plus Taiwan. Messrs. Clifford, Gaud and Linder concur in this recommendation.

The Reuss Amendment says that your determination must take into account our interests in avoiding (a) arms races among countries not threatened by the communists, (b) the arming of military dictators who are denying social progress to their people, and (c) diversion of resources from economic development. State argues that these sales would not promote arms races because they are largely for replacement of worn-out equipment and they represent a means of restraining the recipients from buying costlier and more sophisticated weapons. The finding with respect to military dictatorships is not open and shut with respect to Argentina and Taiwan, but in both cases there is a powerful evidence that the military regimes are not “denying social progress.” State further argues that these expenditures would not represent “needless” diversion of resources from development and that in any event our terms (6%, 7 years on the average) are generous enough to soften the foreign exchange impact.

At Tab C5 is an illustrative list of the type of equipment to be provided. The exact amounts of each item would be subject to negotiation with each country within the ceiling figure established in your Determination.

This Determination does not settle the question of whether and how the Conte/Long Amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act may apply to these sales.6 All these countries except Taiwan are subject to the Conte/Long requirement that we deduct one dollar of economic aid for every dollar a poor country spends on a “sophisticated weapon system.” As of now, we don't think that any of the items for Latin America contained herein will be defined as “sophisticated", but that determination is being made through a separate procedure. If we have problems on that front, we will come back to you.

I join in the recommendation that you approve. But I would not be doing my job if I did not point out that it is a close and subjective judgment whether these sales will involve diversion of funds from development. The Argentine “need” for 15 supersonic jet fighters, for example, is a subject on which reasonable men can and do differ. What we can say, although it will never satisfy Mr. Reuss, is that our only hope of keeping these military “needs” within bounds is to keep our chair in the game by offering a minimal ante. We do much more to accomplish Reuss' ends by making modest sales to these countries than by walking off in a huff and leaving them to the less tender mercies of other suppliers.

If you approve, we need your signature on the Determination at Tab D.7 The Congress would be notified of your Determination within 30 days, as required by law.

Walt

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determinations, Vol. IV [2 of 3], Box 40. Confidential.

2 The Export-Import Bank Act of 1945, P.L. 173, approved on July 31, 1945 (59 Stat. 526) as amended by Title III of the Foreign Assistance and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of 1968, approved on January 2, 1968, P.L. 90–249 (81 Stat. 943). The amendment was sponsored by Representative Henry S. Reuss (D.-Wisconsin).

3 Tab A, a June 6 memorandum from Zwick to the President recommending that he sign the Determination to authorize the use of Export-Import Bank funds for foreign military credit sales to certain economically less-developed countries, is not printed.

4 Tab B, a May 25 memorandum from Under Secretary of State Katzenbach to the President recommending that he sign the Determination, is not printed.

5 Not found.

6 See footnote 2, Document 73.

7 Tab D, a June 8 memorandum from President Johnson to Under Secretary of State Katzenbach, is a signed copy of Presidential Determination No. 68–10 authorizing Export-Import Bank Participation in Credit Sales to Certain Economically Less Developed Countries. It is not printed. A handwritten note on the bottom of the first page of the source text indicates that S/S was notified of the President's signature on June 8 at 11:25 a.m.

78. Presidential Determination No. 68–12 78. Presidential Determination No. 68–121

Washington, June 29, 1968.

MEMORANDUM FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE

Determination pursuant to Section 2(c) of the Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962 (the “Act")2 authorizing the transfer of up to $1,800,000 of funds made available for use under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended.3

In order to meet unexpected urgent refugee and migration needs arising in connection with assistance to Cuban refugees in the United States, I hereby determine, pursuant to Section 2(c) of the Act that it is important to the national interest that up to $1,800,000 of funds made available for use in fiscal year 1968 under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, be transferred to and consolidated with funds made available to the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare for this Act.

The Secretary of State is authorized to direct the transfer of funds for this purpose from appropriation accounts under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended. The Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare is authorized to consolidate the funds so transferred with funds made available to the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare for this Act.

The Secretary of State is requested to inform the appropriate committees of Congress of this determination and the transfer of funds made under this authority.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Presidential Determination, Vol. IV [1 of 2], Box 40. No classification marking.

2 The Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962, P.L. 87–510, approved on June 28, 1962. (76 Stat 121)

3 The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, P.L. 87–195, approved on September 4, 1961. (75 Stat. 424)

79. Report of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs 79. Report of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs1

Washington, October 25, 1968.

DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE IN THE NEW ADMINISTRATION

I. RECOMMENDATIONS IN BRIEF

The President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs is profoundly convinced that vigorous cooperation with the developing countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America in their slow climb toward better living conditions is in the basic interest of the United States. Yet in America today a mood of malaise and withdrawal is enfeebling U.S. development assistance efforts. In our judgment, reestablishment of the U.S. role as a pace setter in peaceful development cooperation is a historic imperative.

Accordingly the Committee recommends that the new Administration coming to office in January 1969 take steps to reorganize and revitalize U.S. development assistance. The Administration should offer a fresh program of new activities and new emphases, while building on the demonstrated strengths of the present system. We believe that the following elements provide such a program.

1. The U.S. will continue to need a strong development assistance agency. The Administration should propose to the next Congress a new authorization act for a streamlined successor to the present Agency for International Development. A new name in keeping with our recommendations might be the Development Cooperation Fund. The new agency should be authorized to use three main instruments: long-term loans on liberal terms for capital assistance, grants for technical assistance, and grants for reconstruction and emergency assistance. We urge that in using these instruments the new agency carry forward three features of present A.I.D. policy: comprehensive country analyses as the basis for providing U.S. assistance and encouraging self-help, integration of capital and technical assistance tools, and coordination of sales and grants of agricultural products with other forms of assistance.

2. The U.S. should expand contributions to multilateral agencies as rapidly as their managements can handle additional resources competently, and as other industrialized countries can be persuaded to go along. Contributions to Special Funds of multilateral banks, and transfers of funds for particular countries to be administered by multilateral agencies, are attractive arrangements for doing so. Closer coordination of all assistance to individual developing countries through consultative groups of donor countries is also highly desirable. The U.S. should welcome the leadership of a strengthened World Bank in providing more assistance and coordinating bilateral programs.

3. Military assistance should be separated from development assistance by transfers to the Defense Department budget, while remaining under the policy guidance of the Secretary of State. Reconstruction and emergency assistance grants should be provided for Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand for the duration of hostilities, and for early reconstruction in Southeast Asia. Beyond this, such funds should be available for only a limited number of countries where there is an emergency or security rationale, and for a limited period of transition to a development effort.

4. An Overseas Investment Corporation should be established to take over the present investment guarantee and investment promotion functions of A.I.D., and to undertake new initiatives for more rapid expansion of private investment to less developed countries. The corporation should have authority to raise capital funds at government-guaranteed rates, and to lend directly to high-risk private ventures which are important for development and which have the potential to be commercially viable. At the same time, the U.S. should liberalize present balance of payments restrictions on direct investment in manufacturing and processing industries in less developed countries.

5. U.S. assistance should focus on support for these important movements in the less developed world: (a) extending the “green revolution” in food grain production through all areas of agriculture and marketing; (b) expanding population and family planning programs to the limit of host governments' ability to proceed; (c) strengthening scientific and professional personnel and institutions; (d) increasing individual opportunities for education and improving the relevance of education for national needs; (e) broadening participation by the general population in both responsibilities and benefits of development.

6. The U.S. should, in its own interest, undertake to restore total development assistance in all forms to at least the share of our national income reached in 1965, and to expand assistance in the future as our income and tax revenues rise. Reasonable estimates of needs are well above these levels. The largest increases should be achieved by expanding flows through competent multilateral institutions and private investment. To meet the over-all objective, however, appropriations for the new development assistance agency ought to rise above those A.I.D. received prior to the deep cuts of Fiscal Years 1968 and 1969. Moreover, greater international attention should be focused on fitting assistance terms to individual countries' debt servicing capacities.

7. The Administration should give prompt study to longer-term innovations, which go beyond measures recommended here. Among the possibilities are: devoting to development assistance some of the Special Drawing Rights which will be created by the International Monetary Fund; government commitments to subsidize interest payments on bonds issued for the International Development Association; and additional funds in the World Bank family for commodity diversification programs in countries whose primary export earnings are seriously depressed. The U.S. should intensify international discussions of such possibilities, with the aim of putting the world's development assistance system on a firmer foundation.

[Here follows a detailed discussion of the Committee's recommendations. All the members of the Committee signed the report except George Meaney who chose to dissociate himself from it.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Perkins Committee—President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs—C. Tyler Wood Files—CY 66 thru CY 70. No classification marking. An attached October 28 letter from James A. Perkins, Chairman of the Committee, transmitted the report to President Johnson. The letter reads in part: “The experience of serving on the Committee has been a rich and rewarding one for all the members. We cannot help but be disturbed, however, at the increasing difficulty in securing public support for U.S. foreign assistance. Because of our deep concern, we have attempted, over recent months, to consolidate our ideas about ways in which foreign assistance programs could be strengthened.” The source text comprises pp. 1–3 of the 43-page report. For another extract, see Document 145.

80. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 80. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 1, 1968.

SUBJECT

Report of the Perkins Committee on Development Assistance

At Tab A is a letter from Jim Perkins enclosing the final report of his Committee on Foreign Aid.2 This is also Perkins' letter of resignation; he assumes the Committee will come to an end January 20 to give your successor a chance to chart his own course on foreign aid.

In my judgment, the report is careful and tame. Most of the recommendations are by now standard—streamlining AID; more multilateral aid, separating MAP from economic aid; concentrating on food, population and education; and restoring the deep Congressional cuts of the past two years. What seems to be the main innovation—an Overseas Investment Corporation to spur the private foreign investment—is an idea already kicked around in the Executive Branch and on the Hill.

The report was not unanimously approved by the Committee. George Meany and Joe Beirne disassociated themselves on the ground that Perkins et al. had taken a “bankers' view” rather than a “people-to-people” approach on foreign aid. So far as we can tell, this issue has no substance. (Beirne is a bit embarrassed about it but felt he had to go along with Meany. I am told Meany did not attend any of the working sessions.)

I know you have had reservations about the Committee but it worked hard and the members have taken their appointment very seriously. Properly used, the report could provide backing for foreign aid that the next Administration might use.

My recommendation for handling the Perkins Report is: 1) Ask for comments from AID, State, Defense, and Charles Zwick.

2) Pass the report and the agency comments to your successor; and

3) Write Perkins a letter of thanks and tell him you do not intend to publish the report but will pass it on to the next Administration to help in its consideration of foreign aid. A proposed letter, for your signature, is at Tab B.3

I think this will satisfy everybody, Perkins is not asking for publication now although he may hope the report will eventually appear. The Committee's first concern is that the report be most effectively used.

You are under no obligation to make the report public and there is a strong argument that your successor can give it a better hearing if it is not on the record.

Walt

If you approve this way of handling the report, you should sign the letter to Perkins at Tab B4

Plan to make report public after receiving comments and draft new letter to Perkins 5

Call me

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee] [1 of 3], Box 17. No classification marking.

2 See Document 79.

3 Not attached but see Document 81.

4 This option is checked.

5  Johnson's handwritten note at the end of this sentence reads: “? ? Let's see".

81. Letter From President Johnson to the Chairman of the President's Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs (Perkins) 81. Letter From President Johnson to the Chairman of the President's Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs (Perkins)1

Washington, undated.

Dear Jim:

Many thanks for your letter enclosing your Committee's final report on development assistance.2

I know that a great deal of time, talent, and hard work went into this effort. You and your distinguished colleagues have performed a valuable public service—in the interest of our own security and of the hopes of millions of people around the world who seek a better life.

I have asked Secretary Rusk, Secretary Clifford, Aid Administrator Gaud and Budget Director Zwick to go over your proposals and give me their comments. I will be most pleased to pass on the Committee's report and our appraisal of it to the next Administration. I believe it will be an important contribution to the deliberations ahead on the future of foreign aid.

I deeply appreciate your personal leadership in the work of the Committee.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely,3

1 Source: Johnson Library, Edward R. Fried Files, Chron File, Box 3. No classification marking. Drafted by President Johnson, Edward R. Fried, and Roger P. Morris.

2 See Document 79.

3 Printed from an unsigned copy.

82. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Zwick) 82. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Zwick)1

Washington, November 25, 1968.

Dear Charlie:

I am sorry to say that I cannot agree with your proposal to reduce the A.I.D. budget request for FY 1970 to $2.1 billion NOA ($2.0 billion on the new BOB basis). Such a figure is clearly too low both on foreign policy grounds and in terms of the merits of the programs you suggest cutting back.

Foreign Policy

Throughout his Administration the President—despite Congressional hostility and cuts—has consistently emphasized the importance of an adequate aid program. For FY 1967 through FY 1969 he requested economic aid appropriations of $2.469 billion, $2.630 billion and $2.499 billion respectively.

After long study and with considerable misgivings as to whether we were short-changing the Alliance for Progress and Vietnam, I proposed a lower amount—$2.399 billion—for FY 1970. You now suggest that this be further reduced to $2.111 billion, which would be $422 million below the average of the past three years.

This would be no minor zig or zag. It would constitute—and would be read as—a major shift in policy.

Why such a policy change? Surely not because the need for aid is decreasing. It is increasing. Surely not because the President's convictions have changed. His statements indicate the contrary. Surely not because of domestic political pressures. These the President had to take into account when he submitted his FY 1969 request of $2.499 billion, “the lowest request in history", which he vigorously defended before the Congress and the public.

The President should continue to hold the high ground on which he has stood throughout his term of office. He should do so

—to reaffirm to the American people, as he has for the last five years, that foreign aid is important to our security and to international cooperation in building a better world;

—to make it clear to the developing countries that he means it when he says the United States will do its best to help them modernize their societies and give their people a better life; and

—to convince other advanced countries, who are disturbed at our slipping to seventh place among aid donors, that he is not recommending to his successor that the United States turn its back on its responsibilities toward the developing world.

His budget for FY 1970 gives the President an opportunity he will never have again: an opportunity to tell the nation and the new Administration what he believes is essential to the public interest. It would be a great disservice to the President to recommend to him a budget which undercuts everything he has said on development over the past five years.

Moreover, in proposing to cut my request so severely, you have given insufficient weight to several considerations relating to the transition from this Administration to the new Administration which were outlined in my earlier submission.

A transitional budget should leave options open. The President-elect should be free to continue the present aid program pending further study, to redesign and reemphasize the program as he sees fit, or to cut it back as the result of a deliberate foreign policy decision.

Your proposal presents the President-elect with a sharp cutback in foreign aid. As a practical matter this gives him no options. For it would be next to impossible for him to increase the aid budget. Your proposal would therefore lead to a continuing downward trend in aid appropriations, and the end of President Johnson's hopes for a more enlightened policy towards the less developed nations.

Finally, your proposed budget wrongly implies that United States concern for certain regions is flagging. Table 2,2 which breaks down the aid program by regions, shows that your proposal would provide sufficient supporting assistance for Vietnam, and maintain our programs in India, Pakistan and Turkey only slightly below their historical levels. This is well and good.

But your proposal also suggests that our commitment to the Alliance for Progress is waning, as reflected in a request 21 percent lower than last year; that we wish to cut back on supporting and other assistance to our friends in East Asia, as reflected in a request 26 percent lower than last year; and that, in concentrating aid to Africa on a few major countries and regional activities, the United States is actually backing off from Africa as a whole. These implications reflect neither United States policy nor President Johnson's own views.

Specific Programs

I am convinced of the merits of the specific programs which you suggest cutting. I believe our budget request should be approved in toto. If, however, A.I.D. must accept some further squeeze because of the government-wide drive to hold down the next budget, I strongly urge restoration of at least $236.9 million, to a total NOA of $2.347.9 billion ($2.236.9 billion on the new BOB basis).

Thirty million dollars to my requested restoration results from your shifting from DOD to the Vietnamese Government responsibility for half of the piaster funding for the Rural Development Cadres in CY 1970. While you have made an appropriate increase in A.I.D. support for the Vietnamese economy proposed for FY 1970, you have not increased total A.I.D. NOA above the planning figure to compensate for the saving to the DOD budget.

The Annexes explain in detail the specific restorations which I am urging, and the reasons why your proposed cuts are unwise.3 Here I will comment briefly on some of the largest or most important of these items.

Your proposed slashes in the Alliance are so large as to call into question the entire United States commitment in this hemisphere. Moreover, you propose to cut most deeply into the highest-priority part of the Alliance program—program loans to the large Latin American countries.

—The balance of payments grounds for the Brazil loan are strong and agreed to by multilateral agencies. The full amount requested is needed for continuing U.S. influence on crucial development policies.

—The balance of payments grounds for the Chile loan include more uncertainties, but the severe fiscal strains of the current drought require us to be in a position to finance, before the election, the full calendar 1970 estimate underlying our budget request.

—In Peru, restoring $8.7 million in sound projects and technical assistance, even without the program loan, would permit a range of responses to a favorable evolution of the new government's policies.

—In Bolivia, an SA loan for local currencies is needed as in earlier years; PL 480 is not a realistic substitute in view of usual marketing requirements for wheat.

—The small grant fund for Social and Institutional Development is an important new initiative for Title IX purposes, and it would be unwise to discourage action on this neglected front simply because the activities the fund will support a year from now are not yet fully defined.

You have taken the absurdly low FY 1969 level for Korea—a product of indefensible Congressional cuts, not political or economic sense—and used it as a base for a $15 million reduction in the request for FY 1970. Our proposed SA and DL, levels are both needed for a continued orderly phase out of aid to a most successful developer and firm ally.

We cannot afford to assume that the proposed cut in Thailand will be politically feasible, especially since it is based on presumptions of Thai financial capability which have not yet been fully analyzed.

Relief needs in Nigeria are already expected to cost A.I.D. $12–$15 million or more in FY 1969. Whenever the war ends, relief needs, rehabil-itation requirements, or both will certainly require more than $10 million SA you have cut from our FY 1970 proposal.

We urge the restoration of $6 million for Ethiopia for precisely the developmental activities in agriculture and livestock production the United States has been encouraging.

In Ghana, the outcome of the debt rescheduling, combined with decreasing needs for PL 480 commodities, have recently reinforced the grounds for the recommended size of our program loan.

As a result of Congressional cuts we have been able to give no project aid at all to Turkey in FY 1969. Your proposed cut would limit us to a single project in FY 1970, which I believe unwise.

We believe the $15 million cut from the India Coop Fertilizer Plant must be largely restored in order to make the project viable.

Research and Institutional Grants should be restored to $10 million each. We have clear Congressional authorization for both these programs, and they are fundamental to improving the quality of our overseas technical assistance over the long run. The 211(d) grants help build staff and training capacity in fields where they are inadequate among American universities, and research is one way of making use of such capacity where it exists.4

It is clear that IBRD calls for the Indus project will exhaust any carryover from the Contingency Fund this year. Considering the obvious uncertainties in Nigeria, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Bolivia, Peru, and even locusts in Africa, it would be prudent to restore the fund to a more normal $50 million level.

Conclusion

To me, it is unthinkable that President Johnson's last budget would not re-emphasize and reaffirm the policies for which he has fought throughout his term of office. It is equally unthinkable to suggest that he present his successor with a budget which all but foreordains a further retreat from our responsibilities to the hungry and disadvantaged peoples in the developing world.

I strongly urge you to reconsider before recommending to the President this deep cut in the A.I.D. budget request.

I have not had an opportunity to discuss your proposed cuts with Secretary Rusk and Nick Katzenbach. This letter is submitted without prejudice to whatever views they may care to express.

Sincerely,

Bill

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, FY 67 and FY 69, BUD Budget (October–December) FY 1969. Confidential.

2 Not found.

3 Not found.

4 Section 211(d) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1966 authorizes the President to make funds available up to $10 million “to research and educational institutions in the United States for the purpose of strengthening their capacity to develop and carry out programs concerned with the economic and social development of less developed countries.” The Foreign Assistance Act of 1966, P.L. 89–583, was approved on September 16, 1966; 80 Stat. 797.

83. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Zwick) 83. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Zwick)1

Washington, November 29, 1968.

Dear Charlie:

I have read Bill Gaud's appeal2 and, although I understand that you and he are now not very far apart, I would like to underline the foreign policy implications of these budget figures.

The real issue is not the merit of particular projects—there is not, as I understand it, a serious disagreement here—but whether the level of the President's request signifies a change in Administration policy. This is a judgment the President might well be hesitant to make in his final budget. Bill Gaud's reduced proposal of $2,348 million—some $150 million less than the request of the Congress last year and $280 million below that of the previous year—comes very close to being such a signal. Let me illustrate what I mean in one important area.

A drop in the President's request for the Alliance to a total significantly and obviously below the level that President Kennedy and he have proposed in the past cannot help but be viewed as an abandonment of a policy this Administration has pursued for 8 years. To Latin American leaders this will mean that the United States no longer feels that it has a special relationship with them. If figures at this level were to come out of the Congressional process, it would force the Administration to concentrate in the larger countries of Latin America and abandon programs in many of the small countries. This action would, of course, be significant, but far less significant than if this were to be proposed by the President in the first instance.

The same argument can be made with equal validity for other areas where the lower level will show a significant cut in Administration requests for key countries where we have previously indicated vital political interest.

It is true that despite his strong leadership the President has been unable to convince the Congress that strong support for economic development is in our over-riding security and foreign policy interest. At the same time, his advocacy of these objectives has had a great impact abroad both in terms of our foreign policy and in terms of his personal prestige. In light of these actions, proposals for significantly lower levels of assistance would have effects multiplied many times in terms of political impact over any real economic impact. These proposals would be regarded as a policy change that is bound to affect more than our aid relationship.

I am well aware of the necessity for a tight budget. And I certainly do not underestimate the seriousness of the general budgetary situation. But I do believe that in making your budget recommendations you should be aware of the crucial nature at the margin of these proposals both in terms of our foreign policy and in terms of the objectives President Johnson has tried so hard to achieve.

I understand that many of these considerations were raised by Nick Katzenbach in a meeting of the SIG and that the views I am presenting were strongly supported by other members.

Sincerely,

Dean

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, FY 67 and FY 69, BUD Budget (October–December) FY 1969. No classification marking. Drafted by Arthur A. Hartman (U).

2  Document 82.

84. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 84. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 10, 1968, 5 p.m.

SUBJECT

Transmittal of the Perkins Committee Report on Foreign Aid

At Tab A are the comments from Rusk, Nitze, Gaud and Zwick on the Perkins Report on Foreign Aid.2 They all agree it is an excellent job that should be valuable to the new Administration and to the coming public discussion on the future of foreign aid.

Nitze and Gaud question the recommendation of the Perkins Committee on the separation of military and economic assistance, mostly because of expected Congressional opposition. Zwick also believes the multilateral aid target in the Committee report is too ambitious and has some reservations on giving the proposed Overseas Development Corporation the authority to borrow from the Treasury. These are essentially tactical differences rather than serious reservations about the Committee's approach and its main recommendations.

You previously approved a letter to Perkins thanking him for his work and saying that you will pass the report on to the new Administration (Tab B).3 In the meantime, the other members of the Committee have submitted their letters of resignation.

The Committee is naturally anxious to get its report on the public record. But it is still true—and the Committee recognizes this—that your successor may feel he can give the report a better hearing if the report is not published for awhile.

I believe you could complete action on the report in one of the following ways: 1. Pass on the report and Cabinet comments through Bob Murphy and say we plan to publish the report unless your successor objects.

2. Pass on the report and comments quietly and leave its disposition to the President-elect.

3. Publish the report as we pass it on with the comments.

I think it makes most sense to do option 1. The report is sound and thoughtful—it can only help the public discussion on aid. But no one will argue that your successor should not have a quiet shot at the report if he wants it.

Whatever your decision, I recommend we handle it with a memo from me to Bob Murphy. (A draft memo is at Tab C.)4 Charlie Murphy concurs that this would be a good channel to use.

Walt

OK option 1; say we'll publish unless there is objection

Simply pass report on quietly5

Publish and pass on routinely

Call me

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee] [1 of 3], Box 17. No classification marking.

2 Not printed.

3  Document 81.

4 Not attached but a copy is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on [Perkins Committee] [1 of 3], Box 17. In this December 11 memorandum to Robert Murphy, U.S. Political Adviser, Rostow wrote in part: “The President believes it would be appropriate and most useful to leave the disposition of the [Perkins Committee] report, including the decision on how and when to publish it, to the President-elect. Our comments on the report, of course, are confidential.”

5 This option is checked.

International Investment and Development PolicyInternational Investment and Development Policy

85. Memorandum From Seymour J. Rubin of the U.S. Delegation to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Washington, February 12, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Chron, S. J. Rubin, 1964 Correspondence. No classification marking. Drafted by Rubin who held the rank of Minister with the delegation.

86. Current Economic Developments

Washington, July 21, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Unclassified. The source text comprises pp. 16–17 of the issue.

87. Editorial Note

88. Press Release Issued by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

Paris, July 24, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. No classification marking. The source text is enclosure 1 to airgram CEDTO A–76 from Paris, August 1.

89. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, July 24, 1964, 9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use.

90. Memorandum for the Files

Washington, July 30, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Bell, Gaud, and AID/IDOS. In an attached note to Gaud, July 31, Bullitt wrote that he also sent a copy to George Woods.

91. Current Economic Developments

Washington, September 29, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Unclassified. The source text comprises pp. 5–7 of the issue.

92. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, October 31, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(OECD) 8. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Alex B. Daspit, cleared by Leddy, and approved by Frank M. Coffin. A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Noted—WSG[aud].”

93. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Paris, November 3, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. Unclassified. A typed notation at the end of the source text indicates that a copy of the letter was sent via air pouch. A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Noted—WSG[aud].” Copies were sent to Gaud and Schaetzel.

94. Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator for Program, Agency for International Development (Chenery) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Washington, November 23, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. No classification marking. Drafted by Richard Palmer (AID/PC/IDOS) and Robert Aliber (AID/AA/PC). A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Noted—DEB[ell].” A copy was sent to Gaud.

95. Memorandum for the Files

Washington, December 2, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. Confidential. An attached note from A. Adams to the Executive Secretariat, December 4, indicates that copies were hand carried to Trued (Treasury) and Bator (White House) and requested that copies be sent to Solomon and Chenery.

96. Editorial Note

97. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, December 18, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Alex B. Daspit (AID), cleared by Coffin (AID) in draft and by Robert L. Yost (ECON) and Alexis E. Lachman (AID), and contents approved by Alice May.

98. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Industrial Development, Agency for International Development (Draper) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Washington, December 23, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, E/CID—Center for Industrial Development (State, AID, Commerce, UN Mtg. Dec. 16, 1964). Confidential. Drafted by Draper on December 21 and concurred in by John F. Hilliard (DAA/TCR) on December 23. Copies were sent to Baumgartner (AA/TCR) and the Executive Secretariat. Draper also took “informal notes” at this December 16 meeting, which he had typed on January 5. (Ibid.)

99. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Paris, January 8, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Letters and Memoranda to and from Coffin. Personal &Confidential. An attached undated, unsigned handwritten note reads: “This ltr, I believe was answered. I have note about answer being put in Bell briefing book.” For this reply, see Document 103.

100. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Industrial Development, Agency for International Development (Draper) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Washington, January 29, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, E/CID-Center for Industrial Development. No classification marking. Drafted on January 28 and concurred in by John F. Hilliard (AID/AA/TCR) on January 29. A handwritten note on the source text reads, “Noted D.E.B.” A copy was sent to Gaud.

101. Memorandum of Conversation

Paris, February 5, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. No classification marking. Drafted by Coffin. The meeting was held in Ambassador Leddy's office. An attached covering letter from Coffin to Bell, February 10, reads in part: “We were pleased to see Burke's receptivity once he had clearly in mind the type of relationship between IBRD and DAC which we were talking about. It is my thought that this would be useful background in continuing discussions with the Bank and with officials and delegations of DAC countries.” In a handwritten note to Gaud on this letter, Bell wrote: “This sounds very constructive.”

102. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Paris, February 9, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. Limited Official Use; Personal. Attached to the source text are two notes from the AID Executive Secretariat to Bell, February 11 and 15. In the first Bell was asked whether he wanted PC to draft a reply to Coffin, and whether copies should be sent to Gaud and Schaetzel. The approval line below the first question is left blank and “yes” on the approval line below the second is checked. The second note indicated that copies had been distributed to Gaud and Schaetzel and asked whether, in lieu of a reply, Coffin's letter should be put in Bell's briefing book, presumably the one for his upcoming European trip. The “yes” on the approval line has been checked.

103. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin)

Washington, undated.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Letters and Memoranda to and from Coffin. Confidential. Attached to this letter are several memoranda. One is a February 9 action memorandum from Bartlett Harvey, Acting Assistant Administrator for Program (AID), to Bell, summarizing the contents and recommending that Bell sign the letter to Coffin, which Schaetzel and Hirschtritt (Treasury) had cleared. Another is a February 4 memorandum from Schaetzel to Chenery, in which Schaetzel said that he would have emphasized more strongly EUR's firm commitment to support AID in the future on DAC matters and concluded: “At the risk of stating the obvious I wanted to make the foregoing comments but not to propose that there should be any change at this end in the letter itself.” In an attached February 8 note to Harvey, Bell wrote concerning Schaetzel's memorandum: “Good point. Let's reflect in letter.” In a February 13 memorandum to Bell, also attached, Harvey reported that he had asked EUR to redraft the letter. No changes were made in the letter, however, first because the EUR officer assigned to revise it fell sick, and then because Ruth Phillips, the OECD desk officer in EUR, pointed out that Schaetzel in his memorandum had said to send the letter as is. (Ibid.; and attached memorandum from Richard B. Palmer to Harvey and Aliber, February 13)

104. Editorial Note

105. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Executive Staff of the Agency for International Development

Washington, March 1, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Trip—Administrator David Bell, Paris, Bonn, London, February 21–27, 1965. Confidential. Drafted by Richard Palmer (AID/PC). Both the memorandum and its attachment are attached to Document 106. Two other attachments, an undated paper prepared in EUR/GER, “U.S. Proposal for Closer Bilateral Aid Relationships with the Federal Republic,” and a February 25 U.S.-German joint press communique issued at Bonn, are not printed. Regarding Bell's trip, see Document 104.

106. Record of Executive Staff Meeting, Agency for International Development

Washington, March 2, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Trip—Administrator David Bell, Paris, Bonn, London, February 21–27, 1965. Confidential. Regarding the several attachments to the source text, see footnote 1, Document 105.

107. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, April 5, 1965, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use; Priority.

108. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Chairman of the President's Advisory Committee on Foreign Aid Programs (Perkins)

Paris, May 10, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Advisory Committee on Foreign Aid: FRC 74 A 58, GAC Memoranda to Dec. 1965. No classification marking.

109. Editorial Note

110. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, August 3, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by E. M. Gilbert, Richard Palmer, and Arvin Kramish; cleared by Frank M. Coffin (in draft), A. B. Daspit, and W. M. Brown (Secretary of the Delegation); and contents approved by Alice May. Repeated to all DAC capitals. Another summary and evaluation of this meeting is in Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 733, August 3, 1965, pp. 5–8. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments)

111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the European Regional Organizations

Washington, October 21, 1965, 9:26 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by William G. Carter (AA/DFPE) on October 20; cleared by Hal Reynolds (PC/FWA), Jo W. Saxe (AA/PC), Anthony C. Albrecht (EUR/RPE), Mark Feer (Commerce), and Samuel Pizer (Commerce); and approved by Gustav Ranis (AA/PC).

112. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, October 29, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by E. M. Gilbert on October 28, cleared by Frank M. Coffin (in draft) and P. R. Cook, Jr. (Secretary of Delegation), and contents approved by Alice May. Passed to the Department of Commerce. Attached to the source text is the “Report of First Session of the D.A.C. Ad Hoc Group on Private Investment held on 25th October, 1965” (DAC(65)40), October 28, not printed.

113. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, November 6, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by A. B. Daspit, Alice May, and E. M. Gilbert on November 5; cleared by A. E. Lachman (in draft) and P. R. Cook, Jr. (Secretary of Delegation); and contents approved by Alice May.

114. Editorial Note

115. Information Memorandum From the Associate Assistance Administrator for Multilateral Aid Programs, Agency for International Development (Saxe) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)

Washington, December 3, 1965.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Program (DAC Work Program) 1965. No classification marking. The date is the drafting date. The memorandum was sent through Gustav Ranis (AA/PC) and the Executive Secretariat. Copies were sent to Gaud and seven other AID officers.

116. Current Economic Developments

Washington, January 4, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Limited Official Use. The source text comprises pp. 15–17 of the issue.

117. Report by the Development Assistance Committee's Ad Hoc Group on Private Investment

Paris, March 2, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Advisory Committees on Foreign Aid: FRC 73 A 159, GAC Memoranda Jan./June 1966. No classification marking. An attached cover note indicates that the report, which provided suggestions for a “D.A.C. Work Program in the Field of Private Investment,” was prepared by the Secretariat in cooperation with the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Group as a result of discussions in the Group and was submitted for consideration at the March 11 DAC meeting.

118. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, March 11, 1966, 2050Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use.

119. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)

Washington, April 14, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 A 1866, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1966. Confidential.

120. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson

Washington, April 22, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Advisory Committees on Foreign Aid: FRC 73 A 159, Rpt. #1—Re IDA 4/19/67 (GAC Memo 58 4/22), Mr. Bell's Memo to Pres., 4/22. No classification marking. Transmitted under cover of an April 22 memorandum from C. Tyler Wood to Committee members briefly indicating the contents of the attachments. One attachment, not printed here, is a letter from Senator Jacob Javits (R.-NY) to Bell, April 19, enclosing a copy of his proposed amendment to Section 205 of the pending Foreign Assistance Act of 1966. His amendment provided for an additional $100 million of appropriated funds for FY 1967 to be made available for lending to IDA under specified conditions. Copies were sent to Secretaries Rusk, Fowler, and McNamara, and Walt Rostow.

121. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, June 13, 1966, 1939Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use; Priority.

122. Summary Notes of 562d Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, July 19, 1966, 11:45 a.m.–12:45 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 3 Tab 44, 7/19/66, The World Food Problem. Confidential/Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

123. Editorial Note

124. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts

Washington, July 25, 1966, 6:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Karmish (AID/PC/FWA) on July 22, cleared by Anthony C. Albrecht (EUR/RPE) in substance and James M. Kearns (AID/EXSEC), and approved by Jo W. Saxe (AID/AA/PC). Sent to all NATO capitals, Bern, Canberra, Dublin, Madrid, Stockholm, Tokyo, and Vienna.

125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Italy

Washington, October 19, 1966, 6:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AGR 3 FAO. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Paris. Drafted by Leighton Van Nort (IO/OES) on October 19; cleared by Fred H. Sanderson (E), Stephen H. Rogers (EUR/RPE), Herbert J. Waters (AID/AA/MR), Dorothy H. Jacobson (Agriculture) in substance, Eskildsen (Agriculture), Ralph Hirschtritt (Treasury), William J. Stibravy (IO/OES), Helen A. Wilson (AID/PC/UN), Paul J. Brynes (IO/OIA), and Joseph J. Sisco (IO) in substance; and approved by Stibravy.

126. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State

Rome, October 22, 1966, 1515Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AGR 3 FAO. Limited Official Use; Priority.

127. Current Economic Developments

Washington, November 8, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Unclassified. The source text comprises pp. 18–19 of the issue.

128. Briefing Paper Prepared by the Agency for International Development

Washington, November 15, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Meetings—OECD Ministerial November 24–25, 1966. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Edward Zimmermann (AID/PC/FWA) and cleared by Saxe (AA/PC), William F. Courtney (E), Anthony C. Albrecht and Ruth H. Phillips (EUR/RPE), and Finkel (Treasury). The paper was one of several briefing papers prepared for the upcoming OECD Ministerial Meeting in Paris. Regarding this meeting, see Document 130.

129. Briefing Paper Prepared by the Agency for International Development

Washington, November 16, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Meetings—OECD Ministerial November 24–25, 1966. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Kramish (AID/PC/FWA) and cleared by Saxe (AA/PC), Albert W. Whiting (E) in draft, and Albrecht and Phillips (EUR/RPE). The paper was one of several briefing papers prepared for the upcoming OECD Ministerial Meeting in Paris. Regarding this meeting, see Document 130.

130. Editorial Note

131. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, November 25, 1966, 2130Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, OECD 3. Limited Official Use. Repeated to the NATO capitals, (Brussels for USEC and Geneva for GATT), Belgrade, Bern, Dublin, the Mission in Geneva, Madrid, Stockholm, Tokyo, Vienna, and Helsinki.

132. Note by the Secretariat of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development

Paris, December 6, 1966.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Program (DAC Work Program) 1966–67. Restricted.

133. Current Economic Developments

Washington, January 17, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Limited Official Use. The source text comprises pp. 24–26 of the issue.

134. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson

Washington, January 28, 1967, 1:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central File, IT 14–1, International Development Association, Box 58. No classification marking. An attached note from Bator to President Johnson, January 31, reads: “Secretary Fowler is seeing George Woods tomorrow morning—between his bouts on the Hill—and is anxious to have a decision to communicate to Woods.” Two handwritten notes on this note read: “Fowler wants a meeting on this” and, “Juanita [Roberts]: This was used at 1:00 lunch today. W[alt]” On January 31 from 2:20 to 3:20 p.m., the President had lunch with General Taylor, Rostow, McNamara, Rusk, Komer, and Christian on Vietnam. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary) No formal record of this luncheon meeting has been found.

135. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, February 3, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, Papers of Anthony M. Solomon, Chron File—February 1967, Box 15. Confidential. Drafted by Ruth S. Gold (E) on February 3. A copy was sent to Gaud.

136. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts

Washington, May 16, 1967, 3:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(IDA). Limited Official Use. Drafted by John C. Coleman (E/OMA) on May 15, cleared by Knowlton (Treasury) and E. Rice and Livingston T. Merchant (IBRD), and approved by John F. L. Ghiardi (E/IMA). Sent to all NATO capitals except Athens, Ankara, and Reykjavik, and to Canberra, Helsinki, Kuwait, Pretoria, Stockholm, Tokyo, Vienna, New Delhi, and Rawalpindi.

137. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright)

Washington, May 29, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. IV [2], Box 2. No classification marking.

138. Research Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, July 26, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use.

139. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson

Washington, July 26, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. IV [2], Box 2. Limited Official Use. An attached July 26 note from Walt Rostow to the President briefly summarized Gaud's report as follows: “the small countries are doing better; the bigger countries are doing relatively less; as a world community they all agree aid is inadequate.”

140. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, November 13, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Private Investment 1967. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Chadwick Johnson (E/ITP/OT/GCP) on November 13.

141. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, November 17, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, OECD 8–4. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by J. W. Koehring on November 16; cleared by Edward C. Fei and I. A. Heyman (in draft), and P. R. Cook, Jr.; and contents approved by Fei. Repeated to Bonn and London.

142. Editorial Note

143. Current Economic Developments

Washington, February 27, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Limited Official Use. The source text comprises p. 3 of the issue.

144. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 15, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Confidential. Drafted by Ruth H. Phillips (EUR/RPE).

145. Report of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs

Washington, October 25, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on (Perkins) [1 of 3], Box 17. No classification marking. The source text comprises pages 21–24 of the Committee's 43-page report. For another extract from the report, see Document 79. For additional documentation on this Committee, under the chairmanship of James A. Perkins, see Documents 32 ff.

146. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, November 1, 1968, 2:25 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Box 20. Confidential. Another copy of the memorandum shows that Fried drafted it. (Ibid., Memos to the President, Rostow, Vol. 103)

147. Current Economic Developments

Washington, November 19, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Limited Official Use. The source text comprises pp. 10–14 of the issue.

85. Memorandum From Seymour J. Rubin of the U.S. Delegation to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 85. Memorandum From Seymour J. Rubin of the U.S. Delegation to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Washington, February 12, 1964.

SUBJECT

International Cooperation in Foreign Aid

Congressional and public criticism of our aid program and its accomplishments has, in my judgment, raised questions among our allies as to future U.S. intentions for aid. The basic reason for any aid program is national self-interest; thus French aid to francophon Africa, or British aid to the Commonwealth, will not be greatly affected by the U.S. debate or by reduced U.S. appropriations. But any faltering in U.S. leadership could seriously prejudice efforts to increase the volume of aid of the notable laggards, to bring about an amelioration of terms, and particularly to better efforts of other donors in important target areas—India, Turkey, Pakistan, for example.

It is important that the U.S. make manifest its continued faith in and determination to support a large aid program, tailored to the social and economic development needs of the less developed countries. It is equally important that we make clear that progress in the LDCs is essential to the security and prosperity of the free world; that the benefits of such progress accrue to others as well as to the U.S.; and that the responsibility for attainment of progress must be a shared responsibility. Particularly must the responsibility be shared in those areas which are not the special province of a particular donor—as Africa is of the U.K. and France, or Latin America is of the U.S.

Specifically: 1. I would suggest that in discussions with the other major donors, we subordinate exhortation to increase of total volume or general improvement of terms to efforts to get larger and better contributions in specific target areas. This would probably mean concentrating on contributions to countries which are the subject of IBRD or OECD consortia, or on such other LDCs (such as Brazil, Colombia, Nigeria) as we may feel warrant special effort. This would also imply tailoring our approach to the various donors to their own special interests; for example, asking Italy to increase its contributions in the Mediterranean Basin (and in Latin America, where there are strong cultural ties), rather than asking in more general terms for an increase in the whole of Italian aid.

2. In our discussions with minor donors, I would also attempt to mesh our effort with their special interests (Norwegians are interested in fisheries, etc.), but I would put greater stress here on coming up to a respectable percentage of GNP as an overall target.

3. As to techniques, I would suggest the following: (a) As a long-range matter, a study (about which Walt Rostow and I talked in Paris a year ago) of the market potential in the LDCs, given a reasonable amount of stability and progress, with the evident aim of demonstrating that aid is in the end to the self-interest of the donors.

(b) In the shorter range, I believe it would be useful, as Mr. Kaplan 2 has suggested, to have a Presidential meeting with DAC Ambassadors in Washington. Such a meeting might be supplemented by the designation by the President or Secretary of State of a high-level representative to visit DAC capitals. In addition to emphasizing the importance which the United States attaches to an effective and coordinated free world aid program, such an emissary could zero in on some of the specific targets mentioned above in paragraph 1. He could also state orally, but at a high level, the seriousness with which the United States regards the questions of comparability of volume and terms of aid. This would be a one-shot mission, based on a desire to explain clearly U.S. intentions at a time when they have become the subject of some doubt; and the effort would be designed to enhance the future negotiating position of the U.S. Ambassador.

(c) I suggest that a serious approach be made, also, to at least the major aid recipients, The problems of the recipients vary considerably; but it does seem to me that a good deal more might be done by them than is done at present in the way of obtaining better and bigger development loans from their donors. They might be encouraged to resist short-term credits for long-term projects, to strengthen their representation in DAC capitals, and to take a variety of other steps to improve their capacity to get useful assistance from non-U.S. sources. Such an approach would have to be handled with tact and discretion; but it would have the not-inconsiderable virtue of underlining the responsibilities of the LDCs and stressing that they cannot rely on the U.S. as the inevitable residual rescuer.

(d) The importance of mobilization of private investment, local and foreign, is a cliche, as are most of the slogans which in this field replace effective steps to encourage mobilization and productive investment of private capital. A variety of committees, groups, etc. already exist, whose stated purpose is to mesh private initiative and investment with developmental needs. If a conference on this subject is to be convened, or new groups formed, care should be taken to survey those already in the field, and to decide whether sufficient encouragement has been given to their efforts. A first step would be to talk to the U.S. side of the BIAC. A second would be to give more forthright support to such ventures as ADELA which, for all their faults, are attacking the problem by a method other than sloganeering.

(e) Finally, skepticism in the sophisticated private community is such that I would approach any large conference with caution. The danger is all too great that such a conference will seem to the sophisticated private interests to be a mere propaganda exhibition. A smaller, well-prepared session, at which government representatives would explain their policies and businessmen would have an opportunity to explain theirs, on the basis of a carefully worked out agenda, might be useful. Even that would run into considerable skepticism in capitals less attuned to the importance of public relations than Washington.

Seymour J. Rubin 3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Chron, S. J. Rubin, 1964 Correspondence. No classification marking. Drafted by Rubin who held the rank of Minister with the delegation.

2 Presumably Jacob J. Kaplan, Director of International Development Organizations Staff, AID.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

86. Current Economic Developments 86. Current Economic Developments1

Washington, July 21, 1964.

Issue No. 706

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

IDA RESOURCES REPLENISHED

Formalities looking toward the replenishment of the resources of the International Development Association (IDA) in the amount of $750 million have been completed. This was accomplished with the formal notification to IDA on June 29 by twelve governments that they would contribute new resources to the organization aggregating more than $600 million, which was the condition prescribed by the IDA Board of Governors when the replenishment was authorized in September of last year. (See page 18, October 15, 1963 issue.)2

Background

IDA was established in 1960 by member governments of the World Bank. IDA's Articles of Agreement authorize it to make development credits on terms bearing less heavily on the balance of payments of recipient countries than do conventional loans. All of the development credits so far extended by IDA have been repayable to foreign exchange over 50 years, free of interest. To help meet IDA's administrative costs, a service charge of 3/4 of 1% per annum is payable on amounts withdrawn and outstanding.

Initial subscriptions to IDA, together with three supplementary contributions by Sweden totaling more than $15 million, have amounted to more than $790.9 million in freely convertible currency. IDA so far has extended credits amounting to $778,350,000 for economic development projects in 22 countries. It has lent $395.85 million for the development of railways, highways and telecommunications, $132.8 million for irrigation, land improvement, flood control and other projects to increase the output of food and other agricultural products $85.5 million for the contribution of schools and of municipal water and sewerage systems, $57.7 million for the development of electric power facilities, and $106.5 million for the development of industry.

New Funds

The new funds will be available for commitment in new development credits by IDA over a period extending to at least June 30, 1966. Payment is to be made in three equal annual installments, the first not due until November 1965, one year after the final payment on the subscription to IDA's initial resources.

The following list shows the 12 governments which had given formal notification to IDA by June 29, together with the amounts of their contributions; Belgium, which gave notification on July 2, is included in the list: ($ U.S.)

Australia $19,800,000

Austria $5,040,000

Belgium $8,250,000

Denmark— $7,500,000

France $61,872,000

Germany $72,600,000

Italy $30,000,000

Japan $41,250,000

Luxembourg $375,000

Norway $6,600,000

Sweden $15,000,000

United Kingdom $96,600,000

United States $312,000,000

Four other governments are taking steps toward formal notification that they will contribute the amounts proposed for them. The four are: ($ U.S.)

Canada $41,700,000

Finland $2,298,000

Netherlands $16,500,000

South Africa $3,990,000

In addition, the Government of Kuwait has decided to participate in the replenishment of IDA resources, with a contribution of $3.36 million.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Unclassified. The source text comprises pp. 16–17 of the issue.

2 Issue No. 686; ibid.

87. Editorial Note 87. Editorial Note

At a high-level meeting of the Development Assistance Committee in Paris July 23–24, 1964, Deputy AID Administrator William Gaud headed the U.S. delegation in the absence of AID Director David E. Bell, who was in Washington that week to testify on the foreign assistance bill before the Senate Appropriations Committee and to guide the foreign assistance authorization bill, which was to be debated on the Senate floor. (Telegram 185 to Bonn, July 20; Department of State, Central Files, AID 1)

According to an overall position paper drafted on July 18 in preparation for this meeting, the U.S. delegation was to promote five goals for priority consideration as follows: "a. For reaching agreements around the turn of the year. "(1) Requirements for and supply of aid, including standards of self-help and performance as well as contributions by donor governments.

"(2) Terms of aid, indebtedness of LDC's, and supplier credits, including implementation of the Terms of Aid Resolution, control of supplier credits, and rescheduling of debt in particular cases.

"(3) Groups to relate aid programs for individual developing countries, including ways of increasing the effectiveness of existing groups and criteria for establishing new ones.

"b. For continuing work. "(4) Improving Technical Assistance.

"(5) Collective approach to development issues arising in the United Nations.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, DAC High Level Meeting, Paris 1964, Briefing Book)

The agenda, additional discussion papers, and DAC Chairman Willard L. Thorp's draft report of July 10 (DAC(64)21 (1st Revision)) are ibid. Gaud's statement at the meeting (DAC(64)28, August 14) is ibid., RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. A detailed summary of the July 23–24 meeting is in CEDTO A–76 from Paris, August 1. (Department of State, Central Files, AID 1) For a summary of agreements reached at the meeting, see Document 89.

For a DAC press communique issued at the conclusion of the meeting, see Document 88. For text of John C. Bullitt's notes at this meeting, see Document 90.

88. Press Release Issued by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 88. Press Release Issued by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development1

Paris, July 24, 1964.

Press A(64)51

40th MEETING OF THE OECD DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE COMMITTEE

Paris, 23rd-24th July, 1964

1. A total financial flow of $8.15 billion to less-developed countries was reported by the Members of the OECD Development Assistance Committee for 1963. This compares with $8.0 billion for 1962. High level government representatives of this Committee under the chairmanship of Willard L. Thorp completed their third annual meeting today at which they examined the results of the latest annual review of the development assistance efforts and policies of their Member Governments.

2. The Annual Aid Review which was completed with today's meeting constitutes an important feature of the DAC's work. During the Review which took place during the past three months each Member was subjected to vigorous questioning concerning its programme and performance and suggestions were made for its improvement. In the interest of promoting closer integration of financial assistance and technical assistance, this year's Aid Review included consideration of technical co-operation programmes. The Committee also took stock of the progress made in other aspects of its work including the review of the development problems of certain individual less-developed countries and regions.

3. The Hon. Willard J. Thorp, Chairman of the DAC, presented a report on the major problems which have emerged from the review of Members' policies.2 He drew attention, among other things to the need for further easing the financial terms and conditions of assistance provided and taking action to ensure a persistent upward trend in the flow of assistance. The Chairman put forward a number of recommendations under the following headings.

New initiatives to expand the assistance flow;

Improving the terms and conditions of aid;

Steps to increase the effectiveness of aid;

More effective international co-ordination;

More stress on performance of developing countries;

Improving technical co-operation;

Encouraging the efforts of the private sector;

Considering the proposals of UNCTAD regarding trade and development.

These recommendations are set out in full in the attached annex.3

4. The Committee examined the report in detail. The Members of the DAC agreed to take into account, in the light of their differing capabilities, the recommendations put forward by the Chairman.

5. The Members agreed to give particular attention in the coming months to the following major problems: 1. The requirements for assistance in the light of self-help measures by less-developed countries, and the adequacy of the supply of aid to meet these requirements. 2. Terms and conditions, indebtedness, suppliers' credits and other short- and medium-term credits. 3. The co-ordination of various aid programmes. The DAC envisaged the possibility of holding a Ministerial Level Meeting early in 1965 to consider these problems.

6. In the discussions the government representatives expressed concern about the growing indebtedness of less-developed countries and the need to prevent an excessive growth in debt service requirements while meeting the needs of the developing countries for a continued flow of capital to finance sound development.

7. The recently held United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in Geneva provided further background to the discussions of the Development Assistance Committee.4 It was agreed to study the recommendations adopted by the United Nations Conference in view of the importance of this Conference for the work of DAC and government assistance policies.

8. The total financial flow to the less developed countries from the DAC of $8.1 billion in 1963 consisted of $5.7 billion of official bilateral flows, some $400 million official contributions to multilateral agencies and an estimated private capital flow of $2.0 billion. In 1963 the flow of funds to less-developed countries from multilateral agencies substantially exceeded payments made by DAC Members to these multilateral agencies. Thus the total flow of funds actually received by less-developed countries in 1963 was $8.4 billion as compared with $7.7 billion for 1962. There is a likelihood of a further increase in 1964. While new commitments were substantially above disbursements in 1963 they were somewhat lower than new commitments in 1962.

The Development Assistance Committee comprises the governments of Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany (F.R.), Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom, the United States and the Commission of the European Economic Community. The meeting was also attended by observers from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. No classification marking. The source text is enclosure 1 to airgram CEDTO A–76 from Paris, August 1.

2 Regarding Thorp's draft report, see Document 87. No approved version of this report has been found.

3 Not printed.

4 The U.N. Conference on Trade and Development was held in Geneva March 23–June 16.

89. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 89. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, July 24, 1964, 9 p.m.

CEDTO 88. From Brown, ADCOR. Subj: DAC high level meeting, July 23–24. DAC high level meeting concluded afternoon July 24 with agreement on following major subjects: 1. DAC will concentrate on following major problems: requirements for and supply of aid in light of performance by less-developed countries, including thorough examination of “gap theory” and examination specific countries; terms and conditions of aid, indebtedness, suppliers credits and other short and medium term credits, particularly effect on development; coordination of aid programs.

Working parties to be established for first two subjects. On coordination, consideration will be undertaken after DAC meeting in the fall to determine if working party required. Work in these fields to move forward with a view to consideration by Ministers at a meeting early in 1965.

2. After comprehensive discussion on the U.S. proposal for a ministerial meeting after the first of the year, agreement was reached on including the communique sentence worded to the effect that “DAC envisaged the possibility of holding a ministerial level meeting early in 1965.”2

3. Meeting also agreed DAC would establish working party on UNCTAD. Immediate task of this working party is to review the Geneva conference, the agreements and disagreements, with ultimate objective of trying to reach consensus among DAC members on questions likely to arise at UN. Governments will be asked to select representatives to the meeting who were at Geneva, if possible, and to work with the secretariat on organizing material for the working party which will start its work early in September.

4. DAC to strengthen its work in the field of technical assistance.

5. Chairman to undertake mutual evaluation of individual country aid/performance in form of confidential letters to individual governments. This will be undertaken as experiment and await reactions from governments following first year's evaluation. Chairman will be mailing letters to all DAC members July 27.

6. Secretariat will develop ideas on how to improve publicity on common aid effort of DAC aid countries, also to prepare pros and cons on Canadian suggestion of occasional DAC meetings in capitals.

7. Chairman's report will be submitted to Council for publication.

8. Both Secretary General and certain countries including Italy, Netherlands, and Belgium throughout meeting stressed importance of UNCTAD for future work of the DAC and need for reaching common positions on UNCTAD follow-up. While U.S. did not dispute importance of UNCTAD to DAC activities, U.S. Representative made clear our view that work should proceed on three major problems of volume of aid, terms and conditions of aid, and coordination of aid programs, on their own merits and as quickly as possible and that it was these problems which would be considered at proposed ministerial meeting.

More detailed airgram follows.3

Finletter 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use.

2 See the communique, Document 88, which contains this language.

3  CEDTO A–76 from Paris; see footnote 1, Document 88.

4 Until early 1965, the U.S. Delegation to the OECD, headed by John M. Leddy, was an element of the U.S. Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations (USRO) in Paris. As Chief of Mission, Thomas K. Finletter signed all documents originating in USRO. Document 107, signed by Leddy reflects a reorganization in early 1965 that made the U.S. Mission to the OECD a separate Mission.

90. Memorandum for the Files 90. Memorandum for the Files1

Washington, July 30, 1964.

SUBJECT

DAC High Level Meeting, July 23–24, 1964

1. Chairman Thorp opened the meeting. He said the new machinery arising from UNCTAD will accelerate the discourse on development and will require DAC members to take public positions on a series of issues. This will require a major effort to coordinate national positions in DAC—both positive and negative positions. Henceforth DAC meetings should be scheduled so as to permit effort to develop common position in advance of international conferences. He made it clear that the other work of DAC should continue, but his emphasis on need to coordinate positions for UN meetings was strong. He said this need represented a “great and new change of focus of DAC's work". [While the balance of the two day meeting was largely a desultory procedural discussion of work schedule, the atmosphere was definitely one of a revitalized DAC, with a real job to do and one which it felt institutionally capable of doing. Virtually all delegations explicitly recognized the political importance of UNCTAD and the corollary necessity for coordination among DAC members in the face of the 75.]2

2. Thorp asked how trade policies were to be adjusted if one wants to add acceleration of economic development as an objective of such policies. [While there was no further elaboration of this theme, Thorp clearly suggested that classical commercial policy theories may have to be modified in the light of problems of developing countries.]

3. Other questions raised by Thorp were: a) How to judge whether more aid is needed;

b) How to judge what to require from the developing countries;

c) Terms of aid and debt service problem—suppliers credits, etc.; and

d) How best to coordinate aid operations.

4. At the end of the two day meeting, Chairman Thorp summarized results, as follows: a) Establishment of Working Party on UNCTAD , to review conference and examine background and report to DAC. Also, to serve as focal point of greater effort of DAC members to find common ground on UNCTAD issues. The WP would be made up of individuals who participated at Geneva. [I would hope Karazy3 could participate for IBRD. Presumably this would be restricted to Committee III matters; as in other organizations, OECD will have to work out jurisdictional questions over various UNCTAD issues.]

b) Establishment of Working Party on aid requirements and supply. This would use as its raw material work AID (Chenery) is doing this summer to determine what internal and external resources would be required by the 10–15 developing countries to which most U.S. aid goes on alterative assumptions of economic and population growth rates.

c) Revival of Working Party on Terms of Aid. This time to include study of problems created by suppliers credits, swaps and other short-term indebtedness; how to cope with countries that have or may be approaching a debt crisis (including extent to which creditor countries are institutionally equipped to do this efficiently), and how to cooperate—both as among creditors and with debtor—to avoid such a situation arising. [Obviously Avramovic4 should play a large role in the analytical work; on questions of how to avoid or cope with problems, Fund should also be involved.]

d) There would be a meeting of DAC this Fall to analyze results of various coordinating efforts; i.e., India and Pakistan consortia, Colombia consultative group, OECD consortia for Greece and Turkey, etc. [Presumably an IBRD Vice President should attend this meeting.]

e) The suggestion was made by several delegations and generally agreed that the DAC Chairman should, in confidence, write each country concrete suggestions on how to improve its aid effort, along the lines of WP-3. Chairman Thorp had already planned to send a letter to each country summarizing his comments at the completion of its Annual Aid Review, and it was agreed that the experience with these letters would be analyzed before proceeding further.

f) The question of greater publicity for the common aid effort (as distinguished from DAC, the institution), including DAC meetings outside Paris, would be studied.

g) Work on (b) and (c) above would go forward with a view to achieving sufficient progress to warrant a DAC ministerial meeting early in 1965. [It might be possible for George Woods to attend this meeting.]

5. Other comments of interest were as follows:

a) Kristensen 5

i) Any fear of OECD countries seeming to “gang up” on developing countries dispelled at Geneva, where 77 preferred to deal with the developed countries as a group.

ii) Mentioned approaches to OECD for organizing financial assistance from Argentina, Brazil, Rwanda Burundi, Trinidad.

b) U.K. (Rickett)6

i) While mutual examination in DAC should continue, it now has a new task—to work out common policies. These need not be negative—in fact, DAC countries should present as favorable a posture as possible.

c) France (deLattre)7

i) Geneva calls for harmonized attitude, even if we can't achieve identity.

ii) France will not reduce aid, but it is not likely to increase, either, so that it will decline in relative terms.

iii) Thought Chairman's Report optimistic on future volume of aid. While he thought volume should increase, he wasn't sure it would. Also critical of complaisance about “pipeline” problem. He pointed out the pipeline had not increased because commitments hadn't increased—not because expenditures had accelerated. Expenditures are not rapid enough because of lack of feasibility studies. Perhaps if more could be done by CIAP, IDB, IBRD, aid givers would have assurance of good projects and could move ahead faster.

iv) It's fine to talk about private enterprise, but budget aid is the really important factor, since private capital doesn't come in until take-off point has been reached.

v) Outside of Argentina and Brazil, no major countries have debt consolidation problem.

d) Germany (Sachs)8

i) Developed countries must be strongly affected by Geneva, which was not an end, but a beginning.

e) IBRD (Miller)9

i) In the course of producing reports requested by UNCTAD, IBRD will want to consult from time to time with DAC.

ii) Miller also said the Bank doesn't consider aid terms its business, although on an ad hoc basis in Indian and Pakistan consortiums the Bank had put pressure on countries. [The attitude that the general problem of aid terms—and therefore of LDC's indebtedness—is not proper Bank business, while not commented upon, came as a surprise to me. I would think in the future the Bank should be a good deal more, rather than less, concerned to exert whatever and however pressure is available to it—both in general and specific cases—to bring about softer terms.]

iii) Noted Mr. Woods' desire to be of help in bringing UN resolutions along and in cooperating with DAC. Thorp commented that he hoped DAC can be of help to the Bank, as the Bank has been to DAC.

John C. Bullitt 10

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Bell, Gaud, and AID/IDOS. In an attached note to Gaud, July 31, Bullitt wrote that he also sent a copy to George Woods.

2 All brackets are in the source text and have been added by hand.

3 Not further identified.

4 Presumably Dragoslav Avramovic, Yugoslav international bank official and Director of the Economic Staff at the IBRD.

5  Thorkil Kristensen, Danish business economist and OECD Secretary-General.

6 Sir Denis Rickett.

7  Andre de Lattre.

8 Presumably Hans-Georg Sachs, Acting German Representative to the European Economic Community.

9  John Duncan Miller, British international banker and Director of the European Office of the IBRD.

10 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

91. Current Economic Developments 91. Current Economic Developments1

Washington, September 29, 1964.

Issue No. 711

[Here follows an article on an unrelated subject.]

EXPANDED ROLES OF IBRD-IFC-IDA EVIDENT AT MEETING IN TOKYO

Discussions at the annual IBRD meeting in Tokyo reflected the expanding roles of the International Bank and its affiliated agencies, the IFC and the IDA.2 Together these agencies committed more than $1.1 billion during the past year, the highest level yet attained. Both IBRD President Woods and Secretary Dillon stressed that Bank group efforts to promote economic development would be successful to the extent that appropriate self-help measures were taken by developing countries and suitable bilateral assistance was provided by the developed member countries.3

Boards of Governors approved three innovations, two of which are designed to enlarge the lending resources of the IFC and IDA. The third clears the way for further progress toward establishment of Bank-sponsored facilities for arbitration and conciliation of investment disputes.

IBRD

President Woods indicated that after an absence of several years, the IBRD will be back in the financial markets of the world to borrow substantial sums during the current fiscal year. Secretary Dillon has urged the Bank to intensify its efforts to assure that more effective facilities are developed for mobilizing private savings in the capital markets of industrialized countries that are accumulating international reserves. Unless such facilities are developed, Dillon said, the Bank will run the risk of having to limit its operations because of excessive reliance on the markets of the US.

The critical barrier, Dillon said, is the high cost of borrowing. It is important that more imagination and effort be devoted to mitigating the impact of these costs of money on the Bank's operation. Enlarged borrowing facilities in other markets would not only ensure the Bank and the developing countries of a broader base on which to rely for financial support, Dillon said, but would be consistent with our common objective of promoting international balance and the effective functioning of the international monetary system, thus meshing with the efforts of the Fund.

In the past year, Bank lending reached nearly $810 million.

IFC

The Governors at Tokyo approved a recommendation under which the IBRD would be authorized to make, participate in, or guarantee loans to the IFC for use in its lending operations. The aggregate amount of debt incurred from any source and outstanding shall not exceed four times the IFC's unimpaired subscribed capital and surplus. IFC resources presently total $120 million. The Articles of Agreement of the International Bank will have to be amended to permit the Bank to make loans to the IFC, within limits, for relending to private enterprise without government guarantee (is required for IBRD loans). The Articles of Agreement of the IFC will also have to be amended to permit the IFC to borrow from the IBRD.

In FY 1964 the IFC invested $21 million, its largest annual total thus far and thereby has committed an amount larger than its total subscribed capital. The activities of the IFC fall into three main categories: first, the making of selected direct investment, usually on a mixed loan and equity basis; second, the provision of equity capital to industrial finance companies; and third, assisting growth of capital markets by engaging in underwriting and standby transactions.

IDA

The Governors approved the recommendation of the Executive Directors that the Bank transfer $50 million of last year's earnings to IDA, which was established to help meet the need for low cost, long-term credits. ($50 million is the balance of the Bank's net income for 1963–64 remaining after the allocation of $47 million to the Supplemental Reserve.) With the action of the Executive Directors in removing the Bank's one percent commission, the previous practice of automatically allocating these amounts to the Special Reserve will end. This will significantly increase the earnings available for future transfers to IDA.

In endorsing the transfer to IDA, Secretary Dillon noted the widespread interest among developed and developing countries in further increasing the resources which can be administered by the Bank family on IDA terms. Dillon expressed hope that the Bank's continuing studies will provide useful guides as to the sources and magnitude of those funds.

The amount of new IDA credits approved during the past year was $283 million, bringing total IDA commitments on June 30, 1964 to $778 million. Disbursements during the year were $124 million as compared with $56 million in the preceding year.

Before the action for the replenishment of IDA resources became effective in June 1964, IDA had committed almost all of its available resources, which totaled $791 million. With the completion of replenishment through formal action by all IDA Part I countries, IDA will have $753 million available for new commitments over the period extending at least to June 30, 1966.

Arbitration Machinery

The IBRD Governors cleared the way for continued work by the Executive Directors looking toward the establishment of a center for the settlement of investment disputes arising between foreign investors and governments, despite the objections of the Latin American countries. The Executive Directors, assisted by a committee of legal experts designated by interested governments, will work out a final text of a Convention providing such a center for submission to government early in 1965.

The Convention would make facilities available to which foreign investors and governments could have access, on a voluntary basis, for the settlement of investment disputes through conciliation, arbitration, or conciliation followed by arbitration. The initiative for such proceedings might come either from a state or from an investor. But no state by the mere fact of accepting the Convention would be bound to resort to the facilities of the Conciliation and Arbitration Center, and no foreign investor could initiate proceedings against a signatory state unless both had previously agreed to have recourse to the Center. Once they had so agreed, however, both parties would be irrevocably bound to carry out their undertaking.

The US and other major nations have supported the proposal for the Arbitration Center. They agree with IBRD President Woods that establishment of the Center would remove fears among many private companies about investing abroad.

The Latin Americans, in rejecting the proposal, said that since the legal and constitutional systems of Latin American member countries offer foreign investors the same rights and protection, in regard to confiscation, discrimination, and expropriation, as their own nationals, the proposed center would contravene the legal and constitutional principles of those countries by, de facto, conferring a privilege on foreign investors, i.e. to sue a state outside its national territory and dispense with the courts of law, which is denied their own nationals.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Unclassified. The source text comprises pp. 5–7 of the issue.

2 The annual meetings of the Boards of Governors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Monetary Fund, International Development Association, and International Finance Corporation were held in Tokyo November 7–11. Secretary of the Treasury C. Douglas Dillon headed the U.S. delegation.

3 For text of Dillon's September 8 statement at the Tokyo meeting, see Department of State Bulletin, September 28, 1964, pp. 444–448.

92. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 92. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, October 31, 1964.

CEDTO A–293

SUBJECT

Role of DAC in Post-UNCTAD World

From Leddy. ADCOR. As reported CEDTO 265,2 this delegation has been giving thought to the question of the appropriate role for DAC in the light of the new factors in the relations between DCs and LDCs introduced by UNCTAD and the imminent establishment of the new UN Trade and Development Board.3 The results of these reflections to date are embodied in the attached paper,4 which is being forwarded for Washington review and comment.

The paper is based on an appreciation of the current situation which may be summarized as follows. The Developed Countries find themselves faced with mounting pressures from the Less Developed Countries for an increased transfer of resources needed by the LDCs to increase the pace of their economic development. The demands of the LDCs are not likely to be satisfied by actions which the DCs will feel able to take in the field of trade, with the result that pressures will increase in the aid field. At present, the DCs collectively are ill-prepared for this development, either in terms of basic data, a positive common doctrine, or institutions. The existence of the Trade and Development Board, which with its predominant LDC membership and its partisan secretariat will be the arena favored by the LDCs for consideration of the full range of problems in trade and aid, makes it imperative from the point of view of the DCs to make good these deficiencies.

A review of the institutions operating in the field of aid leads to the conclusion that though parts of the over-all problem are being effectively handled in one place or another—the IBRD, the IMF, the CIAP, the Colombo Plan, etc.—there is a vital area uncovered which can only be treated in the DAC.

The DAC is the only institution available which can effectively meet the requirement of the Developed Countries to assess the availability of essential data bearing on the financial relations of the DCs with the LDCs, to arrange that gaps in these data are filled, and to assure to the DCs possession of an adequate body of statistical material together with an assessment of its implications.

The DAC is the only institution where it will be possible to develop a reasonable and coherent body of doctrine which will make it possible to gear aid programs more effectively to economic development and relate them properly to the performance of the developing countries.

DAC can also, and without any great bureaucratic proliferation, contribute significantly to the effective co-ordination of bilateral programs in the most important areas which now lack such co-ordination (and are not likely to attract IBRD leadership), and in so doing aid in the application of the body of doctrine referred to above.

If Washington agrees with the general conclusions reached in this paper, the immediate operational problem will become one of persuading the other members of DAC that these are the proper goals to pursue. Some will be favorably disposed, some will be negative, while most will probably be neutral. Conversations to the positive lines proposed will not be won quickly, and a sustained campaign will be required.

The single most positive element on which it may be possible to capitalize is no doubt the existence of the three DAC working groups established after the High Level Meeting. They have the potential of developing in a manner which will point to the validity of the proposals made in this paper, and could take the DAC some distance down the paths proposed. The Chairman of the Working Parties are thus seen as key figures, meriting a special effort at persuasion on our part.

Moreover, an educational effort in the capitals of some of the more important and/or influential DAC members will be indicated. This could be effectively begun with the visits of Hollis Chenery in November, already, tentatively agreed to. If Administrator Bell makes a pre-Christmas trip to London and to Bonn, as there are indications he might, he could lend powerful support where it would help most. For quiet, low-pressure but continuing persuasive efforts directed at operating officials, the Embassies in six or eight capitals should be mobilized. Assuming Washington approval, the Delegation would propose to bring the Economic Counsellors of the Embassies concerned to Paris for a day of discussion, intended to make clear the objectives sought, and to explore ways and means of securing agreement from the several Governments.

The overt side of the campaign might be most effectively opened, it is suggested, in the course of Under Secretary Ball's speech at the Ministerial meeting December 2–3. As a minimum, this speech might suggest that the fifth anniversary of the establishment of the DAC, coming at a time when the relations of the DCs and LDCs are in a state of flux, makes timely a re-examination of DAC operations, and consideration of the institution's appropriate role and that this should be the basic concern of the Ministerial meeting tentatively agreed to in the DAC last July.5

It would be better if after having made this statement the Under Secretary went on to suggest the changes in the nature of DAC operations called for by the changes in the world situation and to ask that the DAC working parties specifically address themselves to a consideration of these matters with a view to reporting recommendations to a DAC Ministerial meeting in the spring.

Finletter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(OECD) 8. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Alex B. Daspit, cleared by Leddy, and approved by Frank M. Coffin. A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Noted—WSG[aud].”

2 Dated October 10. (Ibid., AID 1)

3 The Final Act of UNCTAD recommended, among other things, the creation of a Trade and Development Board, consisting of 55 members, as part of the U.N. machinery on economic matters. Resolution 1995 (XIX) adopted without dissent (under a no-voting arrangement agreed to on December 1, 1964) by the U.N. General Assembly on December 30, which established UNCTAD as an organ of the U.N. General Assembly, also established the Trade and Development Board as part of the U.N. machinery in the economic field. See American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 134, 166, 188–190.

4 Entitled “Report of the DAC in the Post UNCTAD World,” undated, not printed.

5 See Document 87.

93. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 93. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Paris, November 3, 1964.

Dear Dave:

I am enclosing a letter I have written Hollis about his forthcoming trip,2 and—more important—about our airgram (CEDTO A–293)3 concerning the future role of DAC and how we might proceed to advance our common approach, assuming we can arrive at one.

I take it that we are as interested as ever in an increasingly effective relationship among the developed countries and, equally, an increasingly effective relationship between these countries and the developing countries. If so, I think DAC's methods and orientation can stand some constructive reexamination.

What I would like to urge is that there be a serious analysis of our airgram, involving yourself, Hollis, Bob Schaetzel, and others, in time for Under secretary Ball to include in his speech at the OECD Ministerial Meeting on December 2–3 the approach suggested in my letter to Hollis. The comments would include reference to the fifth anniversary, the need for reexamination, the core of our new thinking, and a specific suggestion that the DAC Chairman, the chairmen of the three working parties, and others as appropriate review DAC's role in the light of the problems and opportunities which exist today, and bring their suggestions to the attention of a Ministerial meeting.

This, it seems to me, would do much to engage governments in facing, on a broader basis, their problems of dealing with the developing world. So long as isolated problems are referred back to them, they are all too likely to be negative or indifferent. This is the case today, on too many issues, with all the other major donors. The suggestions for Undersecretary Ball's speech would not only give it some fresh material, but the initiative proposed fits into the present working party arrangements in DAC and would, we think, not be viewed as too radical.

Time being so short, you might be able to make enough progress to agree on the thrust of this part of the Ball speech. We would have time later to put flesh on the bones.

John Leddy is writing a letter to this general effect to Bob Schaetzel.4 I hope we can, by this intervention, add fuel to the fire we started at the High Level Meeting.

With best personal regards,

Sincerely,

Frank

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. Unclassified. A typed notation at the end of the source text indicates that a copy of the letter was sent via air pouch. A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Noted—WSG[aud].” Copies were sent to Gaud and Schaetzel.

2 Dated November 3, not printed.

3  Document 92.

4 Not found.

94. Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator for Program, Agency for International Development (Chenery) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 94. Memorandum From the Assistant Administrator for Program, Agency for International Development (Chenery) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Washington, November 23, 1964.

SUBJECT

Division of labor between the IBRD and DAC on coordination of aid for individual LDC's—agenda for meeting November 24

Several factors—the Bell-Woods lunch2 and the Coffin message in CEDTO A–2933 —have stressed the need for increased donor coordination of aid for individual LDC's. In pushing the IBRD to organize additional coordination efforts and in preparing for the December 9–10 DAC meeting on assessment of coordination experience we will need to develop a U.S. position on the division of labor between the two institutions. I propose this focus, recognizing that in the longer run the IDB and CIAP may play a larger coordination role in Latin America. Thus far, LDC's have applied for coordination sponsorship mainly to the IBRD, and demand has exceeded supply. This memo is to provide a basis for discussion on the selection of appropriate institutions for coordination.

Aims of coordination

The logical aims of coordination are to obtain donor consensus on the amount and nature of an LDC's requirements, on desirable LDC policies and performance, and on means to deal with indebtedness problems. The U.S. has these aims. Other donors have not fully accepted them though they agree that coordination should promote more effective use of LDC resources and aid. In addition, the U.S. has the objective of increasing the overall share of aid provided by other donors though increases in their share for certain LDC's. Our aims in coordination imply the desirability of a substantial increase in the number of LDC's subject to donor consultation.

Currently formal donor coordination is underway for six LDC's. The IBRD manages consortia for India and Pakistan, and consultative groups for Nigeria, Colombia and Tunisia. A Bank group for Sudan is dormant. The OECD/DAC has consortia for Turkey and Greece, the latter phasing out. Recent discussions between Bank staff and PC staff indicate between six and twenty additional candidates for coordinating arrangements, depending on selection criteria. The Bank is geared to handle only a fraction of these possible candidates. We need to identify relevant factors for determining which possible candidates we want the Bank to cover.

Possible candidates for coordination

The PC-Bank discussion focused on selection criteria and specific LDC's for coordinated donor action (a) to promote development and (b) to deal with debt-servicing problems. A memo of that conversation is attached.4

For countries receiving a significant amount of aid we agreed on two broad criteria for selecting candidates for development coordination: LDC performance (including desire and capacity) and interest on the part of several donors. (Continuing discussions with the Bank are resulting in refinements both of the criteria and of the countries listed below.)

On this basis LDC coordination candidates were classified as Sure, Probable, Possible, or Political. The Political category includes countries to which aid is extended by several donors for various political reasons and which may or may not meet development criteria. Several receive substantial amounts of Bloc aid. Further comments on specific LDC's are included in the Annex.5

Sure Probable Possible Political

India* East Africa Morocco* Ethiopia Somalia

Pakistan* Morocco* UAR * Guinea*

Turkey Brazil* Argentina Liberia

Colombia Chile Costa Rica Congo (Leo)

Nigeria Peru Mexico Korea

Tunisia Sudan Iran Thailand

Jordan

Afghanistan

Our discussions with Avramovic, DeMuth, and Wilson6 show that the Bank has not reached tentative agreement on how far it would go in sponsoring increased coordination, but indications are that Bank interest will be greatest in the “probable” countries.

Bases for the division of responsibility

To establish a basis for division of labor between DAC and the Bank on country coordination, several factors are relevant: (i) membership of the organizations, (ii) the policies and effectiveness of the management, (iii) the capability of the staffs, and (iv) the extent to which the U. S. can exert influence.

1. Membership. The membership of the LDC's in the Bank increases their influence and hence their trust in the organization as an aid coordination sponsor. Conversely, the DAC's exclusive donor membership increases its ability to deal with politically difficult LDC's, e.g., DAC's successful effort last year to raise contributions for the UN fund for operational personnel in the Congo. DAC's limited membership has not prevented useful discussion in the past of some LDC's where political problems do not overshadow development, such as the three East African states.

2. Policies and Effectiveness. On performance, the IBRD currently exceeds the DAC in effectiveness of coordination management. In addition, the Bank may be better able to influence LDC policies, though its previous efforts at such influence have been relatively mild.

This would be a debatable Bank advantage if the donors in DAC were in concert on an LDC's performance.

The weakness of DAC and the OECD in their coordination endeavors thus far can be attributed at least in part to the newness of the organization and, in the case of Turkey, to past political events and financial irresponsibility of the country.

The Bank has not been an effective fund raiser among donors in the consortia. This task has fallen largely to the U. S. just as in the case of the OECD consortium for Turkey.

3. Staff Capability. The Bank staff is much larger and more experienced. It is normally engaged in country analysis and in loan operations. However, the OECD Secretariat can probably be strengthened to provide a capability for country analysis of comparable quality. Past Bank policy on sponsoring coordination has been cautious. With existing staff, the Bank could probably take on a few additional LDC's. Beyond this, the Bank would have to decide whether to expand its staff since the staff requirement for mounting an effective effort is sizeable.

4. U. S. Influence. At present, U. S. effectiveness in obtaining agreement to discuss a given LDC is greater in DAC, where the agenda is controlled by member governments, than in the Bank. The Bank management can successfully resist organizing coordination for a given country; it has not been willing to assume this responsibility in many cases, particularly for politically sensitive countries. U. S. influence in the Bank can be considerably increased through effective appointment and use of the alternate U. S. executive director and more high level A.I.D.-Bank contacts.

The objectives in allocating countries for coordination responsibilities

A number of objectives might be served in the process of allocating countries between the Bank and the IBRD for coordination responsibilities. In some cases, conflicts may exist among the objectives; for example, the desire to maximize the number of countries subject to coordination may conflict with the desire to raise the DAC score on managing successful coordinating efforts.

The list of possible objectives below is presented to obtain responses of which should be judged of major importance, and which are second-order importance.

Possible objectives include: 1. Substantially increase the number of countries subject to effective coordination.

2. Strengthen DAC capabilities (including its image and staff) for coordination and for aid policy discussions.

3. Get the Bank to take on political candidates as subjects for coordination.

4. Seek to improve DAC record on coordination.

5. Seek to increase the share of non-U.S. bilateral aid.

Alternatives for a division of labor

1. The logical development of present practice based largely on the Bank's preference would be for the IBRD to continue to focus on the LDC's with better development performance and outlook, the DAC on LDC's where political problems inhibit the Bank's role and some developmental cases the Bank is not able to take on. This has the risk of giving DAC a political image and lessening its effectiveness in dealing with other development policy matters.

2. The Coffin proposal in CEDTO A–293 essentially was to make a deliberate effort to increase the DAC's capacity to handle development coordination and divide the workload between DAC and Bank. This division could be ad hoc according to (a) Bank preference, (b) LDC preference, (c) donor country preference. In practice, all these parties would undoubtedly influence decisions. The advantage of this would be to strengthen DAC's image and effectiveness. It should enable the OECD Secretariat to attract more competent staff.

3. Geoffrey Wilson informally suggested that the DAC could be used as a donors' forum to discuss all coordination cases and establish consistent donor policies, but not maintain a supporting staff for coordination. In development coordination cases, the Bank could be used as the forum for donor discussion with the developing country and provide all the expert staff for country analysis. This has the advantage of capitalizing on the main current qualifications of the two organizations—the DAC as a restricted donor forum and the Bank as an experienced operating organization with donor and recipient membership. It has the disadvantage of minimizing the capacity of OECD to attract good stuff and thereby would weaken DAC's capacity to deal with non-country matters.

In posing these alternatives for discussion, PC favors the second because it strengthens the DAC as an institution while not diminishing the role of the IBRD.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. No classification marking. Drafted by Richard Palmer (AID/PC/IDOS) and Robert Aliber (AID/AA/PC). A stamped notation on the source text reads: “Noted—DEB[ell].” A copy was sent to Gaud.

2 No formal record of this meeting has been found.

3  Document 92.

4 Entitled “Country Notes,” November 23, not printed.

5 The attached memorandum by Chenery to the files, November 23, is not printed.

* Countries with serious external debt problems

* Countries with serious external debt problems

* Countries with serious external debt problems

* Countries with serious external debt problems

* Countries with serious external debt problems

* Countries with serious external debt problems

* Countries with serious external debt problems

6  Richard H. DeMuth, IBRD official, and Geoffrey Wilson, IBRD Vice President.

95. Memorandum for the Files 95. Memorandum for the Files1

Washington, December 2, 1964.

In accordance with prior conversations with Secretary Dillon and Secretary Ball, I called George Woods yesterday to respond to his request for informal advice on this proposal for the IBRD to take leadership in debt-rescheduling negotiations regarding developing countries. His request was made at a luncheon a few weeks ago2 at which he indicated that he would be willing to see the Bank take leadership in such situations, if requested to do so by the country concerned, if it could be generally understood by creditor and debtor nations alike that the IBRD's own participation in a rescheduling situation would be governed by a simple formula: namely, that the Bank would take steps to avoid receiving any net payments from the debtor country during the rescheduling period.

I reported to Woods the informal concurrence of the U.S. Government in such an initiative on his part. I pointed out to him that this formula might require him in some cases to make the equivalent of a program loan in order to achieve the objective of no net transfers during a given time period. George agreed with this conclusion, and went a step further to say that this proposed formula might require the Bank, if neither project loans nor program loans could be effectuated on the appropriate time schedule, to participate directly in the rescheduling agreement.

Woods expressed his pleasure to know that the United States will support him on this matter. He did not indicate what his next step would be.

In the course of the conversation, reference was made to India and to Chile as illustrations of countries for which the Bank might take this type of leadership.

DEB

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. Confidential. An attached note from A. Adams to the Executive Secretariat, December 4, indicates that copies were hand carried to Trued (Treasury) and Bator (White House) and requested that copies be sent to Solomon and Chenery.

2 See footnote 2, Document 94.

96. Editorial Note 96. Editorial Note

The Ministerial Council of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development met in Paris December 2–3, 1964. Under Secretary of State George W. Ball headed the U.S. Delegation. A summary of the OECD Ministerial proceedings is in two parts, CEDTO A–386 from Paris, December 11, and CEDTO A–392 from Paris, December 11, both in Department of State, Central Files, ECIN 3 OECD. For text of the December 3 communiqué, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pages 497–499.

Background and talking points papers on U.S. preparations for and participation in the OECD Ministerial Council meeting are in the Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Meetings—OECD Ministerial Dec. 2–3, 1964, and Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2456–2457.

97. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 97. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, December 18, 1964.

CEDTO A–406

SUBJECT

DAC Meeting on Coordination

From Leddy. ADCOR. Day and a half meeting on coordination December 9–10 focused primarily on problems of coordination financial assistance in individual recipient countries. General agreement that substantially more coordination needed than now undertaken. List of countries receiving $30 million or more annually from several different donors prepared by Secretariat, and supplementary comments by Chenery suggested a priori case can be made for necessity of coordination in some 25 or 30 countries. Allowing for those now covered by consortia and consultative groups, or by CIAP, substantial problem remains.

Large part of discussion devoted to IBRD, what it has done to coordinate assistance in past and what it will do in future. IBRD Vice-President Geoffrey Wilson made presentation and fielded numerous questions. Wilson explained that Bank consortia limited to India and Pakistan because soundings in 1960 and 1961 revealed lack of willingness on part of major donors to join additional groups of this sort. Consultative groups proved acceptable alternative arrangement, because they do not undertake fund raising operations. In past Bank had applied two criteria before agreeing undertake formation of consortia or consultative groups: (1) country must have an adequate plan and development program, and (2) it must be committed to policies likely to promote economic development. Decision by Bank that country met these criteria thus constituted recommendation of recipient country as worthy of donor attention.

There was no searching discussion of operation of either form of coordinating arrangement. Delegates for the most part seemed satisfied with Bank consortia, or at any rate desirous of avoiding comments which might touch on Bank sensitivities. Wilson attempted to blur distinction between consortia and consultative groups, indicating that aside from fact that consultative groups did not establish target for aid givers, other differences were of degree.

There was general opposition to “arm twisting” efforts of consortia and this obviously explanation of unwillingness European countries to see further consortia established. Chairman made some effort to probe procedures whereby recipient countries' planning assumptions as to availability of certain amounts of assistance are brought into line with what is actually supplied, but his questions elicited little more than historical account of factors influencing first Indian plan. British rep stated his conviction that from the point of view of developing countries most important aspect of consortia was the assurance they gave of continuing availability of funds. British colonial experience had demonstrated such assurance to be essential for satisfactory planning. He suggested that this objective might be accomplished without objectionable pressure on donors by modification of procedures followed in consultative groups, with participating countries making declaration of minimum continuing contribution they were prepared to provide. (He called this an “entry fee.”)

As to the influence of consortia and consultative groups on country performance and effective utilization of aid, Bank representative appeared somewhat more complacent than certain country representatives. He suggested that Bank was in a better position to undertake this delicate task than individual donors or donor group such as DAC because its membership included the less-developed countries, and they therefore felt a certain sense of identity with the Bank. He seemed to claim success in this endeavor for consultative group operations for consortia. Chenery, on other hand, thought that the problem of performance was a largely neglected area where there was a large potential payoff. He felt there needed to be a clearer understanding of relations of aid and performance.

General desire was expressed for the Bank to increase the activities and to do its utmost. Wilson indicated there was little likelihood of more consortia but good prospect for additional consultative groups. The Bank was prepared to relax criteria for establishing such groups and was ready to consider countries which, though lacking overall plan gave promise of good performance. When queried as to the Bank's ability and willingness to do wholesale job of appraising individual country plans which UNCTAD Conference called for, Wilson was somewhat vague. When asked specifically how far the Bank might go if urged by DAC, he avoided a definite answer. He indicated that the Bank had limited manpower available for this kind of activity and suggested that general economic reports of the Bank might in some measure meet this requirement. In response to questions implying close collaboration of Bank with DAC in producing appraisals of LDCs, he was at pains to point out that Bank's membership included many LDCs and that the Bank had to take account of their sensitivities. Implication was that the Bank could not afford to become too closely identified with donor organization.

(In corridor conversation with Coffin, Wilson elaborated by saying that, unless LDCs were present at the country reviews, they would resent Bank's participation. Did not close door to possibility of regional reviews with focus on several specific countries, nor to sessions where, like consortia, LDC reps attend part. Ended by saying he would want to hear evidence of donor country interest in the Bank's participation from others than U.S.)

Chairman of the Turkish and Greek Consortia made mild and (for Greek) discursive statements on two OECD groupings. Coffin offered critical appraisal of Turkish Consortium, pointing out that although Turkey of high importance, planning, evaluation and performance relatively good, with improving communications among donors and with Turks, there had been all too little success in achieving concerted views on amounts, sharing, type of aid, terms, timing, and performance goals. There had also been less than adequate institutional support by OECD for the consortium. With the Prise de Conscience and the articulation of the six-point program, there was now hope of achieving the kind of follow-up which the consortium needed. This invitation to a candid self-appraisal was not accepted and no further discussion ensued. No one suggested possibility of other OECD consortia or possibility that organization might sponsor consultative groups.

In discussion other methods and institutional means for coordination, Chenery pointed to significant work now being done in CIAP, particularly in area of self-help. He suggested that CIAP would probably make substantial contribution in this area. Harding (UK) made general case for regional organizations, pointing out their great advantage as politically acceptable institutions, including both donors and recipients, and possibility they afforded of directing LDC's critical attention one at another. Suggested that larger effort should be made to encourage CIAP-like organization in other parts of the world. No exception taken to proposition such organization desirable but others pointed out that at their present stage of development they were hardly an adequate answer to current problems in Africa and Asia.

Examination of existing and prospective coordination efforts showed that total requirements would not be covered by institutions now operating in field. This conclusion naturally led to consideration of what contribution DAC might make. Chairman's initial suggestion that DAC list those countries which seemed to merit careful look and arrange series of meetings of qualified country representatives to consider what form of coordination called for in each case ran into strong opposition from Harding who stated that in his view DAC was not fit for task. This discussion occurred at end of first day and meeting adjourned on this inconclusive note. Following morning, German rep (Kanberg) said past DAC coordination efforts unsatisfactory because they looked only backward. Suggested that there should be country meetings in future where emphasis was on forward look. Certain sums of aid would presumably be available; meetings should consider best way to use this aid. Attempts should be made to assess existing needs and to agree among donors on best way to divide responsibilities.

At this stage, Chairman made fresh effort to define area of agreement revealed in meeting, stating following propositions to which no objection voiced.

1. DAC recognized and stressed importance of Bank role and welcomed intention of Bank to expand its activities.

2. DAC should attempt to support and encourage other institutional means of coordination wherever they existed. CIAP had substantial promise in field and DAC should take advantage of opportunity to learn more of its operations. Unknown developments impend in UNCTAD organs, and Elson Working Group should follow these closely. Consideration should be given to potential of other regional organizations. Secretariat should review these institutions and make report which would be considered by second meeting on coordination.

3. Moreover, should ask other working parties to think of institutional implications of their work and perhaps to prepare recommendations for DAC on how conclusions should be implemented. He hoped that groups could examine problems frankly and could make report to DAC without necessity of clearance by Governments.

4. With reference to list of countries which seemed merit some degree of coordination, he asked that he be authorized to discuss with delegations situations where there seemed prima facie case for coordination and to arrange meetings of countries interested. Such meetings would be informal and should not involve whole membership of DAC. Out of these meetings might emerge positions which would need to be reported back to full committee.

When it was pointed out that this year's work program already agreed to called for meetings in Liberia, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Iran, Afghanistan and possibly Somalia, Chairman stated that he felt these meetings should take place if any country desired it.

Discussion of coordination of technical assistance more limited in scope. There was agreement as to importance of problem, but, as Chairman pointed out, in this field we are still at point where many things need to be examined more closely.

TA programs are increasing, more and more countries are involved, and few of them have field representatives. There is a generally recognized need for effective coordination of financial and technical assistance but little is being done to accomplish this. Even consortia have devoted very little attention to this question.

By common consent coordination of TA is best accomplished by recipient countries. However, there is no body of information which shows how widely or how effectively LDCs undertake this function and we have only general feeling that in many cases they are failing to do an effective job. Coffin suggested it would be useful to have an appraisal of situation in LDCs. Parsons of Secretariat suggested that there is probably acute need for technical assistance to LDC government institutions dealing with technical assistance.

Parsons thought regional organizations promised to make some contribution in this area, suggesting that they might simplify and reduce expenses of administration. He pointed out that CIAP already making some progress in this field. Others doubted that progress in this area could be expected soon, Canadian rep pointing to experience under Colombo Plan as proof of reluctance of LDCs to limit independence of action.

Chairman picked up suggestion UK rep that study in depth be made of experience in administration and coordination of technical assistance in one LDC with view to defining problem more specifically and determining most important points at which coordination needed. Somewhat inconclusive discussion thereupon ensured as to whether proposed TA study of Thailand would accomplish this purpose.

Chairman also proposed that DAC make effort to produce agreed statement of coordination objectives in field of technical assistance and that this statement be referred, via donor governments, to field representatives wherever several donors active. Field representatives would be instructed to hold at least one meeting to discuss DAC documents. It would be matter for local decision whether continuing activity were undertaken in accordance with principles and to seek objectives which would be set forth in DAC statement.

Finletter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Alex B. Daspit (AID), cleared by Coffin (AID) in draft and by Robert L. Yost (ECON) and Alexis E. Lachman (AID), and contents approved by Alice May.

98. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Industrial Development, Agency for International Development (Draper) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 98. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Industrial Development, Agency for International Development (Draper) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Washington, December 23, 1964.

SUBJECT

Meeting of U.S. Government Experts with United Nations Commissioner for Industrial Development—Dr. Abdel-Rahman

This memorandum reports on the subject meeting which took place in the UN Secretariat Building in New York City on December 16.2

Background

1. A telegram received from USUN on November 13 (Tab A)3 stated that the UN Center for Industrial Development had developed its plans for immediate future work program, that UN Commissioner Abdel-Rahman “would appreciate opportunity in near future to meet with experts in industrial development from U.S. Government (State, Commerce, AID) to discuss the Center's program and get their technical suggestions for changes and improvements.”

2. At your Executive Staff Meeting on November 17, Ambassador Williams (U.S. Representative on the UN Economic and Social Council) stressed the U.S. position in opposition to strong pressures from LDCs en bloc for a specialized agency and stated it was essential that we take all appropriate steps to support and make effective the UN Center for Industrial Development—which the U.S. believes is a more appropriate mechanism. You agreed that the strong affirmative U.S. position on the Center made it necessary to look intensively at how best the U.S. Government can protect its interests and channel its support to the Center. (See Tab B—red underline.)

Action Taken

1. On December 3 the undersigned was requested to head the team, take the lead in organizing it and to arrange for the discussions in New York. The seven-man team (six AID and one Commerce) was firmed up on December 7, was targeted for December 16 in New York, had a briefing on December 9 and a review session on December 14 in preparation (Tab C). A confirming telegram from State/OES to USUN was sent December 15 (Tab D).4

2. The team, necessarily limited in size, was purposely heavy in AID participation, but strongly complemented by Mr. McGann, Assist-ant Administrator for Industrial Analysis of BDSA, Department of Commerce. (Future teams can be more balanced among the Departments.) Mr. James Gorman, State/OES accompanied the team.

3. Discussions were held with USUN at 9:15 AM and with the Commissioner and his senior staff the remainder of the day according to the schedule furnished by the Commissioner (Tab E).5 The USUN (Counsellor Clarence Blau) was host at a joint luncheon. The team uniformly agreed that the sessions were very enlightening and most useful and successful. Each expert member of the team has been requested to furnish a memo report covering his observations and suggestions (Tab F).6 These will be compiled and correlated in a subsequent report in January.

Preliminary Observations of Team Leader

The undersigned considers the following preliminary observations as significant: 1. Commissioner Abdel-Rahman was more concerned with getting support for his work program plans than in getting suggestions for changes. Although there was ample opportunity for discussion in each phase of the presentation, it seemed more like a briefing session. The Commissioner's careful summary at the end of the day highlighted their presentation, did not touch on points made by the team, although they were acknowledged during the discussion. Perhaps more will be absorbed and applied than could be openly acknowledged.

2. The Commissioner and his key staff made excellent presentations and he devoted his entire day to this program. Because of the cry for a specialized agency, it is certain in my mind that the morale of the Center staff was aided by this amount of attention by the Commission and the U.S. Government.

3. A number of areas in which the U.S. may be helpful to the Center were identified and discussed in a preliminary way without commitments. The follow-up on each area requires coordination as well as effort. Team observations and suggestions will be summarized in the subsequent report.

4. The Commissioner and his staff have conscientiously tried to work into their plans most of the principal action paragraphs of the U.S.-initiated resolution for a dynamic program which has passed unanimously by both the UN Committee for Industrial Development last Spring and the Economic and Social Council last August, and is now before the UN General Assembly (Tab G).

5. The Center staff, although undermanned and subject to geographic and political “balancing,” demonstrated a surprising degree of competence in the eyes of the U.S. team, and meticulously avoided reference to any political doctrine or developmental philosophy.

6. The degree to which U.S. contributions of substantive resources, cooperation and suggestions will actually be forthcoming and accepted by the Center remains to be seen. However, there is reason for cautious optimism regarding acceptance—given the present leadership and substantial continuity of senior personnel in the Center for Industrial Development.

7. The U.S. team composition served to stimulate interest and support in Commerce as well as in AID bureaus and staff offices in this important activity area.

Frederick G. Draper 7

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, E/CID—Center for Industrial Development (State, AID, Commerce, UN Mtg. Dec. 16, 1964). Confidential. Drafted by Draper on December 21 and concurred in by John F. Hilliard (DAA/TCR) on December 23. Copies were sent to Baumgartner (AA/TCR) and the Executive Secretariat. Draper also took “informal notes” at this December 16 meeting, which he had typed on January 5. (Ibid.)

2 Another record of this meeting is in airgram A–807 from USUN, December 23. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO 10 UN)

3 None of the tabs is attached and, except as noted in footnotes below, has been found.

4 Telegram 1512 to USUN, December 15. (Department of State, Central Files, NCO 10 UN)

5 Not printed. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, E/CID—Center for Industrial Development (State, AID, Commerce, UN Mtg. Dec. 16, 1964))

6 Five of these memoranda, Paul G. McGann (Commerce) to Draper, December 22; Alan M. Strout (PC/PPD) to Draper, December 23; John O. McReynolds (NESA/ENGR) to Draper, January 5, 1965; Saul Nelson (AFR/CDF) to Draper, January 5; and George A. Wyeth, Jr. (DFPE/PI) to Donald W. Hoagland (AA/DFPE), January 5, are ibid.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

99. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 99. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Paris, January 8, 1965.

Dear Dave:

The immediate occasion for this letter is the report of your conversation with Secretary General Kristensen about the organization of the DAC and your scheduled discussion of the general question with Bart Harvey, Bob Schaetzel and others. It would have had to be written in any event as a follow-up on our previous messages on the role of DAC in order to take account of developments since my trip to Washington in mid-November, and to point out certain problems which still need to be addressed. (The earlier messages are attached for your convenience.)2

Behind the Secretary General's suggestion to you about personnel and the reorganization of the Committee there lay undoubtedly the same basic concern which has troubled you and others in Washington, and has produced pretty wide criticism here in Paris; a feeling that the DAC has not been achieving adequate results. When most critics talk in these terms, they are thinking of the objective of promoting an increased flow of aid. That was the one generally accepted objective for establishing the DAC in the first place (though it was never explicitly stated), and it is certainly disquieting to note that there has been a decrease in the flow of assistance during the past three years. Since this has happened, the critics conclude that DAC has failed.

Anyone who reaches this conclusion feels impelled to seek an explanation for it, and these explanations have been numerous and diverse. They include the following: (a) The DAC is too large (12 members) and unwieldy; (b) its organization under a permanent international chairman is not appropriate; (c) it holds too many meetings, which are inadequately prepared; (d) the rule of unanimity reduces forward action to the lowest common denominator, or the expressed views of the most negative member; (e) the staff serving it is second rate; (f) the calibre of permanent representatives is uneven and they are largely composed of people not experienced or deeply interested in aid matters; (g) its meetings do not attract the attendance of policy-making officials.

These observations range from partially correct to totally incorrect. They have one thing in common: they miss the core of the problem.

The basic difficulty about DAC is the lack of political agreement on the basic objectives to be served by the aid programs of the various DAC members, on the criteria which should govern the allocation of aid funds, and on the role which DAC should play in helping achieve these objectives. In the absence of these, it is largely meaningless to talk about amounts, and thus the sole generally accepted objective of the DAC has tended to exist in a vacuum, and arguments about the need for “doing more” lack point and realism. Any discussion of the adequacy of DAC operations, it seems to us, must start with the questions, “What is the DAC attempting to do?” and if, as we believe, it has not been attempting to do enough that is meaningful or realistic, the question becomes— “What should the DAC attempt to do?"

We discussed this problem at some length in our CEDTO A–293 (Attachment B)3 where we proposed a program and set of objectives for the DAC which, if accepted, would give point, direction and impetus to the Committee's activity. We have not yet received a statement of Washington's position on these proposals. I know that there was some feeling initially that we were proposing that DAC take over the job of assessing individual countries which properly belongs to the World Bank. I hope this misapprehension was removed during the course of my Washington discussions in November. We certainly have no ambition to see the DAC take over the functions which the Bank is performing or can be expected to perform. Our position was simply that DAC should survey the field, determine what needs to be done which is not being done, and attempt to see to it that gaps are filled—in the final extremity filling them itself. Perhaps more fundamentally, we urge that the DAC should attempt to develop a doctrine for assistance, criteria for its allocation and implementing procedures—in other words, an over-all strategy for development which would maximize returns.

Before we can make progress in defining DAC's objectives and area of operation, we have got to obtain further clarification of the respective roles of the Bank and DAC based on complementary, non-competitive and close cooperation. The DAC meeting on coordination which took place here shortly after my return from my Washington consultation indicated that the Bank by no means accepted the general line which we agreed upon in AID. During the course of this meeting it was made clear that there was no disposition on the part of DAC to assume the appropriate functions of the Bank; on the contrary, the whole thrust of statements made by country representatives was to encourage the Bank to do its utmost. It was apparent that DAC considered itself an important potential user of materials and expertise of the Bank, and efforts were made to elicit a statement of the Bank's willingness to provide information, to make country studies and experts available and perhaps to undertake country appraisals specifically at DAC's suggestion. Geoffrey Wilson evaded any positive response to these overtures. A recent message from Washington (TOCED 517, December 31)4 in which DeMuth is quoted as having refused to provide DAC the Bank's country studies of debt burden raises some disturbing questions concerning what kind of arrangements can be worked out.

I judge from Wilson's statements here, and from comments made by other members of the Bank's staff that they are very apprehensive of possible adverse reactions from their Part II members if they should become involved in a joint enterprise, or too closely identified with the donor's club. This attitude is understandable, but it is not helpful to the DAC, nor, I would suggest, to the general cause of economic development of the less developed countries. If we can assume the kind of cooperation between the Bank and DAC which we agreed in AID was reasonable and desirable, this means that with a minimum strengthening of staff, the DAC can move effectively into the area of country performance, debt problems, and an allocation strategy calculated to produce maximum results in economic development. If we are not to have this cooperation, it will probably mean that either the DAC will itself have to increase its staff very substantially, or limit itself to the role which our friend Hardy, the U.K. representative, sees for it: donor contributions and terms considered in vacuo, which we believe has by now become a pretty sterile exercise.

It seems to me that basic to any consideration of the question of DAC's function, which in turn must affect considerations of organization, procedure and personnel, is the need for a resolution of the question of the degree to which the Bank will be willing to cooperate with the DAC. I personally see no reason why, with tact and ingenuity, procedures cannot be worked out whereby the Bank can work with its Part I members on development problems without jeopardizing its position with its Part II members. An equally basic requirement for an orderly consideration of these questions is the development of a United States position on what we would like to see the DAC do.

These seem to us to be the real problems of the DAC, and, viewed against this background, the various criticisms recounted in the opening paragraphs of this letter appear for what they are: secondary or peripheral. Having established this point to my own satisfaction, at least, I will now move on to a more detailed consideration of these secondary points, and will make some suggestions concerning them, on the assumption that progress can be made toward solving the central problems.

1. Size, Organization and Procedures

As to the size of the body, the full committee is admittedly of dimensions which inhibit frank and informal discussion. What is more, some of the smaller members have no real interest in a considerable range of the matters discussed, and make only a minimal contribution to the discussion. As Ambassador Leddy points out, this can also be said about other OECD Committees, with even greater emphasis as to some of them. We are now confronted with an additional applicant for membership—Austria—and indications are that Switzerland and Sweden may follow. If the committee now were of optimum size, a case might be made for attempting to hold the line against these additions. As it is, the addition of two, three, or four new members will probably not significantly affect the nature of the organization, which must, in any event, look to measures other than a policy of exclusion to improve its efficiency. Moreover, there would probably be a real gain in the adherence of three neutralist countries: the DAC would cease to be a meeting of the NATO bloc, and would take on a character more representative of the developed, aid-giving world.

There would seem to be no inherent reason why DAC cannot become more effective in its deliberations with a larger membership, if proper steps are taken. We suggest the following: a. Building on present practice, arrange to conduct an increasing amount of DAC business in working parties, tailoring the membership of these parties to the problem at hand.

b. Adopting the convention of meetings on various subjects restricted to parties with a real interest. We are proposing that the meetings for Liberia and Guinea be called with the specific caveat that only countries with a particular interest should attend.

c. Encouraging the Chairman to call monthly sessions of the major donors and several others (which latter group need not always be the same) to discuss the planning of future meetings, scheduling, new initiatives, policy matters. This in effect would be a steering group (or a de facto division between classes of members) without being called such.

Perhaps there are additional techniques, such as in increased resort to limited groups of experts, and a continuing increase in the use of the Chairman's prerogatives of summarizing and making proposals which convey the sense of the meeting unless objected to.

2. Full-time Chairman

The suggestion that we could solve DAC problems and strengthen its operations by eliminating the full-time international chairman and conforming the committee to the others of the OECD is the most unsatisfactory of all those put forward. I have found no one who can explain how the change proposed would contribute to the end indicated. The motives are understandable, but are likely to lessen rather than enhance the development effort. In the case of the Secretary General, it may be noted that he is a strong-willed man, with a considerable interest in development, which is frustrated by Willard's existence as an international chairman. It is clear that he would like to play a much larger role in development assistance matters. I cannot escape the conclusion that his proposal to make the DAC into something like the Trade Committee is related to these factors. I say this not out of disrespect to the Secretary General, whom I admire as a man, but in an attempt to shed some light on the chairman question.

The suggestion that Willard has somehow failed in guiding the DAC to a significant record of accomplishment and that a change in personality (or in organizational structure) would change failure to success I regard as showing a fundamental lack of knowledge of the situation here, and an equally fundamental unfairness to Willard. In appraising the work of the DAC, one has to begin with the basic point I have emphasized in this letter and elsewhere: the lack of agreed objectives—of political will—among the country members of the DAC. I take it that the Secretary General of NATO is not held to be primarily responsible for the divisive tendencies currently displayed in that organization. No more can the Chairman of the DAC supply a will and purpose otherwise lacking in the national governments which form his committee.

I believe that a fair appraisal which takes adequate account of the various factors I have mentioned would accord to Willard very high marks for what he has achieved. He has, we believe, gotten the maximum performance from meetings of representatives of widely varying levels, ability, and interest, and seldom sharing common positive views. His skillful summaries have always made the most of the discussions. He has initiated the practice of sending his summary evaluation of country performance to member governments, which is the maximum pressure of which a chairman is capable, and this practice may account for some of the criticism which masks behind professions of concern about making the DAC more effective.

What the DAC needs, in our opinion, is not a national chairman, but a strengthened international chairman, who has the self-confidence and courage to speak plainly when the situation demands it. We believe that Willard has been doing some of this; if we want him to do more, we must make it very clear that he has at least the full and sympathetic support of the United States Government. If the role and activities of the DAC are extended in the manner we advocate, this is bound to add to the importance of the Committee, and, indirectly, to the influence and authority of the chairman.

If the foregoing analysis is correct, it follows that the Secretary General should not be left in any doubt of our confidence in Willard and our desire to see him continue as chairman, and I would hope that you would write him promptly in these terms.

3. Meetings

The criticism that there are too many meetings seems to bear little relation to the facts. Aside from those sessions devoted to the annual review of donor country programs—about the necessity of which on an annual basis for every country I am prepared to concede there is legitimate ground for debate—a quick check of the calendar indicates there were only some eight or ten substantive meetings in either 1963 or 1964. In simple terms of number, this does not seem excessive. (A complete list of these meetings is attached as Annex C.)5 An appraisal of the subjects covered and the results achieved, however, reinforces the point I have already made: that DAC lacks a focus and a plausible set of objectives.

I have come to the conclusion that a disproportionate amount of the time of the DAC and the energy of the Secretariat goes into the Annual Review, and that in this area significant savings of both commodities could be made, which might be more profitably invested in other activities. The suggestion has been made that more of the Annual Review might be handled in written form, that the examinations could be shortened if they were more effectively focussed on significant problems, and that in the case of the smaller countries, the DAC discussion of the program might be placed on a biennial basis without loss. All of these ideas are plausible, and I am personally inclined to press for their adoption—particularly if we can expect to use the time saved in furtherance of the objectives we have sketched in Annex B.6

4. The Unanimity Rule

This rule exists formally, and, formally, there is nothing we can do about it. DAC cannot legislate by a majority vote—however large—and its recommendations depend for their effectiveness in the last resort on the willingness of Governments to accept them.

This problem is real, but it can be easily exaggerated. It is probably correct to say that unanimity rule or no, any proposal which has the full support of the U.S., the U.K., France and Germany will be accepted by the DAC. In practice, any proposal which has the vigorous support of the U.S. and any two of the others will probably be accepted—though perhaps in a modified form. No country wishes to accept the onus of vetoing alone a course of action favored by all the others. Witness, for example, the U.K. capitulation on the proposal to establish a link between the DAC and the CIAP.

The phrase “unanimity rule” probably conveys an erroneous impression of the DAC method of operations. As a matter of fact, formal voting never takes place. There is discussion, guided by the chairman, which is followed by the chairman's summary of the “sense of the meeting.” This summary stands as the DAC decision on the matter in the absence of dissent. This procedure can be employed very effectively by a skillful chairman, and Willard has been signally effective in using it to extract the maximum positive elements from discussions.

These considerations, I believe, point to the importance of keeping Willard on as chairman. They also point to the need for a determined effort on our part to persuade the U.K. and Germany to any program we wish to advance in the DAC. Moreover, they provide a rationale for the proposal I make in section 3 above for the establishment of an informal steering group, with the Big Four as regular members.

5. Staff

It is difficult to make a fair and meaningful appraisal of the Development Staff. I am personally convinced, however, that the staff here has been unfairly maligned. It compares reasonably well with the rest of the OECD staff, and should do so, since it was formed in the first place by raiding the rest of the OECD, and those who conducted the raids consider that they got most of the men who would be useful. Our own man, Richard Benedick, who is well regarded in AID, told me that in his judgment the people with whom he works compare very favorably with the program officers he has known in AID Missions.

Staffing needs of the development directorate have not received favorable attention, partly because of the uncertainty over the role of DAC and partly because of the opinion that existing staff was not being well used. What is needed, after the role and function of DAC are clarified, is a presentation by the Secretariat to one of the monthly meetings of the informal steering group we propose. The presentation and discussion should aim at the minimum staff structure necessary to serve the essential purposes of the DAC. With a rationale and discussion (and, presumably, the support of major delegations) behind it, the budget request for next year ought to receive much more sympathetic consideration.

The OECD hierarchy as it relates to DAC also merits attention. The Secretary General has so far limited his attention to the lower echelons, stating that he is unable to remove Giretti, the Assistant Secretary General. However, if the United States is being asked to remove Fine (after having already agreed to remove Stettner), we should be in a position to inquire why personnel improvements involving other countries cannot be considered. Ambassador Leddy, with whom I have discussed this letter, is of course intimately acquainted with such problems. He is in the process of preparing his own letter to the Department on the broader aspects of OECD, which will be germane to your discussions.

6. Representation at DAC Meetings

The calibre of the permanent representatives varies widely, but there is nothing which we can do directly about that. It is reasonable to believe that if we can commit the DAC to a more meaningful program, those governments which have inadequate representatives will in time feel impelled to change them. It may be of some interest to you to have a thumb-nail sketch of the cast of characters who gather around the DAC conference table. The U.K. has intelligent but often opinionated and negative high level representation in Harding; France has competent lower level representation in Sauvel, who is given little latitude; FRG has [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] von Bismarck, who has no latitude at all. Of the smaller countries Canada has a young, interested and able new representative in Smith; the Dutch have an able and knowledgeable, though lower level, man in Kupers; the Belgians have an articulate and often negative spokesman in Mme. Tenser; occasionally EEC sends Segre, a competent economist; Italy has in Trotta a well-meaning man of little influence; Denmark, Norway and Japan seldom intervene, although the new Japanese representative may be more active. Of these representatives only Smith of Canada, I believe, comes from an aid background or expects to be assigned to an aid position in the future.

There remains the problem of involving policy makers in DAC discussions. Our conviction is that the implementation of the new role would attract such officials. At present, a series of graduate seminars with a potpourri of miscellany can hardly be expected to attract them. To the extent that aid centralization can be encouraged, opposite numbers will emerge, among whom useful talks will be generated. Indeed, with the British now providing a centralized organization, part of the high-level meeting could be set aside for free discussion of matters not on the agenda.

This has been a long discussion, but, I hope, not an academic one. I believe it points to the desirability of a series of actions, most of which will need to be taken in Washington. These actions are listed below:

1. Decision on U.S. objectives with respect to the DAC, including: a. our proposals regarding substance set forth in Annex B,

b. our proposals regarding organization and procedures set forth in this letter.

It would be most useful to us here to have guidance in writing on these matters.

2. Exploration with the IBRD of the extent to which that institution will be prepared to cooperate with the DAC, and tentative agreement on a division of functions which will enable both institutions to make their full contribution to economic development. This problem is so critical and will so condition all the matters referred to in “1” that you may feel disposed to discuss it yourself with George Woods. Obviously, we are in no position to commit the DAC, but the meeting on coordination gave a pretty clear indication of the committee's position, and some informal discussion of the Bank's attitude would be timely.

3. A letter from you to Kristensen endorsing the continuation of a full-time international chairman for DAC and stating full support for Willard in this role. This would be most useful if it went forward promptly after a decision is taken on replacing Fine, and if it were accompanied by some of our proposals for increasing the effectiveness of the DAC, to indicate that the whole problem is receiving our serious attention.

4. An effort in bilateral discussions to line up support for our DAC proposals, as ultimately developed ("1” above). I believe we should concentrate on the British, the Germans and the Canadians and that these three Governments should be approached directly, and not through their Paris delegations. It is obvious that a fresh breeze is blowing in Whitehall, and developments in the last meeting on supply and requirements suggest that once more we may find the British our best allies—but it would not be helpful to treat through Harding here at this junction. The Germans will not be easy, but there are significant areas of common interest and they can be influenced by high-level representatives—but it would not be useful to hold discussions with von Bismarck in Paris. The Canadians are not only sympathetic but also, in Jim Langley, have an extremely able Chief of Economic Affairs in their External Affairs Ministry who is fully conversant with the inner workings of the DAC. I suggest that you make our proposals for DAC a central element in the discussions you hold during your forthcoming visit to London and Bonn, and that these proposals be discussed informally with the Canadian Embassy in Washington with a request for Canadian views which, when formulated, would certainly bear the Langley imprint.

5. When we get our line established, I would propose to invite our Economic Counselors and AID liaison officers in the key capitals to meet in Paris for a general discussion of strategy and tactics.

After these measures, it will be time to take stock of the situation and decide on further moves. Perhaps it will seem desirable to circulate a paper to delegations as the basis for a special meeting on the role of DAC, or, if this is not proven practicable, for consideration at the July high level meeting. Indeed, a possible sequence might be a special meeting on the role of DAC in March or April (which would signal its fifth anniversary). This could prepare the groundwork for further work and discussion and more definitive action at the July high level meeting.

All of this is written neither to make our bureaucratic life here easier, nor even to try to make an international unit more effective. It goes to the very heart of one of our major objectives: to help stimulate a free world aid effort, more equitable in its demands on donors, more likely to sustain continuing and increasing support in DAC countries, and more responsive to the legitimate needs of the developing countries. Measurable success in giving a new sense of direction and conviction to this task can be one of the most helpful developments in sustaining our own program in the United States.

I wish you and your colleagues in Washington a most fruitful review session. All of us here stand ready to do all that we can to help.

With best personal wishes,

Frank

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Letters and Memoranda to and from Coffin. Personal &Confidential. An attached undated, unsigned handwritten note reads: “This ltr, I believe was answered. I have note about answer being put in Bell briefing book.” For this reply, see Document 103.

2 Not attached. The reference may be to two letters from Coffin to Bell, December 28, 1964, and January 5, 1965, primarily on DAC personnel and staffing matters. Both letters are in Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965.

3 Not attached but printed as Document 92.

4 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, AID 1)

5 Not attached to the source text but to a copy in the Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965.

6 Presumably the reference is to Attachment B; see footnote 3 above.

100. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Industrial Development, Agency for International Development (Draper) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 100. Information Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Industrial Development, Agency for International Development (Draper) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Washington, January 29, 1965.

SUBJECT

Meeting of U.S. Government Experts with United Nations Commissioner for Industrial Development on December 16, 1964

This memorandum supplements my preliminary report to you by Information Memorandum of December 23, 1964 (Red Tab A)2 which described what took place and recorded some preliminary observations.

Summary

The meeting in New York City was arranged to present to the U.S. technical team the tentative 1965 work program of the UN Center for Industrial Development and get technical suggestions for changes and improvements. However, the discussions identified a number of areas in which the U.S. can be helpful to the Center. These are detailed below under “Items of Support and Cooperation.” Memoranda to me from the U.S. team members elaborating on some of these are attached (Red Tab B).3

While there are major problems in the UN concerning reorganization and budgetary support, the following individual areas of U.S. support, and cooperation can be pursued, with the primary AID action offices in each case being responsible for coordination with PC/UN and TCR/IDTH and for resolution of any policy questions that might arise.

Items of Support and Cooperation

1. AID's Office of Research and Analysis (TCR/RA) should keep the Center for Industrial Development informed of AID research activities and results, especially those in the industrial development area. Coordination should also include asking the Center for comments on selected research proposals received by AID and periodically advising the Center on the status of research proposals being processed by AID. A copy of the TCR/RA Report of Active Research Contracts might be furnished on a regular basis.

2. AID (TCR/RA) should furnish the Center several copies of American Research Centers on the Developing Areas,4 prepared by the Department of State External Research Staff for AID. It describes the research on developing countries being conducted by 140 selected university centers and private research organizations in the United States.

3. The Center should follow up its expression of interest in AID's research contracting experience and in its industrial project evaluation experience by sending a senior staff member of the Center to Washington to discuss these subjects with appropriate AID officials in TCR, ENGR, PC, DFPE and the regional bureaus.

4. In support of the Center's work on LDC country studies, AID/PC should undertake to provide the Center with as much of the Country Data Book material as can be released on each UN Member State in which AID has a program, and consider means of updating such material from time to time as it is done in AID/W.

5. AID/PC should furnish the Center a copy of the AID Directory of U.S. Resources for Planning Assistance dated December 1964,5 and supplements and revisions as they are distributed.

6. AID and the Center should consider joint sponsorship of research activities in which both organizations have a direct interest and in which the Center may wish to add (and assign in financing) certain work for its own needs.

7. Commerce Department should explore ways in which the Center might contribute to, and be served by, the research and development clearinghouse function being set up in the U.S. Bureau of Standards. Mr. McGann of Commerce/BDSA, who was a member of the U.S. team, can be helpful in this respect.

8. Both Commerce and AID should benefit from the data which the Center plans to collect from developing countries in respect to manufacturing capital expenditures and sources of funds. Such data is considered by Commerce to be very helpful in stimulating the interest of manufacturers and contractors in industrialized nations in the whole problem of development.

9. The U.S. (AID and Commerce, and perhaps certain private organizations) could be of considerable help in the expanding efforts of the Center to stimulate improvement in project formulation and evaluation. The UN and AID similarly recognize the death of soundly conceived and adequately documented and formulated requests for project assistance—both technical and financial. Improvements in this area would represent a substantial saving from many standpoints. The U.S. should consider detailing or seconding to the UN professional staff personnel specially qualified in the several aspects of project planning, formulation and evaluation.

10. Further, on the subject of (9) above, AID/PC should support the request of the Center for AID help in preparing for and participation in the forthcoming UN Inter-Regional Symposium at Brno, Czechoslovakia in October 1965 on Industrial Project Evaluation. (Mr. Dell, Director of the Center's Research Division, wrote you recently a special letter urging such AID participation.)5

11. AID/DFPE should contribute its experience and techniques for promoting and securing feasibility studies and pre-investment studies. (The AID Catalog of Investment Opportunities6 was sent to the Center when it was published by DFPE.)

12. AID and Commerce should be responsive to a future call from the Center for a future meeting to discuss the topic of “Use of Second Hand Machinery in Less-Developed Countries” on which the Commissioner said he was very anxious to get the help of U.S. experience and consultation.

The Commissioner expressed a desire to have the U.S. consider hosting a group training program in fertilizers and the electro-chemical industry (drawing on TVA experience); he also hoped the U.S. would participate in a Working Group in Training of Industrial Administrators targeted for Paris in September 1965. Both of these items should be followed up by the Center in a more formal communication through USUN in New York before AID pursues them with the Center.

Initial Coordination

Copies of this Information Memorandum will be provided with appropriate explanatory information to concerned offices in AID, State and Commerce.

Frederick G. Draper

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, E/CID-Center for Industrial Development. No classification marking. Drafted on January 28 and concurred in by John F. Hilliard (AID/AA/TCR) on January 29. A handwritten note on the source text reads, “Noted D.E.B.” A copy was sent to Gaud.

2 Not attached but printed as Document 98.

3 Not attached. These memoranda may be those cited in footnote 6, Document 98.

4 Foreign Affairs Research Documentation Center, Research Centers on the Developing Areas, comp., Margaret M. Rhoades (Washington, 1964).

5 Not found.

5 Not found.

6 This AID publication, produced periodically beginning in May 1964, brought together many industrial feasibility and economic studies, many of which contained information on specific investment opportunities abroad.

101. Memorandum of Conversation 101. Memorandum of Conversation1

Paris, February 5, 1965.

PARTICIPANTS

Burke Knapp, IBRD Vice President

John Miller, IBRD Paris Representative

Ambassador Leddy, US Mission to OECD

Frank M. Coffin, US Representative to DAC

Alex Lachman, Development Assistance Adviser, US Delegation to DAC

SUBJECT

Bank-DAC Relationships

After long and useful discussion on problems of Turkish Consortium, current debt exercise, Bank's study, and Bank attitude to possible future lending, the question of Bank-DAC liaison was discussed.

Mr. Knapp conveyed the information that the Bank, in pursuance of its desire to widen its work with consultative groups, had worked out a list of possibilities: Chile, Peru, Brazil (with a question expressed as to acceptability to Brazil), Morocco, Ethiopia, East Africa (assuming this is acceptable to DAC, the regional possibilities are of interest to the Bank), Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Iran (if it does something to “pull its socks up"), and (dependent on many factors) the UAR. This was a potential list of 11 consultative groups to be added to the two existing consortia and four consultative groups. He also expressed the Bank's hope that the quality of work being done in the present consultative groups could be improved. He concluded by saying that George Woods was thinking of personal visits to Bonn, London, and perhaps other capitals to enlist support for the new list. If he was not able to go himself, another senior official would be sent.

Mr. Coffin said that the problem remained of effecting the proper relationship between the Bank and DAC for countries, other than those on the Bank's list, which may be significant recipients of aid from several donors. He explained that this was proving to be a year of reappraisal and probing for new directions for future work for the DAC. Through its working parties on financial aspects, and requirements and performance and a newly formed experts group of development economists, it was attempting to arrive at a body of doctrine looking toward more rational allocation and use of assistance for development—taking into account both LDC performance and debt servicing capacity. When and if the DAC nations accepted this concept as a major policy objective, they would then, hopefully, apply the resulting doctrine and analytical approaches through reviews of individual LDCs. At this point the DAC would greatly benefit from both papers and experts available to the Bank.

Mr. Knapp said that he did not want to be misunderstood as being negative but that he was speaking from experience. He said that he had no objection at all to the DAC sponsoring its own consultative groups but that in such cases it was not realistic to rely on the Bank for staff work. The Bank was going to have a large task to develop the staff it would need for the additional consultative groups. The DAC should develop and increase its own staff for such consultative groups as it wished to organize.

Mr. Coffin said that he had not made himself clear. He had not been suggesting that DAC mount new consultative groups. The Turkish Consortium was quite enough of an operational responsibility for OECD at present. And OECD would be doing well to provide effective institutional resources for it. Moreover, although the total OECD Secretariat was larger than the total staff of the Bank, the development secretariat was very small and could not be expected to be dramatically enlarged.

Mr. Coffin said that the traditional preoccupation of the DAC had been the content of donor aid programs, with the aim of bringing pressure to bear for increased aid on better terms. Although donor programs would continue to be examined, pressure from “the 77” could be expected to increase. The DAC could, he thought, in the future serve its members best by helping develop a rationale and consistency in aid allocation and programming policy—which would in turn make it more likely that donor programs could have sustained and even increased public support. The implication for DAC, if this objective were accepted, was increased attention to problem of individual LDCs.

To fulfill this new role, a new way of conducting DAC business was beginning to be envisaged. The concept was not that of a sustained operation, involving special staff for particular countries, but rather that of well prepared meetings. The meetings would be devised not to elicit either global pledges or commitments to projects but to probe deeply the problems of a LDC and to achieve a consensus among donors on a sensible development strategy. Such an agreed strategy would have implications for the aid given by donors (kinds, magnitude, terms, sectors) and for the priority objectives and the quality of performance of the recipient. The implementation of the agreed strategy would, however, be left to donors to carry out through their own bilateral programs and their own dealings with the recipient. Occasionally donors might think it desirable to set up some coordinating arrangement among their representatives in the field. While an LDC might be—over time—the subject of more than one meeting, if circumstances warranted, each meeting would be viewed as self sufficient for the purposes of increasing donor consensus. Over a period of a couple of years the DAC might be able to consider most of the significant aid-receiving countries not in groups under the IBRD aegis.

Mr. Knapp had not been aware of this concept. It was different from the traditional issue he had discussed on earlier occasions, i.e., what groups should the IBRD sponsor vs. those the DAC should sponsor. He said that he was not too concerned over the problem of irritating LDCs by sending representatives and data to the DAC. He pointed out that the consortia met without LDCs, without creating suspicion or resentment. He did add, however, that he had told Secretary General Kristensen that, should the OECD be viewed as the center of “the western caucus", LDCs might take a more hostile view. Ambassador Leddy then referred to his own experience at Geneva and said he felt the LDCs preferred that the industrialized countries try to agree on issues and programs they would be willing to support. In any event, with 77 nations acting together, the industrialized countries also had to work more closely together.

Mr. Knapp said that the problem which troubled him was simply that of additional burden on the IBRD's staff. Mr. Coffin then said that a practicable step would be, when the DAC itself had decided whether or not it wished to embark on a work program of the nature he had described, for members of the development secretariat to OECD to discuss with Bank staff what assistance DAC would like to have and what might be available.

At this point Mr. Knapp said that if only the DAC could determine a year's program in advance, specifying the countries for which reviews were contemplated, and the times of these reviews, the Bank could take this into account and be in a better position to make a useful contribution. For example, if the DAC were to review, say, Ghana next September, and the timing were known long in advance, Bank personnel could schedule their own workload with this meeting in mind. In the past DAC country meetings had been called with inadequate time to prepare. Effective participation meant more than sending a bank expert from Washington to Paris. It required much study and preparation.

Mr. Coffin said this was a very helpful suggestion, that, indeed, DAC would have to put itself in a position to lay out such a work program well in advance of scheduled meetings.

It was on this note that the discussion concluded.

Comment: Both Ambassador Leddy and Mr. Coffin felt that this was a significant and constructive discussion. It had originally been intended to hold this discussion with Mr. DeMuth but they felt that the opportunity to review these matters with an IBRD official of Mr. Knapp's seniority should not be passed. It was perfectly clear that up to now the suggestions made concerning the DAC might operate and the kinds of liaison which might be appropriate were new to Mr. Knapp. Indeed, it was clear that he had been thinking in terms of the DAC wanting to draw on the IBRD to help staff coordinating groups and that he considered such an arrangement unacceptable. When the alternative concept was made clear, he not only raised no objections but, in effect, suggested that the DAC develop a long-range work program in consultation with the Bank. It was of course made clear on both sides that the positions stated were personal opinions, which did not have official status in the Bank or the DAC. It appeared, however, that a possibility for a mutually satisfactory division of responsibilities and a significant area of useful cooperation may have been discovered.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. No classification marking. Drafted by Coffin. The meeting was held in Ambassador Leddy's office. An attached covering letter from Coffin to Bell, February 10, reads in part: “We were pleased to see Burke's receptivity once he had clearly in mind the type of relationship between IBRD and DAC which we were talking about. It is my thought that this would be useful background in continuing discussions with the Bank and with officials and delegations of DAC countries.” In a handwritten note to Gaud on this letter, Bell wrote: “This sounds very constructive.”

102. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 102. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Paris, February 9, 1965.

Dear Dave:

I have recently been giving considerable thought to the chronic problem of stimulating more activity in the field of public support in the DAC nations other than the U.S. I don't need to underscore the distressing signals of reduced activity in Germany, retrenchment in France, and glacial progress elsewhere.

Our problems in the past have been to identify key Europeans who would be willing and able to carry on effective activity and to envisage the kind of activities which would be effective. My present thinking is that both objectives might be better accomplished if some preliminary groundwork were done outside of governmental circles, by way of identifying the kind of work that needed to be done on a sustained basis, the kind of international “umbrella” organization (if any) which would be helpful, and the individuals and national organizations who could be part of such an effort.

My suggestion, therefore, is that we try to see if there are several international foundations which would be interested enough in the problem to consider joint sponsorship of a conference on increased public understanding and support of development assistance. Specifically, I would start with Henry Heald of The Ford Foundation, who has demonstrated in his public statements realistic awareness of the long range nature of the development task. Ford is already doing much, but, if it could see that stronger international public support would be a catalytic agent of significant potential, it might very well feel that an initial investment would reap many dividends.

Perhaps George Harrar ought also to be involved—but I would not want U.S. foundations to dominate the effort. In any event, the first step would be to have a quiet discussion, talking about the need to have something going in this field, how a conference would help develop the intellectual framework, identify people and organizations, and pave the way for a standing action organization.

The next step would be for the U.S. foundation (or foundations) to enlist the interest of a few others. Volkswagen seems to me to be a logical co-sponsor. Other foundations in the UK, France, and one or two smaller countries might be included.

If such a consortium can be put together, it would face the following tasks: 1. Determine the nature and scope of the conference.

2. Establish a budget and staff to which all would contribute.

3. Prepare an agenda and list of participants, including the commissioning of certain papers which would be the basis for discussion and ultimate publication. This part of the effort I would envisage as the intellectual basis for a sophisticated and sustained support effort.

Its scope would have to be carefully considered. On the one hand, the conference ought not to duplicate the many meetings and conferences which are constantly being held. But on the other hand, it seems to me necessary that there be a substantive agenda to attract good people and to avoid the risk of the effort shoaling off into discussion of public relations techniques.

It seems to me that there can be proper linkage between substance and public support planning, if the substantive agenda is based on the issues most relevant to the problems of support. As a starter, I would suggest as substantive objectives (1) a more common sense of purpose; (2) a more sophisticated awareness of the common donor interest in an effective response to developing countries (humanitarian, economic, political, social); (3) the principles underlying an effective response (the stimulation of self help, adequacy of budgeted amounts, liberality of terms, continuity of program, centralization of administration, developing the needed personnel within and outside government); (4) placing in perspective the chief arguments advanced against aid (cost, balance of payments, waste, LDC maladministration and ineffective utilization of aid); (5) the need for public understanding and support to sustain an effective response; and (6) the role, structure, financing, and membership of an international public support effort.

4. When some such agenda has been thought out, papers should be assigned to appropriate experts or leaders of opinion; study groups organized—with representation from experts of relevant disciplines, government officials, parliamentarians, and other community leaders.

5. The conference itself should last for a substantial period of time, so that individual panels could discuss and redefine the preparatory work and adequate plenary sessions could take place.

6. After the conference, the basic “bible” or international white paper would be prepared and published in the languages necessary to reach all donor countries.

7. Materials for popular consumption should then be planned, published, with arrangements made for widespread distribution. Various promotional activities should be envisaged. Much of the continuing work would fall under the aegis of the international council, perhaps with continuing funding support from business, labor, and foundations.

8. The question of future such conferences, their location and focus, would be bound up with the very role of the continuing organization.

I hold no firm brief for the precise agenda, but it seems to me that the problem of public support is critical enough to warrant an approach to foundations. It is a problem worthy of their attention and one which perhaps is not best addressed directly by governments. All would depend, of course, on the sensitivity, ability, and imagination brought to bear on this course of action.

If this seems to have merit, you might want to take some low key soundings on your European trip, particularly in Bonn. If you feel this needs further work here, let me know the direction of your thinking. If, on the other hand, you feel this is a non-starter, don't hesitate to say so.

With best personal regards,

Sincerely,

Frank M. Coffin 2

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 68 A 2148, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1965. Limited Official Use; Personal. Attached to the source text are two notes from the AID Executive Secretariat to Bell, February 11 and 15. In the first Bell was asked whether he wanted PC to draft a reply to Coffin, and whether copies should be sent to Gaud and Schaetzel. The approval line below the first question is left blank and “yes” on the approval line below the second is checked. The second note indicated that copies had been distributed to Gaud and Schaetzel and asked whether, in lieu of a reply, Coffin's letter should be put in Bell's briefing book, presumably the one for his upcoming European trip. The “yes” on the approval line has been checked.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

103. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) 103. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin)1

Washington, undated.

Dear Frank:

I appreciate the full analyses of the role of the DAC and related problems which you have given us in your October airgram and your letter of January 8th.2 I am in general agreement with your assessment. I feel that we have made considerable progress in the past two months in clarifying our own ideas in discussions here and in Paris and in communicating them to the DAC and the IBRD. The following summary represents a consensus on where we stand, which was reached in a recent meeting I had with Gaud, Schaetzel, Leddy, Chenery and Harvey.

Functions of the DAC and the IBRD . The principal U.S. objective for the DAC is to make it an effective body for the evaluation and resolution of general questions of aid policy. While decisions about aid levels, terms, self-help performance, development strategies, et al. will be made in the national capitals, the DAC is the best forum in which to get countries to face the issues involved, to carry on mutual education based on experience, to influence national policies, and where possible, to secure agreement on common policies and development strategies. Therefore, we need a strong chairman, good representation, active collaboration of major members on policy issues, and imaginative use of techniques such as working groups of experts that can pave the way for governmental discussion and consensus.

We regard the IBRD as the principal multilateral operating agency in the aid field and the principal source for the evaluation of individual country programs and performance. We count on the Bank to provide leadership and economic analysis for an increased number of consultative groups. We also look to the Bank for analysis of general economic and financial problems, in some cases in support of policy discussions in the DAC.

Within our broad objective for the DAC I feel we need to establish more clearly our short term work priorities with a view to concentrating our efforts to achieve specific results. I gather from a recent cable that you share this view.3 I hope we can discuss this matter when I come to Paris. Meanwhile, I am asking the Office of Program Coordination to begin an exchange of views with you on this question. I believe greater concentration of effort is our best answer in DAC to the lack of political agreement on aid objectives.

Another important need at this time is to obtain a consensus on the respective roles of the DAC and the Bank and to develop a better working relationship between them. This should be done through agreement in principle at the top levels followed by extensive staff discussions which would involve A.I.D. and Treasury as well as the DAC and the IBRD.

I feel that as a result of a series of meetings involving George Woods, our senior staff members and myself, we have reached a satisfactory agreement on an expanded role for the IBRD. The last such meeting took place on December 21 at which Woods directed DeMuth and Friedman to go over the list of countries that are candidates for coordination of some sort by the Bank and to expand the Bank's analytical capabilities for country studies.3 Since then Friedman has been made responsible for all economic work of the Bank and has been given a mandate to expand his analytical staff quite substantially. (On this matter I enclose a memo on a lunch conversation between Irving Friedman and Bart Harvey and others.)4

Coordination. The U.S. position on coordination was outlined in the papers prepared for the DAC meeting on this subject which followed our discussions here. I understand that at the conclusion of the DAC meeting on coordination, Thorp received a mandate to explore the possibilities of cooperation and an agreed division of labor between the IBRD staff and the OECD. We are exploring internally and with the Bank our priorities for expanded country coordination which we hope shortly to be able to communicate to you. Since the IBRD seems to be moving in the direction which they were urged to take at this meeting and in our discussions here, the next step should be a meeting between Thorp and Woods which would firm up this understanding. After that there should be sufficient staff contact between the two institutions to work out the necessary analysis on a country basis or to show the gaps which cannot be adequately filled in this way. I should think that A.I.D. should continue to promote this type of collaboration informally both in Paris and Washington.

The Office of Program Coordination has expanded its contacts with the Bank staff and should be able to give you a more detailed report on their analytical activities in the near future. I think that we need to see how far the Bank is willing to go in meeting the analytical requirements of the DAC before deciding how much country analysis the DAC should be prepared to carry out. I agree, however, that the DAC's principal function of providing a general framework for the aid effort would be greatly facilitated by a solid basis of country analysis being provided to it from some source.

Procedural Matters. We agree with virtually all of your comments on procedural and organizational questions. I certainly want to strengthen Willard's position as chairman of DAC and will take this up personally with Kristensen during my Paris visit. It seems clear that Willard's chairmanship has been one of DAC's few strengths. Its weaknesses have stemmed more from lack of desire and effort by member countries. We should seek to strengthen its performance through means such as the ones which you suggest and most particularly by concentration of effort on a smaller number of priority issues and by advance consultation in key donor capitals.

We will do our best to provide the best possible replacement for Fine. Leddy feels that the Fine position would be a much better one if it could be designated as deputy to Giretti, either formally or informally. Leddy can give you further comments on this subject.

Representation at DAC Meetings. I agree entirely with your emphasis on this question. Hollis and I discussed it with Seers at some length while he was here and I think that we may be able to develop some effective coordination with the British on this score. Perhaps our next target should be a better understanding with the Germans and more bilateral discussions with them and other delegations.

Sincerely yours,

David E. Bell 5

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Letters and Memoranda to and from Coffin. Confidential. Attached to this letter are several memoranda. One is a February 9 action memorandum from Bartlett Harvey, Acting Assistant Administrator for Program (AID), to Bell, summarizing the contents and recommending that Bell sign the letter to Coffin, which Schaetzel and Hirschtritt (Treasury) had cleared. Another is a February 4 memorandum from Schaetzel to Chenery, in which Schaetzel said that he would have emphasized more strongly EUR's firm commitment to support AID in the future on DAC matters and concluded: “At the risk of stating the obvious I wanted to make the foregoing comments but not to propose that there should be any change at this end in the letter itself.” In an attached February 8 note to Harvey, Bell wrote concerning Schaetzel's memorandum: “Good point. Let's reflect in letter.” In a February 13 memorandum to Bell, also attached, Harvey reported that he had asked EUR to redraft the letter. No changes were made in the letter, however, first because the EUR officer assigned to revise it fell sick, and then because Ruth Phillips, the OECD desk officer in EUR, pointed out that Schaetzel in his memorandum had said to send the letter as is. (Ibid.; and attached memorandum from Richard B. Palmer to Harvey and Aliber, February 13)

2  Documents 92 and 99.

3 Not further identified.

4 The attached January 23 memorandum from Palmer to Chenery, which summarized this January 21 luncheon conversation, is not printed.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

104. Editorial Note 104. Editorial Note

AID Administrator David E. Bell visited Paris February 21–23, Bonn February 23–24, and London, February 24–27, 1965, to discuss possible strategies for the improvement of the coordination of U.S. and European worldwide economic aid programs. Documentation on Bell's trip is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922; Trip—Administrator David Bell, Paris, Bonn, London, February 21–27, 1965. For Bell's report on his trip and AID senior level discussion about it, see Documents 105 and 106.

105. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Executive Staff of the Agency for International Development 105. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Executive Staff of the Agency for International Development 1

Washington, March 1, 1965.

SUBJECT

Visit to Paris, Bonn and London, February 21–27, 1965

Summary:

Several aspects of this trip impressed me and seem to me worthy of our joint attention. The major donor countries—France, Germany and Britain—are quite plainly committed to development aid over a period of years. In each the atmosphere was one of increasing, not decreasing, commitment. Each looks forward in varying degrees to future increases in amounts of aid. The U.K. and to a lesser extent Germany anticipate further liberalization of terms. There is agreement particularly in France and Germany on the need to emphasize better self-help performance.

Both Germany and the U.K. desire to move ahead with much closer bilateral coordination with us. In addition, France, Germany, and the U.K. agree on the desirability of strengthening multilateral coordination through support for 5 or 6 new IBRD consultative groups, and through more effective informal Big Four leadership in the DAC. Our proposals for improving DAC performance in (1) assembling and assessing data, (2) developing aid doctrine, and (3) monitoring its application to specific LDC's were well received. There was support for a DAC ministerial meeting this July to agree on certain measures to help anticipate LDC debt crises, to discuss experience in debt consolidation and rescheduling, and to consider how to promote better self-help performance.

In sum, I had the impression that we have a number of opportunities to achieve closer partnership with the other major donors, who as a result of change of government and operating experience now increasingly share our views on the desirable aims, means, and policies of aid programs.

Aid Levels

Officials of all three governments expect increases in aid over the next several years. In France, Andre DeLattre, Director of External Finance, Finance Ministry, was projecting a small increase up to $1.4 billion in public and private resource flows to LDC's (a return to the 1961 level) as part of the balance of payments plan for 1966–1970.2 He foresaw a sizeable shift in aid toward non-franc zone countries. Minister of Cooperation Triboulet forecast a maintenance of present aid levels for French-speaking tropical Africa, with a continuing shift from budget support toward development aid.3

German officials, embarrassed by the low 1965 capital aid budget of DM 600 million, were generally confident that the Chancellor would increase aid levels after the fall elections. The Budget Director of the Finance Ministry suggested the possibility of at least DM 1,000 million next year (although he was unclear whether that amount included technical assistance—DM 204 million in 1965). Other FRG officials said the recent problems with aid to the UAR and Tanzania had resulted in some Cabinet members (including the Chancellor) placing an increased value on aid to LDC's, and thought the aid budget next year might be doubled. FRG officials said that disbursements would rise in both 1965 and 1966, and after a dip reflecting the 1965 budget, continue upward thereafter. They hoped future aid authority would bring public and private resource flows to about the UNCTAD target of 1 percent of national income.

Mrs. Castle, Minister of Overseas Development in Britain, foresaw a small rise in aid within a new U.K. 5-year plan, with the ultimate aim to reach 1 percent of GNP excluding private capital. Apart from current balance of payments pressures and normal budgetary competition, the U.K. Treasury saw no obstacle in future increases in aid. ODM will discuss future aid levels in a White Paper to be published in June.

Concern was widespread that the U.S. was cutting back its aid effort. Officials expressed their relief when I explained the President's A.I.D. legislative strategy and the fact that total U.S. assistance is not declining.

The Role of DAC

I found general acceptance, enthusiastic in Bonn, for the U.S. proposal for the longer term role of DAC (Attachment). The three main DAC tasks we proposed are these: (1) assemble more complete and accurate data on matters of importance to development and assess collectively the policy significance of these data, (2) develop a realistic body of principles and doctrine to guide aid efforts, (3) facilitate the application of such principles and doctrine in the conduct of aid programs for individual developing countries. German officials were particularly interested in U.S. experience in negotiating bilateral aid agreements providing for specific quantitative standards for self-help performance, and agreed this was an important area for DAC to work in. They had throught such self-help promotion possible only under multilateral sponsorship. All three governments strongly supported country meetings in DAC (supplementing IBRD consultative groups), which would examine LDC problems and aid requirements and attempt to work out common donor views on appropriate self-help performance measures and donor aid responses.

The French, Germans, and British as well as Chairman Thorp welcomed the idea of increased Big Four cooperation and leadership in DAC on an informal basis. It was agreed that this leadership should be flexible, and other countries could be included as appropriate on particular matters.

IBRD Consultative Groups

Before my arrival, World Bank officials had discussed with each government the Bank's proposal to establish 5 or 6 new consultative groups over the next 18 months. I expressed U.S. support for such groups, noting our few differences in country priorities, and found support in principle in each capital. Consideration of particular countries was just getting underway. All three governments wanted Big Four consultation on countries before final agreement with the Bank. Germany strongly concurred that the Bank should be urged to improve its efforts at encouraging self-help performance. The British were anxious that the Bank present such groups in a way that would avoid giving LDC's the impression they were being disciplined as “naughty boys.” The British also urged close IBRD and donor country consultation with the UN Special Fund and the EPTA regarding technical assistance to consultative group countries.

DAC Targets for the July High Level Meeting

The Germans were in full accord with all of the following proposals. The British and French were less explicit, but supported them too. (1) The DAC Working Party on Aid Requirements should prepare for discussion at the High Level Meeting a paper analyzing how the IBRD and A.I.D. have in practice related aid to self-help performance in individual countries and a proposed resolution on relating aid to self-help performance. (2) The Working Party on Financial Aspects of Development should prepare an analysis of experience to date with debt consolidation and rescheduling practices and how they might better be related to development aid programs and performance standards, (3) The DAC should reach agreement on an integrated DAC-IBRD reporting system on credits going to LDC's. The OECD Secretariat and the Bank staff are well advanced on the specific details, (4) DAC should establish an “early warning system” to help anticipate LDC debt crises well before rescheduling becomes necessary.

German officials also agreed on the importance of more liberal aid terms although they were disinclined to establish quantitative DAC targets. They thought Germany could make wider use of official loans at 25 years, 3 percent, and 7 years' grace after the election when the development lending budget would be increased. For this year supplementary aid funds would have to be raised on the capital market and lent to LDC's at hard terms to maintain FRG aid levels. During the visit, however, the Cabinet approved the first interest rate subsidy on such a hard credit for Morocco, offering the prospect of greater flexibility this year.

In the U.K., Minister Castle was greatly concerned about future political problems that “aid” on commercial terms in generating. She placed high priority on liberalizing terms, advocated a spectrum from IDA terms on down, and promised a U.K. liberalization to be announced in the spring, if possible in time for the U.S. Senate aid hearings. She planned ODM consultations with Germany on this question with the implied hope of inducing changes there.

FRG Economic Cooperation Minister Scheel and I felt that the DAC High Level Meeting in July should be a Ministerial meeting and agreed to attend. U.K. Minister Castle said she would also try to attend.

Bilateral Cooperation

Full agreement was reached in Bonn and London on closer bilateral aid cooperation. In each case it was seen in part as a means for improving multilateral coordination in DAC and elsewhere. The Germans in particular, who have regular bilateral consultation with the French, stressed the importance of not undermining DAC.

Scheel agreed on a second US–FRG ministerial meeting in Washington next fall after the German elections and regularly thereafter every 9–12 months, alternating capitals. Increased senior staff visits to Bonn and Washington on country and functional problems, continued close Embassy relations in Bonn, exchange of information including classified data, and better field coordination were agreed on. Embassy Bonn and the FRG will jointly prepare a proposed schedule on follow-up staff meetings and a draft instruction to the field on coordination.

The understanding with the U.K. on bilateral cooperation was less explicit, but implied the same degree of cooperation, visits, information exchange, and field coordination.

Other General and Country Problems

Following are a number of problems that were discussed, some of them in connection with bilateral cooperation or other topics above:

Turkey. Keiser of the FRG Economics Ministry requested a U.S. concession to agree to rolling over $2 million of Turkish debt in order to provide Turkey with cash on a comparable basis to U.K., FRG, and French action. He hoped for the U. S. decision in time for the March 3–4 meeting of the Consortium.

Afghanistan. Germany regards Afghanistan as an urgent matter for US–FRG discussion. Credit repayments in kind to Russia are now 60 percent of Afghan export earnings. GOA has required FRG B/P aid which FRG cannot provide. Germany regards the Afghan difficulty as temporary in view of prospective oil and gas earnings and considers the Government's current performance responsible. Germany has told Russia it must participate in any debt relief provided Afghanistan. Germany agreed with the GOA to discuss the situation with the U.S. and in DAC.

Chile. FRG officials urged that Chile, together with possible other Latin American countries, be the subject for the first follow-up staff level bilateral US–FRG meeting. They said Chile, along with India, Pakistan, and Turkey, was one of Germany's main countries of concentration. In 1965 DM 40 million in lending authority is planned for Chile. The Germans were particularly anxious to discuss our experience and join with us in detailed self-help performance negotiations.

India, Pakistan, Keban Dam. The Germans desire to hold consultations with the U. S. prior to the IBRD consortia meetings and the Bank meeting on the Keban Dam. They agree on the need to urge the Bank to press more effectively for Indian self-help performance.

UAR . The FRG asked for discussions in normal channels before the U.S. makes any decision on resuming deliveries of PL 480 commodities to the UAR.

Korea. German officials favored a consultative group for Korea following a Japan-Korea settlement if Japan joined the group.

High Commission Territories. The U.K. expressed hope that the U.S. would consider joining Britain in aiding these territories. Minister Castle felt that as in British Guinea economic improvements can help settle political problems. I agreed to examine the question.

East Africa. Minister Castle agreed on shifting the East Africa consultative group from DAC to IBRD auspices. The OECD Secretariat said that a June DAC meeting was necessary to keep faith with East Africa and agreed that meeting could provide a transition to IBRD sponsorship.

Malawi. The U.K. is sending an economic mission to Malawi in June. Sir Andrew Cohen favored bilateral talks on Malawi over a DAC discussion at this time.

U.S. Pledge to the UN Special Fund and EPTA . The British in noting their increase of 17–1/2 percent in this year's pledge to the two UN programs said that a U.S. pledge is urgently needed.

Merger of UNSF and EPTA; Africa Development Bank. The FRG would like to discuss these questions bilaterally at a later date.

Population and Family Planning. Minister Castle places a high priority on this topic and would like to arrange discussions and exchange of information as soon as possible.

Public Affairs. I agreed with FRG officials on the desirability of a Washington meeting of U.S. and FRG public affairs experts on means for increasing public support for aid.

Aid Tying. German Economics Minister Schmucker reported growing pressure to increase the extent of aid tying. (Schmucker described himself as the “last bastion” fighting for untied aid in the FRG, saying even the Economic Cooperation Ministry favored tying. I encouraged him to fight on and, in view of the strong German balance of payments position, to provide leadership on this issue.

Two Topics Needing Further Study. Discussion in Bonn revealed agreement on the inadequacy of existing analysis and understanding of: (a) the use and control of local currency windfalls that accrue to host governments as a result of loans extended under the two-step procedure. I agreed to inquire about the Bank's thinking on this matter. (b) The relationship of export credits to LDC indebtedness and the need for a framework of analysis for this problem.

Attachment4

U.S. PROPOSAL WITH RESPECT TO THE FUTURE WORK OF THE DAC

I. The Over-all Role of the DAC

The United States and Germany, as substantial contributors to international organizations in the field of development assistance, and as donors with the widest geographical distribution of bilateral assistance in the world, have a common interest in attempting to make economic assistance as effective as possible—in seeing to it that the financial and institutional resources available are employed to yield maximum results in terms of economic development.

Partly as a result of the UNCTAD conference at Geneva last summer, the World Bank and other international institutions have begun to reexamine their program. While we can reasonably look forward to an extension of the role of international institutions in economic development, the great bulk of assistance provided will no doubt continue to be on a bilateral basis. Thus, substantial improvements in over-all effectiveness of aid will require improvements in the way bilateral assistance is administered and applied.

In the light of these needs, we consider that DAC should address itself to three principal tasks: A. Assemble more complete and accurate data on matters of importance to development—e.g., debt burdens, transfers of resources between the developed and the underdeveloped world, and to assess collectively the policy significance of this information.

B. Work toward developing a realistic body of principles and doctrine which will support and make more effective the aid efforts of the developed countries.

C. Find means to facilitate the application of such principles and doctrine in the conduct of aid programs to individual developing countries.

Under each of these headings there seem to us to be certain actions which the United States and Germany might usefully promote in the DAC over the next few months. Agreement on such joint actions now, followed by continuing efforts in Paris, should improve the prospects for significant achievement in the DAC prior to the High Level Meeting in July. In making these proposals, the United States anticipates, of course, that the DAC will continue or initiate other useful activities, such as the Annual Aid Review, work on private investment incentives and discussion of agricultural problems.

II. Proposed Actions

A. The Assembling and Assessment of Data

The United States finds there is a deficiency of data on the external indebtedness of the developing countries.

To this end, we find encouraging the discussions of the OECD Secretariat and the staff of the IBRD to prepare a joint proposal for improving and dovetailing DAC and IBRD collection of information on public, publicly-guaranteed, and, as far as possible, unguaranteed private credits going to LDC's. Data on unguaranteed private credits would normally be collected by the IBRD from the LDC's. Given the advanced state of the staff work, it should be possible to reach final agreement on this program in time for the July High Level Meeting of DAC. We would hope the FRG would support this aim.

Such an improved system would materially increase our collective capacity to evaluate the debt situation of LDC's. Chairman Everts has proposed in the DAC Working Party on Financial Aspects of Development Assistance that consideration be given to establishing an “early warning system” to anticipate impending debt crises in LDC's. We support this proposal and would hope it could be discussed in the Working Party in the coming months with a view to agreement in some form at the July High Level Meeting.

B. Principles and Problems of Effective Aid-giving

1. The Principle of Self-help

On the basis of its own experience, the United States is convinced that the sine qua non of a successful program of economic assistance is its marriage with an effective self-help effort on the part of the recipient country. In this also lies the best hope of bringing countries to the point where they are no longer dependent on external assistance.

The United States has found that it has been possible in most countries where the effort has been made to obtain agreement on self-help performance objectives on a project basis, and considers that this is a useful accomplishment. However, for full effect, such efforts need to be extended to a wide range of a country's policies and actions in mobilizing and applying its own resources; such things, for example, as tax, budgetary and fiscal policy and administration, the establishment and maintenance of effective financial institutions, investment policy, export promotion, etc.

For one donor to exercise important influence on a range of questions of this nature is of course difficult, but the United States considers that it has had a measure of success in a few LDC's where American assistance played a major role. We would cite our experience, for example, in Pakistan, Korea and more recently, Brazil and Chile. In all of these countries, arrangements have been agreed upon, to relate the availability of aid to the effective performance of certain clearly defined undertakings of the recipient country. Aid has, in short, been purposefully used to stimulate the adoption and execution of necessary policies of self-help.

There are a number of countries where total external assistance is considerable, where no one donor plays a major role, and where close and effective cooperation among several donors is required to encourage the adoption and implementation of self-help measures. A desirable first-step would be to achieve common agreement among members of DAC on self-help and performance standards and feasibility of using aid to encourage the meeting of such standards.

The U.S. proposes that Germany join with it in proposing to the Working Party of Assistance Requirements and Performance the drafting of a report, which would incorporate U.S. and German views on the decisive importance of self-help efforts to economic growth. Such a report might discuss, and without implying that there are general formulae invariably applicable in all cases, some of the more important factors which enter into an effective self-help effort, and might cite some of the evidence showing how economic development has been accelerated by good performance of the developing country.

It is the United States' view that if it proves possible to secure general acceptance of a report of this nature in the Working Party, it should be submitted to the High Level Meeting. We would not wish at this stage to prejudge possible actions of the High Level Meeting; however, we do suggest consideration of the possibility the Meeting might endorse the report in general terms, and might resolve that member Governments take account of effective resource utilization and planning by the LDC's in determining the budgetary provision they make for aid, and their allocation of available funds. For maximum effect, it might prove desirable to publish both the report and the resolution.

2. Financial Policies of Donors

a. Debt Consolidation and Rescheduling Practices

Experience of the past several years has shown important connections between debt problems and development aid programs. Most recently we have joined with other DAC members in debt consolidation and rescheduling programs for Brazil, Chile, and Turkey. We do not have a carefully worked out set of proposals linking debt relief and development efforts, but we believe the donor countries need to consider this question carefully as they have already begun to do in the DAC Working Party on the Financial Aspects of Development Assistance.

We welcome the leadership Mr. Everts has shown thus far in the Working Party. We support his general proposal on anticipating debt crises, as mentioned above. We also believe that, when creditor countries agree on rescheduling of debt obligations, it might be appropriate to ask the LDC to take measures that will help avoid future debt crises. For example, in the case of the Chile rescheduling, the Chilean Government has agreed to place limits on the volume of new short-term credit the country will accept and to report periodically to the IMF on the compliance.

It may also be possible that rescheduling may provide enough leverage to enable the creditors to seek agreement by the LDC on certain desirable development policies. For example, it might prove possible on the occasion of consolidation and rescheduling to persuade a government, where it is appropriate, to adopt a more realistic exchange rate policy. Such action would be in the interest of DAC members both as creditors and as sponsors of development.

We would propose that the DAC Working Party on Financial Aspects of Development Aid explore this subject over the coming months. While we are not certain that time permits the preparation of definite recommendations for action for the July High Level Meeting, we feel that as a minimum a useful report might be prepared and presented which would summarize recent experience and analyze the extent to which the results have contributed to economic development as well as to financial solvency.

b. Terms of Aid

The Working Party Chairman has also proposed that DAC members agree on specific targets for aid terms, both globally and in consortia and consultative groups, and that they agree on a time schedule for arriving at the targets. We support the Chairman's view that this proposal be considered for DAC agreement at the July High Level Meeting.

It seems to us that establishment of desirable targets for aid terms would give content to the Terms of Aid Resolution the DAC adopted two years ago. From the American point of view, agreed targets would also help persuade Congress that closer comparability of donor terms is in prospect and we believe such a formulation might be of assistance with your own Bundestag. In the last two years, the United States Congress has twice substantially hardened the most liberal interest rate AID could offer, largely because of the difference in terms among DAC countries.

In consortia and consultative groups we would suggest making aid terms a regular item on the agenda of every group. Minimum or target terms or a range of desirable or acceptable terms could be worked out in each case in consultation with the IBRD and the recipient country.

As to a global terms target, we believe there is still a strong case for over-all liberalization of terms in light of the 15 percent annual growth of debt service burdens of LDC's and their long-term need for net inflows of capital. Accordingly, we would suggest a terms target that would provide for an increase in the proportion of DAC aid provided as grants or loans on very liberal terms.

The DAC Chairman's Report last year included a table (page 46) showing the wide variation among DAC members in the proportion of net official disbursements in 1963 provided as bilateral grants, multilateral grant contributions, and bilateral loans at 3 percent interest or less. If a qualification for loan maturities and grace periods were added, say 25 years' maturity and seven years' grace, the proportion would have been significantly smaller.

Without suggesting at this point a specific target percentage for aid on liberal terms, we would hope that the DAC could agree on a sufficiently high percentage to be of real benefit to the LDC's and to help avoid a hardening of U.S. terms. Donor countries currently providing a comparatively low percentage of soft aid could establish a gradual, but reasonable schedule of softening. We would hope that members might use the Annual Aid Review as an additional forum for discussing their possibilities and intentions for meeting the targets.

C. The Application of Principles and Doctrine

The DAC has an interest in the application to individual LDC's of the principles and doctrine it develops. This can of course be done in a number of ways. General principles agreed to should help shape the bilateral programs of member Governments. These principles should also influence the operations of the consultative groups (not consortia) sponsored by the World Bank—those already existing and the five or six new ones the Bank contemplates establishing over the next eighteen months. The work on principles performed in the DAC could aid materially in providing to DAC member governments, which are also members of the consultative groups, a common standard judgment and agreed objectives.

After account is taken of the contemplated increase in the number of Bank Consultative Groups, and of the work of the CIAP in Latin America, there will remain a number of fairly important recipient countries for which no form of review or coordinating machinery exists. The United States believes that it may prove desirable for the DAC itself to review the development effort of certain of these countries in occasional meetings.

The primary objective in these country reviews, as we conceive them, would not be to estimate and fill a resources gap, but to develop a common appreciation of the situation in the LDC, and measures appropriate to deal with it. The review might normally include an assessment of the development efforts of the LDC, both present and required, the general economic policies which the LDC should be encouraged to follow, an appraisal of institutional assets and limitations, consideration of priority requirements for technical assistance, etc. An effort should be made to enlist the cooperation of the IBRD in preparing for these meetings, as well as the participation of staff experts in the meeting itself. Sometimes, one donor might take the initiative in submitting the basic paper, as the United States proposes to do in the case of Liberia, and the United Kingdom for Sierra Leone.

If such a meeting is properly prepared, and attended by country experts from respective capitals, it should be possible to secure agreement on most of these basic points in the course of a one-day session. The Secretariat might be commissioned to produce a paper setting forth the conclusions of the meeting, and this paper, circulated to capitals and field missions, would facilitate the application of coordinated policy.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Trip—Administrator David Bell, Paris, Bonn, London, February 21–27, 1965. Confidential. Drafted by Richard Palmer (AID/PC). Both the memorandum and its attachment are attached to Document 106. Two other attachments, an undated paper prepared in EUR/GER, “U.S. Proposal for Closer Bilateral Aid Relationships with the Federal Republic,” and a February 25 U.S.-German joint press communique issued at Bonn, are not printed. Regarding Bell's trip, see Document 104.

2 A memorandum of Bell's conversation with de Lattre, February 23, is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Trip—Administrator David Bell, Paris, Bonn, London, February 21–27, 1965.

3 This February 23 conversation was summarized in A–1938 from Paris, March 3. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 3 CCAM)

4 Limited Official Use. No drafting information appears on the source text.

106. Record of Executive Staff Meeting, Agency for International Development 106. Record of Executive Staff Meeting, Agency for International Development1

Washington, March 2, 1965.

ES/RD–35

[Here follows a list of the 37 attendees.]

SUBJECT

Report by the Administrator on His Visit to Paris, Bonn and London, February 21–27, 19652

This meeting reviewed Mr. Bell's recently completed trip to Paris, Bonn and London which is described in summary in the Administrator's memorandum of March 1, 1965.3 During the course of the meeting the Administrator asked for specific actions to be taken as a result of his trip. These include the following:

Germany

First priority attention to bilateral coordination at the country level should be given to the situation in Afghanistan. There should be set up in Washington or Bonn a meeting which would follow up and carry forward Mr. Bell's initial discussions on this subject. (Action: NESA)

The Germans also have a keen interest in Chile as well as Latin America generally. A specific discussion in either Bonn or Washington needs to be set up to permit staff level discussions on these subjects. (Action: LA)

The Germans also are interested in further discussions on Korea. Timing of these discussions is not urgent at the moment since they probably should not take place until after a Korea-Japan settlement has moved further. (Action: FE)

The Germans are particularly concerned that we have a bilateral exchange of views in advance of consortium meetings. They are particularly interested in talking in advance of forthcoming meetings on India, Pakistan and the Keban Dam. (Action: NESA)

Mr. Bell had agreed that the Germans and we should send reciprocal instructions to our embassies and field missions concerning field level coordination. These instructions should be prepared as soon as possible.4 (Action: PC in conjunction with U.S. Embassy at Bonn)

UK

Mr. Bell emphasized that it was clear that the UK desires to enlarge its aid program and improve the terms of its aid as soon as possible. He also mentioned that Mrs. Castle, Minister of Overseas Development, hopes to visit the United States in the future.

The UK is sending a special mission to Malawi. They urged that we participate in assistance to Malawi. We agreed that we would be willing to work with the UK group after the completed study and assist Malawi as appropriate, although we consider UK as having the primary responsibility. (Action: AFR)

The UK also asked us to consider assistance to the High Commission Territories. Although Mr. Bell indicated that we would look at this case on its merits, it did not now seem appropriate for us to take any significant role in the HCTs. (Monitoring Action: AFR)

The UK concurred in an IBRD consultative group for East Africa. We agreed that this was generally desirable. East Africa is one of the countries on the IBRD list of more likely candidates for additional consultative groups. If the Bank moves ahead there would need to be careful effort to make a smooth transition from the DAC working group to IBRD sponsorship. (Action: AFR and PC)

France

The French authorities had indicated to Mr. Bell that French assistance would soon regain 1961 levels. GOF expects to have greater dispersion of its development aid based largely on redirecting funds previously made available for colon repatriation and similar costs in Algeria and Morocco. The French do not expect a reduction in assistance south of the Sahara, although they do look to continued shifts from budgetary support to development programs.

DAC

Paris, Bonn and London all agreed that we should seek to develop some kind of informal Big Four steering committee within DAC which would seek to get Big Four agreement on what DAC should do and how it should go about doing it. Other countries could join in an ad hoc basis as appropriate. Mr. Coffin and Mr. Thorp will be working on this in Paris. (Monitoring Action: PC)

In discussion with the Germans we agreed we should work through DAC in helping to develop better data on debt of the LDCs and on credit flows they receive. Our major problem in this area will be improving data on unguaranteed private debts. (Action: PC)

Representatives of the French, British and Germans all agree on the desirability of re-emphasizing the matter of terms of aid at the July Ministerial Level DAC meeting. (Action: PC)

Other General Items

There was general agreement in the three capitals that the IBRD should set up five or six new consultative groups. While there was no particular agreement on a priority list of countries to be so treated there did seem to be room for the Bank to obtain an acceptable consensus.

Mr. Bell had also discussed IDA replenishment in the three capitals. The French are now talking about replenishment at an annual level of $400 million (against the current rate of $250 million). The Germans appeared somewhat less forthcoming. The UK on the other hand sees the situation much as we do—i.e., we should push for as high a replenishment as possible with donor ratios not too different from those at present. (Monitoring Action: PC)

In all three capitals there was recognition that there is need to find an acceptable multilateral framework in which aid recipients can make general financial and fiscal commitments similar to those that Brazil and Chile made to CIAP in connection with their current development efforts. There was general discussion in the staff meeting about the use of IBRD consortia and consultative groups for this purpose. It was recognized that this would substantially increase the role and largely change the focus of the Bank in these groups. There was also agreement that IMF might serve as the “sponsor” of such commitments in certain circumstances. It was agreed that there was need for further study and discussion with the Bank on this matter. (Action: PC)

During the discussion of Mr. Bell's talks with the Germans and others on Turkish debt rollover problems, it was noted that the terms we are now recommending for Turkey are different from those that were proposed and accepted in the case of Chile. It was agreed that we should seek to establish standard patterns for negotiation of debt rollovers in all areas and that we should deviate from these standards only after full discussion and justification of a reason for such deviation. (Action is studying standard patterns: PC)

In this connection Mr. Bell noted the need to be prepared for the July high-level DAC meeting to report on and analyze our experience in the relationship between debt rollovers and the development process. (Action: PC)

In conclusion, Mr. Bell commented favorably on our AID staffs in Paris and London. He suggested that we should consider whether we should have somebody assigned directly to Bonn to maintain a close relationship with German development agencies. (Action: PC)

Donald S. Brown
Deputy Executive Secretary

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Trip—Administrator David Bell, Paris, Bonn, London, February 21–27, 1965. Confidential. Regarding the several attachments to the source text, see footnote 1, Document 105.

2 Regarding this trip, see Document 104.

3  Document 105.

4 Not further identified.

107. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 107. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, April 5, 1965, 3 p.m.

CEDTO 1036. ADCOR. Subject: March 30 DAC meeting on TC coordination. Reference: TOCED 877.2 At March 30 DAC meeting Thorp re-elected Chairman for coming year and Pierre-Brossolette of French Delegation elected Vice Chairman.

Since this first DAC meeting since Austrian accession, Chairman welcomed Austrian Delegate, who made brief statement that Austria will strive to improve its performance in development field in coming years and cited fact that $2 million budgeted for Austrian TA for 1965 compared to $1.3 million in 1965.

Two agenda items of substance reported below: (1) objectives and methods for coordinating TA and (2) directory of non-profit organizations participating in TA. Third item, TA study in Thailand reported separately.

Methods of Coordinating TA . Secretariat's presentation followed lines of DAC (65) 93 setting forth suggested elements of coordination, i.e., government-to-government coordination among donors-on-spot field coordination, and provisions for continuing consultation through “clearing house” arrangement. Parsons described three categories of LDCs in which organized coordination effort may be feasible (Annex C of paper): 1) LDCs where some coordination already exists under international auspices; 2) for those where UN programs constitute 30 per cent of total aid, UN could be asked to handle coordination effort; and 3) for those where bilateral programs constitute over 70 per cent of total, major donor could be asked to take lead in coordination effort.

Although all delegates favored principle of coordination and all felt Secretariat paper was good attempt to come to grips with problem, reaction was cautious and mixed. UK, France, Portugal and EEC considered Secretariat proposals too ambitious and felt that data-gathering requirements would overburden small donor Embassies in many LDCs. These delegates all expressed concern about DAC becoming involved in “operational” activities.

France and EEC stressed problem of relationship with LDC government and psychological ill effects on recipient of donor-imposed structure to police TA operation. UK acknowledged that this delicate issue but not excuse for ignoring need for coordination.

US, Canada, Germany and to lesser extent Japan, Belgium and Norway took more positive line. Indeed, Belgian Del even expressed view that DAC should not hesitate to undertake operational activities. US suggested DAC has contribution to make to coordination effort without operational involvement by 1) fostering exchange of information on TA projects to avoid duplication, 2) candid exchange and assessment of field experience to help improve aid coordination efforts, and 3) helping LDCs develop their own system or agency for coordination by analysis of factors, organizational and otherwise, necessary for effective coordination. German Del supported Secretariat paper but expressed reservations about role of UN as coordinator for List II LDC in Annex C. He stressed need for field coordination through regular and continuing consultation.

Canada observed that close on-spot field coordination particularly important for small donors.

Japan favored more informal on-spot coordination flexible enough not to overburden small Embassies.

In discussing next step, Chairman mentioned possibility of DAC sponsoring additional coordination groups in LDCs selected from List I of Annex C, citing Thailand example of what can be done. He acknowledged this would involve DAC to certain extent operationally, which several delegates had earlier opposed. He offered as alternative, general instructions to donor field missions through DAC capitals stressing need for on-spot coordination. US, UK and Canada spoke in favor this approach, with US Del addition that aid has sent instructions on coordination to its field missions on several occasions, but only limited results achieved on unilateral basis.

Chairman agreed to have Secretariat modify proposal in light of discussion and circulate it to delegates for consideration at second meeting, probably within one month. US, Canada and Netherlands expressed hope that proposal can then be taken up at high level meeting in July.

Comment: With several major donors opposed to DAC operational involvement and concerned about burdensome reporting requirements, as well as sensitive political implications of donor groups in LDCs, apparent that any effective DAC action towards improved coordination should begin with low key effort. Thus we support proposal for rather general instructions to field with hope of feedback of information (perhaps to capitals rather than directly to DAC) as first step which may have general support of all members. Would appreciate any comments from Washington as to nature of guidelines most likely to achieve serious field attention, and AID/W views as to which LDCs may be most appropriate candidates to additional coordination efforts. Any data AID/W has on which LDCs already have internal agencies for aid coordination (e.g., Thailand's DTEC) would be of great assistance to Secretariat.

Secretariat later reported to us that they are well satisfied with results of meeting and that they fully aware proposals set forth in DAC (65) 9 more ambitious than many dels willing to accept. Secretariat considers “joint instructions” to field reasonable and appropriate first step to more effective field coordination.

Directory of non-profit organizations engaged in TA . Parsons reported ICVA offer to collaborate with OECD in compiling directory of European non-profit TA activities similar to report prepared for US by TA information clearing house. He stressed value of such study and advantages of cooperating with ICVA, along lines DAC (65) 6.4

UK Del asked if ICVA would share cost of project and would assume responsibility for keeping directory current. Parsons replied that ICVA will provide office space and services but that budgetary limitations preclude ICVA cost contribution. However, ICVA has given verbal assurances for maintenance of directory, possibly with help from foundation, since this is continuing requirement.

Canadian Del offered support for directory, assuming Canada included. Secretariat replied directory had been envisaged as European undertaking but that Canada could be included and that budget would be amended to provide at least one data gathering trip to Canada. This would leave Japan as sole OECD country excluded (US covered by earlier study). Japanese Del queried by Secretariat about GOJ interest in participation, but having received no instructions from Tokyo, he reserved GOJ position.

Belgian Del questioned value of directory, commenting that non-profit activities largely unrelated to real TA and suggesting UN as source of data on voluntary organizations. Secretariat replied that UN has compiled very little information on this subject and that many organizations formerly performing strictly missionary functions now concentrating more on true TA to respond to LDC needs identified in national planning documents.

US Del supported view that directory needed to fill gap caused by lack of data on relevant non-official activities. Based on US experience with TA clearing house, he encouraged OECD to accept association with ICVA as arrangement favorable to OECD.

There being no objection, it was agreed that Chairman would pass proposal to budget committee for approval.

Leddy

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use; Priority.

2 Dated April 2. (Ibid.)

3 Not found.

4 Not found.

108. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Chairman of the President's Advisory Committee on Foreign Aid Programs (Perkins) 108. Letter From the Permanent Representative to the Development Assistance Committee (Coffin) to the Chairman of the President's Advisory Committee on Foreign Aid Programs (Perkins)1

Paris, May 10, 1965.

Dear Jim:

At long last here is the note I promised you on the background, activities, and possibilities of the Development Assistance Committee.2 Even though quite long, it still seems to me to hit only the highlights, and the additional materials referred to in the first paragraph make valuable supplementary reading.3

At this juncture, I am hopeful that the High Level meeting in July, to which Dave and the aid Ministers from the UK and Germany are coming, will be the most significant one yet. Certainly more preparatory work, through working parties and experts' groups, has been done than ever before.

As for subjects which your Committee might usefully examine, there are three thoughts that come to mind. The first is to look into the question of the likely reasonable and realistic volume of aid needs which the industrialized free world will encounter in the fairly near future, drawing on AID and other studies, in order to be able to express an authoritative and respected voice on the issue. If, as I suspect, we and others will—in our own interest—be well advised to break away from the plateau which we have been treading for several years, the Committee might well be able to play a significant role in the development of thinking and gaining general acceptance.

A second issue is that about which there has been considerable discussion on the Hill and in some of the recent literature—the right balance, for the U.S., between bilateral and multilateral aid. The discussion often seems to assume things that should be tested and proven. It occasionally indulges in mythology. Key questions need looking into. How much should IBRD-IDA be expected to do? At what point would they themselves become subject to distorting political pressures? To what extent is it true that effective performance is better achieved through multilateral aid? To what extent does U.S. interests require bilateral aid? To what extent, if at all, should the U.S. be willing to contribute to international institutions, beyond the matching contributions of others? There are many other questions, but the whole issue is exceedingly important. And a reasoned, balanced examination by your Committee might be very significant.

The final area may well lie beyond your frame of reference but it is important for all countries, as well as ours—the question of public understanding and support. We lack, internationally, an umbrella or forum which would lend support to the activities of individual countries and the common effort in general. In State and AID a number of ideas have, from time to time, been discussed. But they have not, so far as I know, resulted in a course of action. Perhaps the Committee could look into this problem—which has a bearing on our willingness and ability to mount a continuing substantial aid program.

To conclude, let me wish you and the Committee all success in your efforts. Certainly there are few fields where it is as important both to act as effectively as possible and to gain the confidence needed for sustained effectiveness. Needless to say, we in Paris would again welcome you or any of the Committee who may be travelling this way.

With kind regards,

Sincerely,

Frank M. Coffin

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Advisory Committee on Foreign Aid: FRC 74 A 58, GAC Memoranda to Dec. 1965. No classification marking.

2 The attached “note,” a 16-page paper with four tables, prepared for the President's Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs, is not printed. For documentation on this Committee, under the chairmanship of James A. Perkins, see Document 32 ff.

3 This paragraph refers to the following documents: Chairman's Report for 1963 (published in September 1964), which has not been found; CEDTO A–293, Document 92; and a memorandum prepared for German officials by Administrator Bell in February 1965, which may be the paper attached to Document 105.

109. Editorial Note 109. Editorial Note

The Development Assistance Committee held its fourth annual high-level meeting in Paris July 22–23, 1965. AID Administrator David E. Bell headed the U.S. Delegation. The briefing book prepared for the meeting, which includes a draft agenda, list of delegates, a statement of U.S. aims, Chairman Thorp's draft report of June 24 (DAC(65)18), other DAC working party papers relating to improvement of the common assistance effort, and briefing and other papers, is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, DAC—Ministerial Meeting—Paris, July, 1965. A “condensed” briefing book is ibid. “Notes on DAC Ministerial Meeting,” an 18-page, unofficial record prepared by Arvin M. Kramish (PC/FWA) on August 13, is ibid., AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 A 1866, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1966.

In identical letters to Representative Thomas E. Morgan, Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and to Senator J. William Fulbright, Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, both dated August 17, Bell summarized the two resolutions adopted at the meeting and pointed to the “significant progress being made in the efforts, which have been so strongly recommended and supported by the Congress, to encourage other developed nations to increase the amounts and to soften the terms of the aid which they provide.” (Ibid.)

For the summary of this meeting, sent in CEDTO A–88 from Paris, August 3, see Document 110.

110. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 110. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, August 3, 1965.

CEDTO A–88

SUBJECT

DAC High Level Meeting

REF

CEDTO 912

ADCOR. See Attached Table of Contents for Country References.3

I. Summary

1. The fourth annual High Level Meeting of the DAC was held in Paris on July 22–23. The meeting was a significant improvement over past years, as judged by the level of representation, the quality of the discussion, the specific actions taken, the concern voiced on the need for additional efforts and the focus on DAC's future work. The U.S. Delegation was headed by AID Administrator Bell. Other delegates included five Ministers from important DAC countries (U.K., Germany, France, Japan and the Netherlands) and the President of the IBRD.

2. Most speakers stressed the usefulness of DAC's work, and, perhaps more significantly, several emphasized with deep conviction that the current aggregate aid level to LDCs is inadequate and that urgent action to provide more assistance on easier terms is required. President Woods of the IBRD stressed this theme pointedly in reporting that Bank studies had revealed that LDCs can usefully absorb annually, between now and 1970, $3 to $4 billion of external resources beyond what they are presently receiving.

3. The meeting's major concrete achievements were to approve two important policy documents drawn up by the DAC in its working party sessions: 1) terms of aid recommendations providing specific numerical targets for softening aid terms over the next three years;4 and 2) supply and performance recommendations reaffirming member countries' intentions to attain and, if possible, exceed the UNCTAD target of one per cent of national income; and, for the first time, accepting principles aimed at relating assistance to LDCs' performance.5

4. The future work program of the DAC was also discussed, with the U.S. and U.K. taking the lead in offering suggestions for new initiatives. U.S. items included proposed studies of absorptive capacity, under-utilized capacity, and relations between aid programs and economic development in selected aid-receiving countries, as well as the examination of new areas such as agricultural development, private investment and population growth. The U.K. recommended a study of the impact on debt burden of commercial credits, and a search for means of improving public understanding and support of aid. It was agreed that a detailed work program would be formulated by the DAC in the early fall, and that this program should reflect a careful selection of priorities.

II. Chairman's Report and General Policy Discussion

1. Thorp opened the meeting with a balance sheet of comments relating to the Chairman's Report.6 He noted that the 1965 economic outlook for LDCs was less favorable than for 1964 and the possibility of further decline in the growth rate; he stressed the need to continue the activities of the DAC working parties which are considering problems of requirements, performance, debt, terms, export credits and the avoidance of debt crises. He noted the heavy workload of the Secretariat and Delegations in recent months and the need for reviewing activities and setting priorities at the fall meeting on the work program. He noted that DAC had done more on policy than on specific country applications, and suggested more experimentation on a systematic schedule of country meetings. He noted the establishment of a working party on private investment, the need for a recommendation on this subject for UNCTAD, and the need for better knowledge about private flows.

2. Secretary General Kristensen repeated his 1962 statement that development aid should be a regular and permanent activity of members and not be victim of balance of payments or other economic fluctuations. He noted some improvement in this regard, but some failures also, pointing out there had been no aid increase in four years, even in money terms. Expressing OECD interest in DAC's work, he invited Thorp to make a presentation on DAC's work to the OECD Council next week and next fall.

3. All Heads of Delegations except the Portuguese followed with policy statements which included a number of positive, forthright and important remarks which in the opinion of many observers who have followed the operation of the DAC over a period of years constituted a high point in awareness of member governments of the need for further action in the aid field. Aside from several constructive interventions by Mr. Bell, the most noteworthy of these statements were made by President Woods of the World Bank, Overseas Development Minister Castle of the U.K., Aid Minister Bot of the Netherlands, and Finance Minister Giscard d'Estaing of France. German Economic Cooperation Minister Scheel made a relatively cautious and less positive statement. Other representatives offered routine comments, praising the Chairman's report and endorsing the work of the DAC in general terms.

4. FRG 's Scheel was somewhat ambivalent, offsetting praise of DAC's work with criticism that political objectives of coordination did not always receive adequate attention. He stressed that aid is limited and should go mainly to LDCs which are mobilizing their own resources and are prepared to take appropriate political measures. He felt that it was possible to overemphasize financial assistance, noting that there was also acute need for expert personnel. Noting debt as a shadow over development, he said that soft terms are only a partial solution; members should support projects that produce quick increases in GNP and exports. Recognizing the continuing major role of official aid, he urged DAC consideration of more incentives to private enterprise. Scheel cited two important fields: 1) agriculture in the light of rising populations; he warned against identifying development with industrialization and advised balanced development to avoid abrupt changes in social structure; 2) research and evaluation of the effectiveness of aid; here he urged close DAC cooperation with the Development Centre.

5. Japanese Foreign Minister Shiina was quite defensive, saying Japan would improve its aid effort as capabilities permit, and continue aid in collaboration with other DAC members. He said further discussion was needed on a standard target for terms. He referred to the U.S.-Japan understanding of the need for aid to Asia, and pleaded for participation of other DAC members in the Asian Development Bank and in Southeast Asian proposals of the United States.

6. Netherlands Aid Minister Bot mentioned as indicators of serious intent of the Dutch Government in the aid field his own recently established Cabinet post, rising 1965 and 1966 GON aid budgets, and the decision to lower interest rates through subsidies. Noting that Stevenson, Castle, and Thant didn't mince words on the plight of the LDCs, Bot suggested that the tone of the Chairman's Report was overly detached and philosophical, insufficiently inspired by the urgency of the problem. He praised the Report's emphasis on the need for better relations between members and LDCs, proposed education and science as new areas for DAC attention, and suggested that use be made of OECD experience in channeling technology. He advocated better use of existing international aid machinery, including the UN Industrial Center, the Special Fund, and UN Regional Representatives; suggested that in the OECD the Secretary General, Chairman and Delegations consider how to break down “watertight compartments” and interrelate aid, trade and economic policy efforts bearing on development.

7. IBRD President Woods warned that “unless bold decisions on the volume of aid are taken soon, the climate of development will worsen rapidly.” Citing the gap between what DAC says and what it does, he predicted “a heartbreaking slowdown of development, and even trade, if the gap is not closed.”7 He noted the plateau of DAC net official aid since 1961, in spite of an annual rise of $40 billion in GNP; asserted that the capacity of LDCs to absorb aid is steadily rising as skills and experience increase and that it will continue to rise. In his judgment, current net aid and private resource flow are wholly inadequate in terms of what the LDCs have demonstrated they can use and what the donors can give. To facilitate long-term planning, he urged donors to give individual LDCs advance indications on a multi-year basis of target levels of aid which would be reviewed annually against performance of the LDC. He announced plans to establish the first new consultative groups at the time of the Bank-Fund Annual Meetings and to improve consultative group operations. He commended the new U.K. zero interest rate policy. He closed his statement with a plea for greatly increased contributions to IDA replenishment, citing advantages he saw in multilateral aid (development orientation, good projects, soft terms, untied procurement, political acceptability).

8. U.K. Minister of Overseas Development Barbara Castle agreed with the theme stated in the Chairman's Report that DAC “had reached a crucial point in the role of aid in development—a plateau in volume as though rich, developed countries had exhausted their political will and institutional capacity to mobilize resources.”8 She said that despite economic difficulties HMG had rejected pressures to reduce aid as “immoral and short-sighted.” She noted the importance of the centralized Ministry of Overseas Development, e.g., in developing data and spreading information to Parliament, press and the people. She was convinced of the usefulness of the DAC Annual Aid Review ("cross-examination should induce self-examination") and urged strengthening it to compare donors' aid practice to an international standard, to get off the plateau. She was concerned that a “go ahead” aid policy by one donor, if not followed by others, would produce trade disadvantages and domestic political problems for that country. Pointing out that the U.K. and some others in the past had given soft terms to LDCs with which they had special relations, she said that the U.K. acknowledged the need for a new start, and would offer interest-free loans to a substantial number of LDCs, using the same criteria as IDA. She warned of the political problem which would arise if comparability of terms was not achieved in general, and in individual LDCs, with U.K. interest-free loans in effect servicing hard loans of others. She pointed to the need for an agreed on and equitable policy for rescheduling debt and regulating the flow of export credit. She supported IBRD consultative groups while noting the need for improvements, and proposed that DAC examine the whole international machinery of coordination. She urged that donors establish three to five-year advance projections of aid targets, at least for major recipients, and noted that the U.K. national economic plan for the period through 1969–70, to be ready in the fall, would contain overall U.K. aid projections, and thus permit the ODM to project figures of individual LDCs.

9. AID Administrator Bell offered U.S. agreement with the Thorp-Woods analysis of the status of LDC development, noting transitional countries like Taiwan were exceptional, and that for most LDCs the prospects now are less attractive than several years ago. He agreed that as LDC absorptive capacity improves and more projects are prepared, the need for aid will rise, not fall. He said that if this assessment is correct, then DAC members' responsibility is to give more aid on better terms with corollary LDC responsibility for better performance and mobilization of resources. Referring to members' responsibility for advocacy of aid at home, he said it will help the U.S. to be able to report comments of the U.K., Netherlands and other Delegations. He noted that now for the first time the U.S. is able to report that there are other lenders offering terms as soft or softer. He stated the view that DAC's work had become increasingly important and suggested that in considering the future work of the Committee, attention be given to three main fields of activity: 1) fact-finding and analysis in support of maximizing benefits, minimizing costs and fitting aid into broader economic and political context; 2) seeking to achieve common policies on both giving and receiving of aid; 3) application of policies to specific LDCs and regions, without duplication of IBRD or CIAP efforts. He suggested DAC regional reviews, different from those of the past, designed to provide an overview of development problems, flows of aid, trade patterns, with participation of the IBRD and the IMF.

10. Mr. Giscard d'Estaing, the French Minister of Finance, observed that the High Level Meeting offered an opportunity to discuss aid policy and future means of coordination among DAC donors. He emphasized that coordination is the basic objective of the DAC—coordination both of aid policies at the national level and day-to-day coordination of actual aid programs. However, consistent with the line France has always taken against DAC involvement in operational activities, he warned against confusing coordination with action.

The Finance Minister pointed out that French aid already exceeds the one per cent target set forth in the Recommendation on Supply and Performance. He noted that France is providing more than her share of the DAC's total foreign assistance and that France's 1964 total net flow of resources of $1,236 million is second only to the United States. He stressed that for France, an increase in the volume of aid is not an immediate objective, but that the Government is concerned with increasing the quality and efficiency of French aid. He stated that since 1964 public sector grants have stabilized at approximately $700 million, while loans are increasing, especially in the franc zone. A shift from grants to long-term loans, however, will demand more responsible action on the part of the recipient, and thus must be undertaken gradually.

He noted that although a big percentage of French aid will continue to go to Africa, the percentage of total French assistance being provided to the franc zone countries is steadily decreasing (83 per cent in 1963 to 77 per cent in 1964).

Commenting on the debt burden in LDCs which has increased threefold in less than a decade, the Finance Minister noted that this problem could be alleviated either by the softening of aid terms or by efforts by the LDCs themselves to mobilize their own resources more effectively so as to rely less on foreign borrowing. While in his view the second alternative was preferable, he conceded that a combination of both solutions would have to be employed.

Giscard d'Estaing pointed out that development assistance is only one form of aid and that the LDCs required technical assistance and the reorganization of trade, favoring the primary producing countries. This is especially important this year because of changes in world commodity prices.

Finally, he warned against dispersion of effort in too many directions, indicating that France hopes the DAC will concentrate in the future on coordination and country annual aid reviews and will leave research studies to the Development Centre and other research institutions with which the DAC has connections. He also suggested that the DAC consider undertaking a “study of studies” which would relate the activities of the various working parties and expert groups to the work of the DAC as a whole.

11. The Norwegian representative, Mr. Cappelen, emphasized the desirability of channeling aid through multilateral institutions, and suggested that future aid increases of members be provided through these channels.

12. The Italian representative, Mr. Zagari, stressed Italy's structural economic problems, especially low per capita income, internal developing areas, status as capital importer, and inflexible budget requirements. He said harmonization of donor aid policies would be more effective if adequate account is taken of the differences among donors. He hoped that in anticipation of future UNCTAD discussions, the Working Party on Supply and Performance would consider donors' capacity to provide aid and would propose equitable burden-sharing criteria. In his view, soft aid should be given multilaterally to avoid distortion of trade patterns. Citing the need for a planned national aid policy, he said that aid was now included in Italy's Five-Year Plan for the first time. He regretted DAC inaction on the coordination of technical assistance.

13. The Austrian representative, Mr. Halusa, stressed the coordination aspects of the DAC and welcomed the guidelines for the coordination of technical assistance. He hoped that the guidelines will be improved and implemented in the near future. He noted that a small donor like Austria is limited in the scope of aid it can provide and therefore looks to DAC to provide basic data on opportunities for aid based on feasibility studies undertaken by larger donors or international organizations. He noted that in Austria's view, performance is the key to development assistance effort and that more cooperation from LDCs is required. A mere increase in the volume and liberalization of terms of foreign assistance is not enough unless matched by effective measures within the LDCs themselves.

14. The Danish representative, Mr. Kastoft, expressed gratification at Sweden's entrance into the DAC, noting that it will permit a closer cooperation in aid matters among the Scandinavian countries. In stressing the value of the Annual Aid Reviews as a self-analysis and stocktaking exercise, he noted that Denmark had been rather self-satisfied with its aid program until such terms as “distressingly low” were applied to it at the Annual Aid Review. He said that this constructive criticism has been taken seriously in Copenhagen and had focused attention on the need to improve the Danish aid effort. He predicted that by next year's AAR, Danish aid will have increased significantly, but warned that such increases could not be expected year after year, due to limitations imposed by Danish balance of payments and other economic difficulties. He also noted the need to improve publicity and public opinion of aid, adding that he hoped to circulate the Chairman's Report widely inside Denmark.

15. The EEC representative, Mr. van der Lee, spoke briefly, making two points: first, that the increasing debt burden is the most serious problem facing the development of most LDCs. (He noted, however, that the EEC aid program is mostly on a grant basis and thus does not aggravate the debt problem.) Secondly, he suggested that multilateral organizations should not depend only on subscriptions of member governments but should borrow more from world capital markets.

16. Speaking as an observer, the representative of the Inter-American Development Bank, Mr. Copete, noted that by 1970 Latin America will have a population of about 200 million people and therefore will require a significantly increased flow of resources from the industrialized nations.9 He endorsed Mr. Woods' thesis that more assistance was needed, and on softer terms, while at the same time agreeing with Mrs. Castle's observation that liberal use of commercial credits can dangerously increase the debt burden of LDCs.

17. The Swedish representative, Mr. Lundstrom, also expressed his Government's concern about the growing debt burden and the leveling off of official aid. Without being specific, he indicated that the Swedish Government is prepared to contribute to the improvement, both of the quality and the quantity of its assistance, adding that the GOS prefers multilateral to bilateral channels.

18. The Belgian representative, Mr. Ockrent, indicated that the views expressed by the Netherlands, U.K. and IBRD, accurately reflected the position of the Belgian Government. With respect to the Chairman's Report, he expressed the hope that a little more urgency would be introduced into the final version to take account of the concern expressed by many of the delegates at the High Level Meeting.

19. The Chairman, in summing up the discussion of aid policy and the Chairman's Report, noted that the consensus called for additional aid on softer terms, increased attention to the growing debt burden of LDCs, closer working relations between donor and LDCs and constructive discussions among donors. He asked for, and received, the approval of the High Level Meeting for the publication of the Chairman's Report.

III. Improvement of the Common Aid Effort

A. Financial Terms and Indebtedness 1. Mr. Everts, Chairman of the Working Party on Financial Aspects, reviewed the activities of the Working Party over the past year, referring to specific DAC studies (DAC 65 (15)10 and (17)).11 With respect to the debt problem, he said there was a lack of detailed information on the subject, and the Working Party welcomed the cooperation between DAC and the IBRD. He said that he recognized that some members might resent the burden of providing additional information; nevertheless, questionnaires would soon be sent to the DAC members for the purpose of acquiring additional information on debt. He said it would also be necessary to do more with respect to individual countries in considering the debt problem. He looked forward to a common effort to establish criteria for terms, and felt that country studies would contribute to greater harmonization of terms. Finally, he suggested that the IBRD might be in the best position to undertake some of the necessary country studies.

Addressing himself to the future work of the Working Party, Mr. Everts said that there would be a continuation of debt analysis in cooperation with the IBRD. He said we would try to develop means of diagnosing debt service criteria and the Working Party would pursue work on debt resettlement problems. He stressed the important relationship between export credits and development loans and the need to understand more of this relationship. Also, he hoped that the Working Party could consider criteria for the most appropriate terms of development assistance for specific countries.

Mr. Everts, turning next to the recommendations on terms of aid (DAC 65 (14)),12 said it was necessary to keep three basic points in mind: 1) The importance of harmonizing terms in individual countries. He said that the terms proposed could be supported by every country regardless of its internal economic position. If a choice had to be made between volume of aid and softer terms, the latter should be chosen in view of the over-all debt problem. 2) The general targets for lending prescribed in the Recommendation reflect several basic facts: (a) they are designed so that the bulk (80%) of all DAC lending is covered; (b) they should be at the average level of terms of all members; a procedure is prescribed in the Recommendation for yearly scrutiny or review of progress made in achieving targets. 3) The Recommendation contained language in favor of reducing and ultimately eliminating tied aid.

2. The Belgian representative, Mr. Ockrent, while supporting the Recommendation, called it “a meager instrument” to deal with the enormous problems raised in earlier discussion.

3. Mr. Bell strongly supported the Recommendation and urged its adoption. He thought that in the drafting of the several provisions of the Recommendation a fair balance had been struck and that no one could reasonably argue that the terms proposed would work a hardship on his country. He said that we intended to review our own terms again in the light of the Recommendation, and commended the British for their action in establishing a category of interest-free loans. He noted that U.S. loans had been made harder by the Congress over the opposition of the President in 1963 and 1964 and pointed out that U.S. action is limited by Congress. This action was taken primarily because of Congressional impatience with the situation in which U.S. loan terms had been so much easier than those of other donors for a long period of time. He referred to the very careful debt study which was prepared by the U.S. Government and which, he said, was useful in contributing to a better understanding of the problem. He felt confident that we could avoid any further hardening of terms and stated that our efforts on this front would be greatly assisted by our ability to point to Canadian and U.K. terms more generous than our own. Positive action by DAC assists each member in defending a policy of easier terms.

4. Minister Scheel noted that the German Government finances loans by the private sector and that very low interest required the provision of subsidies. He said that Germany is now providing project assistance to a number of LDCs. He rejected Mrs. Castle's suggestion that other countries consider the interest-free loan policy. It was important that donors stay in line with local capital markets; otherwise, LDCs would have no understanding of the importance of loans and of the fact that it was necessary to pay for capital. Interest-free loans, he said, convey a false impression of the world capital markets. (These comments suggested that he did not fully understand the two-step procedure which he referred to later.) He said that Germany would stay within the recommended terms, giving loans at approximately 3%, but might extend maturity dates or grace periods, and would in some cases utilize divided rates (two-step loan procedure). He suggested that for harder loans, interest in excess of 3% could be paid in local currency. He reminded members that some assistance is offered on the basis of very special favored relationships with receiving countries, but that these same donors are not too generous in helping other LDCs. Germany, on the other hand, is distributing its assistance more widely. Mr. Scheel said that Germany could accept the Recommendation on terms of aid.

5. In stating the Japanese Government's attitude toward the draft Recommendation, Foreign Minister Shiina said that while Japan recognized the requirements for aid, it feels that: 1) terms can be different because of the differing economic conditions within each donor country, and 2) the Recommendation may lead to a reduction in the volume of aid available. He said that Japan could not achieve the objectives of the Recommendation within a three-year period and added that the per capita income of the donor should be taken into account. In this connection, he noted that per capita income in Japan is $638, only about 22% of that of the U.S. and about 46% of the DAC average. He said that Japan will not stand in the way of the Recommendation and will do the best it can in adhering to the spirit of the Recommendation, but nonetheless requested that his views be duly recorded. Despite the Japanese statement, which was intentionally presented in a somewhat vague manner and did not take the form of an outright rejection, the Chairman later considered the Recommendation as having been adopted by all member countries, and the Japanese Delegation did not object.

6. The Italian spokesman agreed with the objectives of the Recommendation and said that Italy would be able to accept it. However, he echoed the Japanese view regarding the need to consider donor per capita income as well as capital availability and requested inclusion of his views in the record.

7. The Canadian representative, Mr. Towe, said that Canada could accept the Recommendation which it viewed as a careful compromise with a very clear meaning for all members present. He said there might be some danger that the LDCs would feel that the statement of targets implied a DAC view that there was no need for softer terms than those specified. Canada feels that even more generous terms are needed and that the proposed targets are indeed “cautious” steps in the light of the seriousness of the debt problem.

8. The Netherlands representative, Mr. Bot, fully endorsed the view that the Working Party should continue to explore the issues before it, and expressed particular satisfaction regarding the cooperation between the DAC and IBRD. He said he looked forward to studies of individual countries. He added the following three points: 1) He felt that the Netherlands proposal for a “neutral zone” (i.e., an area between strictly commercial credits and clearly concessionary terms in which no government loans or guaranteed credits are provided) offered a way of dealing with the problem of export credits and development aid. He requested that additional study be given to this proposal, or any other with the same objective.

2) The Netherlands Government has requested the Parliament to subsidize interest on Government loans so that receiving countries will not have to pay more than 3% interest. He said his Government accepted the Recommendation and would be able to achieve the targets.

3) He regretted that the language in the Recommendation on aid-tying (paras 15 and 16) was weak. In 1963 about 70% of aid was tied and he expects that this will be the case in 1964. He stressed the serious disadvantages of aid-tying, and expressed regret that there was a deadlock on this issue which could not be dealt with at this time.

9. The Portuguese representative said he shared the reservations expressed by Italy, but said he could approve the Recommendation.

10. The Swedish delegate said that his government would work hard with others in coping with the debt problem. He said that 75–80% of Sweden's assistance is in grant form, and that loan policies provide for 20 years, a grace period is five years, and interest is as low as 2%. He advocated more multilateral assistance as the best solution of the problem of softer and comparable terms, and endorsed the views of the Netherlands representative on the disadvantages of aid-tying. More concrete action is needed on this problem, he said, but no country can untie aid alone; action must be taken by all.

11. The French Finance Minister, Mr. Giscard d'Estaing, said that France was able to endorse the Recommendation because, in his view, it helped to meet the serious debt problem. He made two points: 1) The softening of credit terms is a palliative and not a cure for the growing debt burden. He said that the third world must better mobilize its own resources by internal measures such as tax reform, etc., to slow down the flight of capital to advanced countries.

2) He said that France viewed aid-tying as “perfectly acceptable” and that it should not be condemned. By this means, aid is made more palatable to public opinion and its volume increased. In the French view, the basic aid problem at present is not one of finance but rather of technical assistance. When a project has been adequately studied, there is no great problem in finding lenders to support it. As a matter of fact, he said, often there is severe competition among lenders, providing LDCs with a choice.

On aid-tying, he said the French system appropriately reflected the long cultural and other connections which France has with a number of LDCs, and they had no intention of abandoning it.

12. The Chairman, in summing up this item of the Agenda, said that the meeting accepted the report of the Working Party, and the draft recommendations. The report provides guidelines for future work of the Working Party. The recommendations will go to governments which, he hoped, would take concrete actions to put them into effect; it was important that the gap between words and action be narrowed.

B. Assistance Requirements and Development Performance 1. Mr. Thorp, as Acting Chairman of the Working Party on Requirements and Performance, reported on its general conclusions: that LDCs can effectively use more assistance and that requirements for foreign assistance are directly related to LDC performance. He described the study undertaken by an expert group on the uses of analytical tools in evaluating development and the examination of bottlenecks in the supply of aid.

2. The Canadian delegate, Mr. Towe, offered Canada's support for the Recommendation on requirements and performance, although he observed that the language on requirements and volume was weaker than Canada would have liked. He noted, moreover, that in reaffirming the commitment to attain the UNCTAD target of 1% of national income, no mention was made of the special position of countries which are still net importers of capital, and asked that the Recommendation be amended to take account of this provision of the UNCTAD Resolution.

3. Speaking for the United States, Mr. Bell accepted the Recommendation, noting the importance of the relationship between performance and requirements. First, donors cannot justify to their own people or parliaments aid to countries which are not making effective use of their own resources and which are not taking reasonable self-help measures. Secondly, aid, in order to be effective, must be a partnership involving effort on the part of the recipient as well as the donor. The U.S. makes close studies of performance and gives aid to some countries only after a quarterly review of the performance of those countries. In this instance, performance is a key factor in determining aid level. With reference to Mr. Woods' statement that LDCs require massive additional aid, Mr. Bell agreed that the target of 1% called for in the Recommendation is certainly far short of what is ultimately needed. He suggested that the Working Party undertake further studies in this area, drawing upon work being done by the World Bank, the Development Centre, and by member governments.

Specifically, Mr. Bell suggested four topics for study: 1) the relationship between aid programs and economic development in selected countries receiving aid over a period of ten years; (the U.S. has undertaken such a study in Taiwan); 2) continuation of the work already begun by the Working Party, using particular LDCs as care studies to determine aid requirements by employing modern analytical techniques currently used by some member governments; 3) an examination of absorptive capacity in specific LDCs, including a study of action which can be taken to increase the number of well-prepared projects; 4) a study of unused or underutilized economic capacity, e.g., India and Pakistan, and its implication on the kinds and amounts of aid needed.

In developing point (2) above, Mr. Bell said that he preferred the expression “modern analytical techniques” to “econometrics” to describe the techniques which had been studied by the Experts Group. He felt that those who referred to “econometrics” were possibly implying that there was something recondite about the procedures. As a matter of fact, all that was involved was an effort to apply to the developing countries techniques which were employed as a matter of course by Ministries of Finance or bodies engaged in economic forecasting in any of the developed countries—an attempt, in short, to apply the most efficient tools available to the task at hand.

4. Mrs. Castle expressed agreement with an earlier French statement that research is not basically a DAC function. However, she agreed that the work outlined by Mr. Bell would be most useful and should be undertaken—though not necessarily by the DAC itself. She favored placing additional emphasis on performance and indicated plans to expand U.K. technical assistance to help LDCs raise their level of performance.

With respect to the treatment of specific LDCs, Mrs. Castle observed that the DAC should not consider itself a perpetual consultative group on all LDCs not covered by other organizations.

She offered U.K. support for the Recommendation, while acknowledging that the 1% target should not be considered a final goal, and urging that members do their best to exceed it.

5. The German representative expressed agreement with the U.S. point about linking requirements and performance closely together. He also accepted Mr. Bell's four proposals for action in this area. In this connection he said that DAC's mandate should not be too restrictive, but, on the other hand, he had no objection to the suggestions made earlier by France and the U.K. that research projects should be undertaken outside the DAC.

He also expressed the view that multilateral organizations, especially the IBRD, because of their objectivity and relative freedom from political considerations, could be more effective than bilateral programs in stimulating improved performance in LDCs.

He stated German endorsement of the Recommendation, but suggested that in order to strengthen it, paragraphs 4 to 20 of the Annex to the Working Party's Report (DAC 65 (20)),13 the illustrative list of development criteria developed by the Working Party, might be attached.

6. The Austrian representative enthusiastically supported the Recommendation on requirements and performance, adding that he considered it a vital element of DAC's work. He suggested that the experience and evaluation undertaken by big donors be made available to small donors through the DAC, if this could be done in such a way as to avoid the notion among LDCs of a “blacklist” kept by the DAC.

7. Speaking for the IBRD, Mr. Woods expressed agreement with Austria's suggestion, adding that the sharing of experiences is an important characteristic of consortia and consultative groups. In this connection, he indicated that the IBRD is generally satisfied with existing consortia, but has no plan to add to their number. However, the Bank is not satisfied with current arrangements for consultative groups, and hopes continuously to improve them; he said plans are now under way to create consultative groups for a number of additional countries. Mr. Woods offered the Bank's full cooperation with DAC in the matter of country studies, and indicated that further questionnaires are needed to obtain adequate data on debt burdens of the LDCs.

The Chairman noted the proposals for amendments to the Recommendation offered by the Canadian and German delegates: first, Canada's request that qualifying provisions of the UNCTAD Resolution, specifically that relating to the special position of net importers of capital, be included in the quoted excerpts from the Resolution in paragraph 3. After brief discussion, it was agreed to resolve this point by deleting the specific quotation from the UNCTAD Resolution and substituting instead a brief reference to “the UNCTAD Resolution referred to above". Second, the German delegate's request that paragraphs 14 to 20 of the Annex to DAC (65)20 be incorporated in the Recommendation. The Chairman felt that the checklist provided in these paragraphs was too general to be incorporated in the Recommendation, and noted that the German delegate's point would perhaps be met in any event if the Report of the Working Party were published. A special group will look into the feasibility of publishing certain important DAC documents, including the WP report, next fall.

C. Coordination 1. Working Party on UNCTAD Issues The Chairman of the Working Party, Mr. Elson, gave a relatively brief, low-keyed oral statement which in effect was a commentary in supplement of his written summary report circulated as a part of the documents of the meeting (DAC 65 (23)).14 Mr. Elson noted that, whereas coordination among the Western Group on UNCTAD issues is and will continue to be required, effort of the DAC Working Group to this end encounter certain difficulties because membership of the Western Group in UNCTAD bodies differs from that of the Working Group, and it is not yet clear how or to what extent effective coordination can be achieved in Paris to best support coordinative efforts in Geneva. He noted also that the Working Party on UNCTAD differs markedly from the other DAC Working Parties in that, on the one hand, its scope of concern derives almost entirely from activities of another international organization, and on the other hand, the substance of the issues with which it is concerned is frequently within the province of other bodies within the OECD. He said the future of the Working Party and its relationship to the Western Group in Geneva is not yet clearly defined, but that the work program for the coming year would focus primarily on preparations for the first meeting of the Committee on Invisibles and Financing Related to Trade and for the third session of the Trade and Development Board.

2. Technical Assistance Coordination

The Chairman mentioned that this topic had already been discussed at two DAC meetings and that a document attempting to formulate guidelines has been prepared and revised. Although all member governments have not yet indicated their final approval, the Chairman expressed the hope that agreement could be reached quickly, without another meeting, and that implementation could begin as soon as possible thereafter. Although there was no formal discussion on this point, three delegates referred to the guidelines in a positive tone during the course of the meeting.

IV. Future Direction of DAC's Work

1. Mr. Bell opened the discussion on this point, stressing the need to concentrate on priority matters. He suggested that in the future the DAC should draft a proposed work program for the following year in advance of the High Level Meeting, so that Ministers could arrive at the meeting prepared to consider specific proposals. Drawing on the suggestions he had made earlier in the meeting, Mr. Bell proposed several items for possible DAC study next year. He suggested that the Working Party on Financial Aspects should pay particular attention to the improvement of data relating to the debt burden on the LDCs (in order to meet Mr. Woods' point on the deficiency of these data). He suggested that the Working Party on Supply and Performance might consider action on the four proposals he had made during the discussion of this item (see paragraph III B, 3), namely, 1) the relationship between aid programs and economic development in selected aid-receiving LDCs, 2) application of analytical techniques to selected LDCs with a view to determining guidelines for programming aid, 3) study of LDCs' absorptive capacity, 4) study of possible underutilized capacity in LDCs.

Mr. Bell further suggested that the DAC itself conduct additional carefully planned regional or country meetings along the lines of that held on Liberia and Sierra Leone last month. Regarding new horizons which DAC might explore, Mr. Bell proposed: 1) agricultural productions; 2) methods to stimulate the flow of private investment; and 3) the problem of population. Finally, he suggested that the DAC might address itself to the question of establishing criteria to identify “a less developed country.” This would include a review of the current list which is now some five years old and which contains a number of transitional countries such as Taiwan, Venezuela, Mexico, Spain, Greece, Israel, etc., which have graduated from the LDC class and no longer require aid on concessional terms.

2. Mrs. Castle agreed with Mr. Bell that the DAC work program should be planned in advance of the High Level Meeting. She said also that she generally agreed with Mr. Bell's suggestions for a work program and added a few items of her own, including: 1) study of the effect of commercial credits on the debt burden of LDCs; 2) examination of the international administration of assistance, including consortia and consultative groups and their relationship to UN agencies; 3) study of meas-ures to be taken to improve public understanding and support of foreign assistance. In this connection, she proposed “public discussions” in member countries in which the DAC could participate. As a start, she invited DAC members to take part in a public discussion on foreign assistance in the U.K., adding that the invitation was being offered seriously and that she hoped member governments would consider it carefully.

3. The German representative indicated his general agreement with the U.S. and U.K. suggestions for the DAC's future work, adding, however, that he agreed with the French delegation that the DAC should assess its priorities with care and not attempt too many projects.

4. Mr. Ockrent of Belgium observed that if all the suggestions made were followed, the DAC would be overburdened with work. He suggested that much of the research could be undertaken by the Development Centre and recommended the DAC improve its coordination with the Centre.

Referring to Mr. Bell's point about transitional countries which are now emerging from the LDC category, Mr. Ockrent suggested that a systematic study of their special needs would be useful and might be considered by the DAC.

Mr. Ockrent also made a plea for a joint DAC effort to improve public opinion of aid, which he described as “refrigerated” in Belgium. He said that if the present trends for public criticism of aid continue, we will soon reach the point when governments' ability to act positively in this field will be seriously limited. He suggested that part of the problem rests with educating members of the press who, so far, have not shown that they are well informed about the facts or the objectives of foreign assistance.

V. Press Communiqué

1. The fourth draft of the press communique, which had been prepared by a special group working concurrently with the High Level Meeting, was approved with a number of minor changes. The most serious objection was raised by the French representative, who objected strongly to the inclusion of Mr. Woods' statement that LDCs could effectively use an additional $3 to $4 billion annually over the next five years. It was agreed to delete mention of the figure of additional requirements but after several delegates stressed the importance of taking note of Mr. Woods' speech, an innocuous formula was agreed. Copies of the Press Communique in final form are attached.15

Brown

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by E. M. Gilbert, Richard Palmer, and Arvin Kramish; cleared by Frank M. Coffin (in draft), A. B. Daspit, and W. M. Brown (Secretary of the Delegation); and contents approved by Alice May. Repeated to all DAC capitals. Another summary and evaluation of this meeting is in Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 733, August 3, 1965, pp. 5–8. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments)

2 Dated July 24. (Department of State, Central Files, AID 1)

3 Not printed.

4 "Recommendation on Financial Terms and Conditions Adopted by the Development Assistance Committee at its 58th Session on 23rd July 1965” (DAC(65)14(Final)), July 27. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, DAC—Ministerial Meeting—Paris, July, 1965)

5 "Recommendation on Assistance and Development Efforts” (DAC(65)22(Final)), July 26, adopted by DAC on July 23. (Ibid.)

6  Thorp's draft report (DAC(65)18), June 24, is ibid. No final version has been found.

7  Woods' statement, July 22, is attached to Kramish's notes of the meeting, cited in Document 109.

8  Castle's July 22 statement (DAC(65)31), July 29, is attached to Kramish's notes of the meeting, cited in Document 109. Her remarks as quoted here, are close to those in her written statement.

9  Ignacio Copete's July 22 statement (DAC(65)34), July 23, is attached to Kramish's notes of the meeting, cited in Document 109.

10 "Summary Report to the D.A.C. on the Work Undertaken by the Working Party on Financial Aspects of Development Assistance” (DAC(65)15(1st Revision)), July 7. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, DAC—Ministerial Meeting—Paris, July, 1965)

11 "The Growth of External Debt Service Liabilities of Less Developed Countries” (DAC(65)17), June 28. (Ibid.)

12 "Draft Policy Recommendations on Financial Terms and Conditions” (DAC(65)14), June 18, and “Draft Recommendations on Financial Terms and Conditions” (Correigendum to DAC(65)14), July 6. (Ibid.)

13 "Summary Report to the Development Assistance Committee on the Work Undertaken by the Working Party on Assistance Requirements” (DAC(65)20), June 30. (Ibid.)

14 "Summary Report by the Chairman of the Working Party on UNCTAD Issues to the DAC on the Activities of the Working Party” (DAC(65)23), July 6. (Ibid.)

15 Not found.

111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the European Regional Organizations 111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the European Regional Organizations 1

Washington, October 21, 1965, 9:26 a.m.

TOCED 242. Ref: CEDTO 245.2 ADCOR. Subject: Meeting of WG on Private Investment. Carter, Mark Feer, Deputy Assistance Secretary of Commerce for Financial Policy, and Samuel Pizer, Assistance Chief, Balance of Payments Division, Department of Commerce, will attend. Arriving TWA 802 October 24. Confirm hotel reservations.

We agree that Watson Report3 provides excellent takeoff point for work of the WG. In view past reticence some DAC members on subject of private investment the Watson Report will be helpful in establishing the relevance and importance of WGs activities. The vast range of possible activities, well illustrated both by scope of Watson Report and variety of suggestions made at May meeting,4 create real danger of unfocused discussion at first meeting. At the same time, while recognizing that US should take strong lead, it is important we not give impression of dominating WG. We also believe it important that the work program have a good balance between research oriented activities and current programs.

Against this background, we wish give priority to following items.

(a) A program to improve the efforts of DAC members to collect comprehensive data on private capital flows and reinvested earnings. Present deficiencies well illustrated by grossly inadequate data on private capital flows in annual aid memoranda of most member countries. Ultimate objectives would be development of a model system which would provide comparable data from all major countries and commitment by members to do the job. You will recall this item was suggested at May meeting by the French.

(b) WG should design and monitor a research project to determine overall economic effects of private foreign investment in LDCs. Little systematic research has been carried on in this field. The Secretariat and the Development Center could probably carry out the program, with the first stage of project design to be followed by case studies of a representative group of LDCs.

(c) WG should examine in detail our suggestion that the DAC might design a series of investment symposia as a practical step to facilitate private capital flows to selected LDCs. Such symposia, which would be held in a host LDC at its invitation, would provide effective means to improve mutual understanding between LDCs and private investors on impediments, incentives, priorities, etc. Organized at the invitation of the LDC and with multilateral participation by donor countries representatives, both private and governmental, the relational problems which have nullified the usefulness of BIACs investment climate studies, would be avoided. If proposal does not generate enthusiasm in the WG, we would drop it but we do wish to explore it.

(d) WG could usefully explore ways of encouraging a more systematic use of foreign private firms established in LDCs for training purposes. Subject well covered in Watson Report, page 40.

(e) We would expect to emphasize and hopefully obtain agreement on the desirability as a development objective of strengthening LDC private sector institutions, and would like to exchange information on methods.

Other suggestions made at May meeting, including the desirability of evaluating the experience of government-sponsored equity institutions such as the German Development Corporation, study of appropriate forms of public-private partnership in the LDCs, and incentives offered by donor countries to their private firms, also have merit. Omission from above list does not mean we would object to their being included in the WG's program. For obvious reasons discussion of draft convention for the protection of industrial property and fiscal incentives for foreign private investment is inadvisable.

Copies Watson Report airpouched 10/19.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by William G. Carter (AA/DFPE) on October 20; cleared by Hal Reynolds (PC/FWA), Jo W. Saxe (AA/PC), Anthony C. Albrecht (EUR/RPE), Mark Feer (Commerce), and Samuel Pizer (Commerce); and approved by Gustav Ranis (AA/PC).

2  CEDTO 245 from Paris, October 14, reported that the first meeting of the DAC working party on private investment would occur on October 25 and set forth possible U.S. strategy for the session. (Ibid.)

3 Reference is to the AID Advisory Committee on Private Enterprise in Foreign Aid, which was mandated in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1963. The Committee was appointed on May 26, 1964, with Arthur K. Watson as chairman; held 11 meetings; and presented its report to President Johnson on August 25, 1965. The report has not been found. For AID's detailed response to the 33 recommendations made in the report, see Foreign Assistance and Related Agencies Appropriations for 1967: Hearings Before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, House of Representatives, Eighty-Ninth Congress, Second Session (Washington, 1966) Part 2, pp. 137–152.

4 An account of the May 12 DAC meeting was transmitted in CEDTO 1224 from Paris, May 19. (Department of State, Central Files, AID 1)

112. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 112. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, October 29, 1965.

CEDTO A–254

SUBJECT

Meeting of DAC Working Group on Private Investment

REF

TOCED 2422

ADCOR.

Summary and Major Conclusions

The first meeting of Working Group on Private Investment was held on October 25 under the chairmanship of Lamby, Ministry of Cooperation, Bonn, to begin task of setting up a work program to recommend to DAC in the field of private investment. The meeting addressed itself to questions of what topics should be considered, who should undertake work and what procedure should be followed.

The Chairman and Secretariat expressed satisfaction with the results of the meeting which was satisfactory also from US viewpoint as points made by US (following lines of reftel) were largely accepted without impression of US domination of meeting. Major results included: (1) Identification of at least three areas of possible activity for future work program: (a) improvement of statistical base in capital exporting countries for reporting data on private capital flows to and from LDCs.

(b) exchange of experience on investment incentives offered by industrialized nations and assessment of degree of influence which such incentives exert on investment decisions.

(c) study of stress of possible cooperation and coordination between public aid and private investment, e.g., training and technical assistance in LDCs, and government equity institutions such as German Development Company.

(2) Agreement to invite five international organizations to future sessions (IMF, IBRD, IFC, BIAC, OECD Development Centre).

(3) Encouragement of preparation of papers prior to next meeting, with specific offers made by US and Secretariat (see below).

(4) Agreement to meet on December 7 with specialized institutions represented, to delve into proposed topics at technical level and prepare for third meeting in January at which proposed work program would be finalized for submission to DAC.

Representation and Country Positions

All DAC countries except Belgium, Canada, Portugal and Sweden were represented but only Germany, Netherlands and US sent delegates from capitals.

Most active speakers were US, UK, Netherlands and Austria. Chairman exercised considerable initiative, opened with sweeping tour d'hor-izon, then focused attention on need to study investment incentives. He showed great concern for procedural matters, warning against confusing substance of work with organization and reminding members that group's mandate was to design and recommend work program to DAC, not to undertake substantive work directly.

Sole French delegate (from Quai d'Orsay) virtually missed a.m. session, was late to p.m. session, although he insisted this was due to pressing engagements and not lack of French interest; his single intervention was decidedly negative, expressing concern at proliferation of items for consideration and suggesting that WG limit itself to one topic (which French had raised at May meeting), that of improving statistical data on flow of private capital to LDCs.

UK delegate (Harding) displayed caution on specific issues, but on balance supported objectives of WG. On the positive side, he shared the US view that the already agreed top priority work in the field of statistics should begin as soon as possible and need not wait for rest of program to be formally approved by DAC in January. Harding repeated old UK view that DAC should stay out of research work and that Development Centre should be used to maximum extent. He also expressed the view that it is unrealistic for OECD to initiate multilateral agreements such as multilateral investment guarantees and convention for protection of foreign property, since these arrangements must be negotiated and implemented by an institution where LDCs are represented, e.g., IBRD. He therefore cautioned against making any unilateral proposals which would be unacceptable to LDCs. He stressed that investment climate studies would not be appropriate for DAC but might be undertaken by major donors or consortia. Harding also doubted wisdom of US proposal for study of overall economic effects of private investment of LDCs. Perhaps speaking from point of view of ex-Colonial Office official, he pointed out that in historical perspective much foreign investment in LDCs took place when LDCs were colonies or territories whose relations with industrialized nations were very different from today and that extractive nature of early investments might tarnish the image of private investment as a development catalyst which the study would be designed to promote. Harding mellowed somewhat when the US delegate pointed out that this did not apply to the bulk of post-war investments, especially in the manufacturing field, citing investments in Latin America as an example, and at close of meeting said he would welcome US paper on this subject. Harding also expressed a real interest in US Catalog of Investment Opportunities.

Netherlands delegate supported Chairman's proposal for exchange of experience on investment incentives. He also associated himself with UK position that study of economic effects of private investment might produce undesirable results because of the nature of early investments. He reacted favorably to the US investments symposia proposal and expressed interest in the US Catalog, adding that opportunities for LDC investments should be publicized more in other DAC countries.

Austrian delegate favored bring BIAC and Development Centre in WG at early stage and asking Centre to undertake research oriented items. He supported work on statistics, incentives, and investment symposia.

Japanese delegate made a strong pitch for improvement of statistics, placing special emphasis on repatriation of profits.

Other Issues

In addition to the three priorities generally agreed to, the Chairman raised other issues for discussion, but as no delegations were inclined to support them, the Chairman postponed them for possible future consideration. These items include: 1. Collection of data on pre-investment and feasibility studies undertaken by member countries and UNSF. Secretariat and others pointed out that US Catalog already contains substantial listing of surveys and that majority of Special Fund's surveys are of large infrastructure variety which are not usually privately financed. However, general intent was shown in making more extensive use of US Catalog.

2. Study of role of development banks to promote private investment. This may be examined further when the Development Centre's directory is completed.

3. Consideration of possible uses of counterpart funds generated from two-step loan procedure. It was agreed that at the present time this is not of general interest because only two countries (US and Germany) are involved.

Preparation for December Meeting

US offered to prepare brief papers: (a) describing function of Catalog of Investment Opportunities and Information, and suggesting how it could be more widely used in other DAC member countries; (b) developing ideas of investment “symposia” proposed at May meeting; and (c) defining purpose and scope of study on economic effects of private investment in selected LDCs. Secretariat will prepare a paper on what statistical data is most needed but now lacking on flow of private resources. All delegations were encouraged (but not obligated) to report on experience with investment incentives. At least Germans and Dutch are likely to provide papers on this subject. Chairman at first opposed the US suggestion that papers be prepared for next meeting, not wanting to overburden capitals, but agreed to voluntary preparation as described above, on the understanding that papers would be working documents aimed at determining suitability of topics for inclusion in the work program.

Brown

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by E. M. Gilbert on October 28, cleared by Frank M. Coffin (in draft) and P. R. Cook, Jr. (Secretary of Delegation), and contents approved by Alice May. Passed to the Department of Commerce. Attached to the source text is the “Report of First Session of the D.A.C. Ad Hoc Group on Private Investment held on 25th October, 1965” (DAC(65)40), October 28, not printed.

2  Document 111.

113. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 113. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, November 6, 1965.

CEDTO A–273

SUBJECT

DAC Work Program for Current Year

1. The DAC on October 28, 29, for the first time in its five-year history, undertook to define systematically and in some detail exactly what problems it should concern itself with in the course of the work year. The two-day discussion was based on an exhaustive Secretariat paper, DAC (65) 36,2 which presented all of the suggestions made in the course of the High Level Meeting, as well as those which had appeared in the course of regular meetings, and from delegations, and it had the benefit of prior discussion held in two Working Parties and an Ad Hoc Group concerning a major part of the proposals listed.

2. The two-day debate threw in clearer relief than ever before certain basic differences in philosophy concerning the essential character of the DAC, and at least the vague outline of the groups supporting the two basically different theories was defined.

3. The doctrinal divergence was between what might be called the introverted and the extroverted view of the organization—or the Little DAC view as opposed to the broader. The Little DAC view was clearly articulated by Harding, the U.K. Permanent Representative in the Committee. He said that the essential quality of the DAC derives from the fact that it is a group of donors. It cannot treat problems requiring an exchange with the LDCs; it cannot deal with individual country problems; it should not undertake individual country reviews. Conceding that sectoral studies, for example agriculture, might be more debatable, he made it clear that in his judgment the DAC had no contribution to make in this area. The broader view was not so explicitly formulated, but it is implicit in the U.S. initiatives last year in persuading the DAC to embark on a study of the relation between requirements and LDC performance. This view begins with the premise that assistance is a marginal element in development and that to treat it abstracted from the development process is unrealistic. From this point of view, the U.S. has urged attention to performance of the LDCs and to such problems as absorptive capacity, and has advocated country reviews as necessary to test principles and theories, and to inject an element of realism in what otherwise would be an abstract and possibly academic exercise.

4. Other terms carrying doctrinal implications which appeared rather often in the course of the discussion were “theoretical” and “operational.” These terms were used mainly by the “Little DAC” proponents to reinforce arguments for limiting the Committee's activities; there was little effort to define exactly what the terms implied, however. The French appeared to suggest that the preparation in the DAC of TC Coordination Guidelines was “operational", though it was perfectly clear that no operations of any sort were involved, and the role of the DAC was limited to imparting initial impetus to an operation which would take place exclusively, if at all, in the field. Country meetings were objected to either because they were “operational” (since they might affect aid policies) or because they might ultimately imply some contact between DAC and an LDC. There was a good bit of use of the term “practical” to describe the proper character of DAC efforts, but again there was little agreement in its application. Both Harding (UK) and Smith (Canada) were for practicality as a standard, but Harding used the standard to exclude discussions of such topics as agriculture, population and housing, whereas Smith argued that the DAC has an important role to play in the exchange of experience among its members, and that it was not always essential that new ground be broken.

5. The Little DAC doctrine was supported by the French and the Belgians, in addition to the U.K., but no other delegations rallied to this standard. The broader view as supported by the Germans, the Canadians, all three Scandinavian countries (both Denmark and Norway appear to have drawn strength from the adherence of Sweden and have become more vocal) the Netherlands and Austria. The Japanese did not take a very definite line, but appeared to lean to the U.S. view. The smaller countries obviously wish to receive from the DAC the maximum assistance they can get in supplementing their own meager resources of information and analysis concerning the LDCs, and since they are organizing themselves to deal with “problems of small donors” they may possibly come to exercise an important influence on the ultimate shape of DAC operations.

7. What emerged from the two days of discussion was a program of work clearly defined and generally supported on the side of donor efforts, and limited and somewhat vague on the side of the LDCs. Major attention will be placed on donor efforts, with the program including the following relevant elements: 1. An improved and strengthened AAR.

2. Attention to the volume of assistance, with major emphasis on “burden sharing.”

3. Further attention to the terms of assistance, with priority given to: a. Principals for dealing with debt-servicing problems; and

b. Export credits and related indebtedness and commercial policy problems.

8. On the side of the recipients, it was agreed that there was not much possibility of additional useful work in general terms on the problem of requirements, performance, and absorptive capacity. It was the U.S. view that these subjects could best be considered within the context of individual country studies, a view supported by the Germans, and to which no direct exception was taken. The Little DAC contingent, however, stated its objection to country studies on general principles, and sought to assure that the reviews being undertaken by the Experts Group on Analytical Techniques should not be made the subject of any significant discussion in the working party.

9. In spite of these efforts at obstruction, the way was left open for further country reviews, and thus of further progress on elements of LDC performance, of which the U.S. induced the DAC to take cognizance last year. It should be recognized, however, that in the absence of a few meaningful country reviews, there is a distinct likelihood that the views of the Little DAC contingent will prevail. It should be further recognized that in the absence of a strong U.S. initiative, it is unlikely that the DAC will hold meaningful country reviews this year, or that the Experts Group will make a useful input into the Working Party on Supply and Requirements.

10. On the basis of the attitudes of delegations described in this message, it is likely that there will be strong resistance to the DAC repeating an exercise on Brazil and the Central American republics which has already been conducted in CIAP, and it may be that the only acceptable U.S. nominee among the group so far put forward will be Somalia. Delegation doubts that a study of this country will do much to forward the general cause.

Brown

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by A. B. Daspit, Alice May, and E. M. Gilbert on November 5; cleared by A. E. Lachman (in draft) and P. R. Cook, Jr. (Secretary of Delegation); and contents approved by Alice May.

2 Entitled “Preparation of D.A.C. Work Programme for 1965/66,” October 12. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Program (DAC Work Program 1965)) An annex attached to the source text, not printed, provides a point-by-point summary of the items covered in DAC(65)36.

114. Editorial Note 114. Editorial Note

The meeting of the Ministerial Council of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development was held in Paris November 25–26, 1965. Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Thomas C. Mann headed the U.S. Delegation, which included AID Administrator David E. Bell and Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Anthony M. Solomon. For a full list of the U.S. Delegation, see Department of State Bulletin, December 27, 1965, page 1039. Text of the communique, November 26, is ibid., pages 1038–1039. Documentation on the meeting is in Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Meetings—OECD Ministerial Meeting November 25–26, 1965; and Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 347, CF 2564–2565.

115. Information Memorandum From the Associate Assistance Administrator for Multilateral Aid Programs, Agency for International Development (Saxe) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) 115. Information Memorandum From the Associate Assistance Administrator for Multilateral Aid Programs, Agency for International Development (Saxe) to the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell)1

Washington, December 3, 1965.

SUBJECT

The DAC—1965–1966

By and large we have done well in the DAC during the five years of its existence. The countries which are members of the Committee have agreed at least implicitly, that there should be a general framework of rules within which aid should be given and received. In the Committee and elsewhere, they have hammered out some of these rules, e.g., the 1963 and 1965 Recommendations on the terms of aid, the UNCTAD Recommendation entitled “Guidelines for International Financial Cooperation".2

But in July 1965, some of the members were sharply critical of some aspects of the Committee's program of work for 1965–66. This criticism led to a discussion of the work program late in October.3 This discussion was the first opportunity we have had for some time to re-examine and re-state the purposes which we are trying to serve in the DAC and the scope and direction of its work.

The re-statement is embodied in a paper prepared for the OECD Council (under Tab A).4 But this is necessarily a little too bland and detailed. The purpose of this paper is to elucidate and summarize it.

The euphoric atmosphere at the DAC meeting in July 1965 may have misled us a little about our relations with the DAC. Some of the other members disagree with what they believe that we believe to be the nature and purpose of the Committee. They believe that we continue to consider the DAC either as an operational institution or as a seminar in the economics of development (or both). They believe that we wish to examine the situation and policies of recipient countries in detail in order to reach explicit agreement on common policies. They argue that the IBRD is our instrument for doing this in important cases and there isn't much to be gained from discussion in the DAC of others. They consider it primarily, if not exclusively, a place for consultation about development assistance policies, with very heavy emphasis on the policies of the member countries. These beliefs aren't wholly unjustified. For a time we did try to make it into an operational institution (e.g., the DAC consideration of aid to East Africa in 1962 and 1963). And we have, from time to time, given somewhat theoretical lectures there. But our recent re-examination of the Committee's work program has enabled us to set this record straight. Consequently, this disagreement isn't as great as it seems and doesn't detract from the real accomplishment in July: A terms of aid target which added to the framework of rules I've mentioned.

Over the years we have made progress in the DAC by consulting (and arguing) with other members about their policies. Occasional use of illustrations in the form of “country” studies of the use of analytical techniques, debt, etc., has been or will be useful. More extensive concern with individual recipient countries has not been useful in the past. It is a little unlikely that much will come of DAC meetings to discuss population, housing, etc., agriculture may be an exception. These negative conclusions lead me to approve of the work program described below. They also lead me to conclude that we should make an effort (which we have begun to make) to do more analysis here and in general, to prepare more carefully for discussions there. It follows that we must choose the subjects on which we work with care. Unless they are important enough to us here for us to go into them thoroughly, there isn't much point in discussing them there.

All of this has had its effects on attitudes and was reflected in the discussion of the 1965–1966 work program. The work program, subject to some modification and additions, e.g. agriculture, is as follows:

a. Financial Aspects of Assistance

We have a fairly well-defined set of subjects to examine and discuss under the heading of the financial aspects of assistance, for which there is a DAC Working Party. We are proceeding to build up our capacity to analyze some of these questions here. The most important of these just now is how to deal with the consolidation, rescheduling and/or other means of alleviating unduly heavy burdens of servicing external debt and in particular with debt arising from suppliers' credits. A previous question in this area is how to define a burden which is unduly heavy. These questions are complex and contentious. There is no agreement about the answers within the U.S. Government. Progress in dealing with it will be slow. Note that some consideration of the debt problems of individual countries will be necessary.

b. Requirements for Assistance

The work that falls under the heading of requirements for assistance is less well defined. The Expert Group which is a subsidiary body of the Working Party on the subject will be meeting to make “trial applications” of the analytical techniques developed by Messrs. Chenery, Strout and Timms, to the case of Pakistan. If the Export Group is to serve its purpose, it should probably consider and prepare a report not only on these, but on other ways of analyzing requirements for assistance, performance, etc., including the determination of absorptive capacity by aggregating projects as the IBRD seems to have done. This report might then go to the Working Party. It is essential to have, and we have taken steps to insure, IBRD (and IMF) participation in this as well as the other activities mentioned above.

More general work on the Requirements for Assistance will start with some ideas put forward by the French representative.5 He suggested that member countries should meet the UN and UNCTAD targets in such a way as to equalize the burden of giving aid. Members not now meeting these targets should increase their aid. Those whose aid exceeds the target amount should not reduce it.

He mentioned these problems involved in considering increases: (1) How the targets should be calculated, i.e., what definition of aid would be appropriate, what definition of national income?

(2) What measures of ability to pay should be used? He suggested that ability to pay increases with per capita income.

(3) Within what period of time should the targets be reached?

He went on to speculate about the uses to which the increase might be put. These might be: (a) the consolidating or rescheduling of debt; (b) supporting the price of raw materials; (c) financing balance of payments deficits. This was a speculative statement, since made more formally by the Minister of Finance6 (at the recent meeting of the OECD Council at Ministerial level. Summary report under Tab B).7 Of course we might be embarrassed by being asked to explain when and how we propose to meet these aid targets, and I'm pretty sure we won't like the French ideas about commodity stabilization. But we are going to be embarrassed by these questions elsewhere, e.g., at the UNCTAD. At least the examination of possible uses for more aid might be a useful adjunct to work on requirements.

c. Private Investment

At a recent meeting of an ad hoc group, we were able to work out a reasonably good preliminary program for inquiry into private investment.8 Progress may be a little slow because we don't really know enough about the subject, but we are probably heading in the right direction by attempting to ascertain its economic effects on investing and host countries. (This work should be carried on in conjunction with the inquiry into the effects of private investment on the U.S. balance of payments.)

d. The Annual Aid Review

The Annual Aid Review will consist of the major questions appropriate to each major country and to important questions appropriate to other countries rather than a long list of questions addressed to every country. We hope country examinations scheduled for the spring and fall (instead of being done during a relatively short period during the late spring) in order to permit more thorough investigation by the Secretariat in advance of each.

There will be no change in the requirements for statistical reports and narrative statements. Consequently, the Chairman will be able to prepare and present his report in July as in the past. In general, the review will be used to reinforce other efforts to reach and implement agreements about aid policies.

We hope that studies in some depth of the aid policies and programs of each member country during the past few years will be made during the coming year in conjunction with the review. We plan to advocate their publication.

All this adds up to further, laborious examination of a small number of the problems we have been examining right along. I don't expect startling progress this year.

But what we do, or attempt to do, in the DAC should be put into the context of the broader problem of the relations of the United States with the other principal aid-giving countries and of our relations, individually and collectively, with the developing countries. Gradually we should attempt to raise the level of attention paid to aid problems, here and abroad. The long-run objective is to make aid a major element in foreign economic policy. This is not to say that all of these problems should be dealt with simultaneously, nor that there is an ideal, unique solution to them.

We should adopt a less parochial attitude toward the DAC. It has some unique advantages. But it is only one of a number of arrangements for dealing with the economic relations between rich and poor countries. In the past we have, at least on occasion, mistaken the institution for the problem. Major problems about the volume and terms of aid, about debt, targets for aid, etc., will arise within national governments, in other committees of the OECD (see, for example, the summary report of the examination of the state of the German economy in the Economic Development and Review Committee of the OECD on November 23, 1965, under Tab C),9 and in other international institutions. These questions cannot be wholly separated from questions of commercial policy, monetary policy and so on. The gradual propagation of sensible ideas about the duration, costs, and difficulties of development; the undesirability of conventional terms of lending, the need for agreement among a few of the “great powers” on the importance of being in the aid business, the reconciliation of aid with other aspects of international economic policy are all objectives which we must pursue in the DAC, the OECD, other international institutions (the Executive Board of the IBRD, UNCTAD, GATT, etc.) and first of all, at home.

Jo W. Saxe

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Program (DAC Work Program) 1965. No classification marking. The date is the drafting date. The memorandum was sent through Gustav Ranis (AA/PC) and the Executive Secretariat. Copies were sent to Gaud and seven other AID officers.

2 These guidelines have not been further identified. On December 20, however, the U.N. General Assembly adopted Resolution 2088(XX) by a vote of 83–0, with 15 abstentions, which among other things reiterated the General Assembly's request to the developed countries “to accelerate and ensure the flow of international assistance and long-term capital to the developing countries” so as to attain the UNCTAD target of each developed country contributing to developing countries a minimum net amount of one percent of its national income. (Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its Twentieth Session, 21 September–22 December 1965, General Assembly, Official Records: Twentieth Session, Supplement No. 14 (A/6014) (New York: United Nations, 1966), pp. 27–28)

3 The work program was discussed at the DAC meeting, October 28–29. ("Summary Record of the 59th Session held at the Chateau de la Muette, on Thursday and Friday, 28th and 29th October, 1965,” DAC/M(65)24(Prov.), December 10; Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Program (DAC Work Program) 1965)

4 Not attached. Reference is apparently to the paper prepared by the OECD Secretariat for the Council, “Note on the Work Programme of the Development Assistance Committee for 1965/66” (C(65)114), November 5. (Ibid.)

5 Reference presumably is to the position developed by French Delegate Pierre Brossolette at the October 28–29 DAC meeting, which is described in a November 4 paper drafted by Hal Reynolds (PC/FWA), “Summary of Opening Remarks by Other Delegations at the DAC Work Program Meeting, October 28–29, 1965.” (Ibid.)

6  Valery Giscard d'Estaing.

7 Not attached, but the reference may be to a summary of this meeting transmitted in CEDTO 417 from Paris, November 26. (Department of State, Central Files, AID 1)

8 See Document 112.

9 Not found.

116. Current Economic Developments 116. Current Economic Developments1

Washington, January 4, 1966.

Issue No. 744

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

ECONOMIC ACTIONS OF THE TWENTIETH GA

The most important actions of the recent General Assembly session in the economic field were the establishment of a UN Organization for Industrial Development (UNOID) and the merging of the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance and the Special Fund to form the UN Development Program. Other important items concerned extension of the World Food Program and steps to promote the effectiveness of the UN Conference on Trade and Development. Elections were held to enlarge the Economic and Social Council, in accordance with the Charter amendment.

Ambassador Goldberg, in his statement at a press conference following the close of the 20th session of the GA, said: “The Assembly's work in the political area was equaled if not surpassed by its decisions—too often overlooked—in the economic sphere. It is here, perhaps, that the twentieth session had its most notable advance, pointing up a growing recognition by the members that the future peace may well rest on our success in helping to build the resources of the lesser developed nations of the world. The United States, let me say, has long understood the urgency of this aspect of the UN's work.”2

UN Organization for Industrial Development

Acting on the recommendation of the Second Committee, the General Assembly decided to establish a United Nations Organization for Industrial Development (UNOID) as an “autonomous” body within the UN system. The resolution was sponsored by 51 countries, including the US, and was adopted by Committee Two by acclamation.3 The establishment of UNOID presumably lays to rest for the foreseeable future LDC proposals that a Specialized Agency for Industrial Development be established—a proposal that the US had strongly opposed.

The UNOID will have a permanent full-time secretariat, to be headed by an Executive Director for Industrial Development. The new organization's principal organ will be an Industrial Development Board composed of 36 members. The administrative and research activities of the new organization will be financed from the UN regular budget, while its operational activities will be financed from voluntary contributions by member states and members of the specialized agencies. The US, in explaining its cosponsorship, stated that any contributions to UNOID's operational activities should be made through the UN Development Program. The Assembly also decided to appoint a special ad hoc committee of 36 members to prepare the necessary operating procedures and administrative arrangements for the organization. The ad hoc committee will meet on March 28, and the US is now working on the suggestions it will make in this regard.

The resolution does not explicitly deal with the disposition to be made of the existing Center for Industrial Development and the Committee for Industrial Development, although it is expected these will be absorbed in the new organization. In addition to pressing for such absorption, the US intends to urge the following points in the ad hoc committee: a) that the Industrial Development Board be elected by and report to ECOSOC in order to help assure orderly development of the new organization and support its activities by all parts of the UN system; b) that its Secretariat be established at UN headquarters New York to make it possible fully to avail itself of the other appropriate facilities of the UN which are located there; and c) that appropriate arrangements be made to provide for fullest use of the UNDP for the purpose of receiving and assuring the most effective utilization of voluntary contributions for operational programs and activities in the field of industrialization.

Merger of SF and EPTA into UNDP

At this session of the General Assembly the US saw approval of its long-sought objective of having the Special Fund and the Expanded Program of Technical Assistance merged into the UN Development Program (UNDP).4 Of the 37 seats on the Governing Council of the UNDP, 14 go to Western European and North American countries, 19 to developing countries, including Yugoslavia, and 3 to Eastern European countries. The remaining seat will rotate among these groups over a nine-year cycle, going to the Western European and North American group in 1966 and 1978. The question of the size and composition of the Governing Council was the subject of protracted and difficult negotiations. Although the US had reservations with respect to the size of the Council and the distribution of seats that finally emerged, we supported the merger resolution as laying the basis for effective future development of the combined programs.

Following the General Assembly action, our representative said that the United States would increase its 1966 pledge to the UNDP by $5 million with the proviso that $2 million be devoted to specialized industrial services. The US pledge is thus $65 million, subject to the usual stipulation that its contribution would not exceed 40% of the total. The GA requested states to review their contributions so that the UNDP's annual financial resources would reach the target of $200 million. To date pledges have totaled approximately $150 million for the 1966 program.

The first session of the UNDP Governing Council will open January 10, Paul Hoffman, formerly Director of the Special Fund, is the Director of UNDP.

UN Capital Development Fund

Despite opposition from developed countries, including the US, Committee Two also approved a resolution which urged developed countries to undertake measures designed to ensure early establishment of a UN Capital Development Fund.5 A Soviet Bloc amendment which would have diverted funds from the pre-investment activities of the UN Development Program to capital investment was rejected, however. Ambassador Roosevelt stated four principal reasons for US opposition to the resolution: a) conditions for establishment of the Fund (disarmament) had not yet been met; b) the international community should use existing facilities for capital investment instead of creating new ones; c) resources should not be diverted from pre-investment; and d) the Fund would be operated by recipient countries while any institution to be satisfactory must give equal consideration to the interests of both donor and recipient countries.

World Food Program

The General Assembly endorsed contribution of the World Food Program and established for the three years 1966–68 a target for voluntary contributions of $275 million.6 It also requested examination of the means and policies which would be required for large-scale international action on a multilateral character. This examination is to be made by the SYG, in cooperation with the Director General of the FAO and in consultation with the executive heads of other interested international organizations and programs, including the IBRD, IMF, GATT, and utilizing the total facilities of the UN, including UNCTAD, the UNDP and the World Food Program.7

These two resolutions received affirmative votes from all members of Committee Two except the Soviet Bloc, which abstained. The US representative made a statement indicating: a) our positive reasons for desiring studies; b) our continued feeling that a World Food Fund (such as proposed by Argentina) is impractical; and c) our feeling that we are not committed to “large-scale international action of multilateral character” in this field and that the secretariat, in studying “means and policies” would have to study “problems and possibilities” as a prior matter.

The World Food Pledging Conference will be convened at UN Headquarters in New York on January 18, 1966.

UNCTAD Resolutions

The GA approved the report of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and Geneva at its headquarters. In a series of resolutions, it endorsed the activities of UNCTAD but at the same time expressed serious concern at the lack of progress in solving the substantive problems with which the Conference is faced.8 Furthermore, the Assembly “reaffirmed the continuing and urgent need for member states to take full account in their trade policies of the needs of the developing countries, and convene the second session of UNCTAD in the first part of 1967. It requested the developed countries to take urgent meas-ures to accelerate and ensure the flow of international assistance and long-term capital to the developing countries. The competent UN bodies and other international institutions were urged to take steps to implement the recommendation of UNCTAD relating to the problem of servicing of external debt of developing countries. The GA also called upon Governments to give due consideration to the promotion of private foreign investment in the developing countries, taking into account the need for respect for the sovereignty and the relevant laws of each country.

Other Actions

The General Assembly requested that the Convention on Transit Trade of Land-locked States be signed by the December 31, 1965 deadline, and that it be ratified or acceded to as soon as possible. (The US has signed the Convention.) The GA reaffirmed the necessity of attaining the over-all objectives set for the UN Development Decade, urging further efforts to reach such objectives.9 It called upon the UN family of organizations to prepare a joint report on their goals and objectives for the Decade and to establish such goals and objectives in fields where they had not yet been precisely defined. On patents, the GA reaffirmed that access to patented and unpatented technological and managerial know-how is “essential to the economic development and industrialization of the LDCs” and recommended expanded international cooperation in this regard. The SYG was requested to continue studies on the possibility of developing improved practices for the transfer of such technology to LDCs.

Postponed to the twenty-first session was consideration of the agenda item dealing with decentralization of the economic and social activities of the UN. As to a review and reappraisal of the role and functions of ECOSOC, the Assembly requested that the SYG submit to the Council at its forty-first session, and to the General Assembly at its twenty-first session, proposals on ways in which the Council might adapt its procedures and working methods to enable it to fulfill its role effectively. Also postponed, until next year, were agenda items dealing with permanent sovereignty over national resources, population growth and economic development.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Limited Official Use. The source text comprises pp. 15–17 of the issue.

2 For a long extract from Goldberg's December 22 statement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 134–137.

3 Resolution 2089 (XX), adopted unanimously by the U.N. General Assembly on December 20; text ibid., pp. 153–155.

4 Resolution 2029 (XX), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on November 22 by a vote of 98 (including the United States) to 0, with 9 abstentions; text ibid., pp. 149–151.

5 Resolution 2042 (XX), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 8. (Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its Twentieth Session (A/6014), pp. 21–22)

6 Resolution 2095 (XX), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 20 by a vote of 93 (including the United States) to 0, with 10 abstentions; text in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, pp. 196–197.

7 Resolution 2096 (XX), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 20. (Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its Twentieth Session (A/6014), pp. 33–34)

8 These actions were approved in Resolution 2085 (XX), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 20. (Ibid., pp. 25–26)

9 Resolution 2084 (XX), “United Nations Development Decade,” adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 20. (Ibid., pp. 24–25)

117. Report by the Development Assistance Committee's Ad Hoc Group on Private Investment 117. Report by the Development Assistance Committee's Ad Hoc Group on Private Investment1

Paris, March 2, 1966.

DAC(66)6

I. Introduction

1. At its meeting on 12th May the D.A.C. agreed to establish an ad hoc Working Group to suggest a future programme of work in the field of private investment in the less-developed countries. This Group held its first meeting on 25th October, 19652 and elected Mr. Lamby of Germany as Chairman. Two further meetings were held on 6th December and on 9th February.3 The Working Group has invited representatives of B.I.A.C.,4 the O.E.C.D. Development Centre, the I.B.R.D., as well as the I.M.F. to participate in part of its deliberations.5

2. D.A.C. Member Governments have long been on record as recognizing the significant role played in economic development by private capital. One of the most obvious reasons for the importance of foreign private capital as a source of finance for economic development is the fact that budgetary limitations in the capital-exporting countries preclude the possibility that all the financial needs of the less-developed countries can be supplied by official assistance. In addition, of course, it must be recognized that foreign private capital, particularly in the form of direct investment, makes a contribution which extends far beyond the statistical addition it brings to the host country's resources. For one thing, it is inevitably accompanied by the intangible but important factor of enterprise, in the sense of the capacity not only to conceive a project but also to bring together all the human and material resources necessary to carry it out. The immediate benefit of such foreign participation is that managerial and technical staff familiar with the process and the product will be available from the start. An especially important potential benefit to be derived from direct investment is the resultant investment in human resources through the training of local staff for technical and managerial posts.

3. Unfortunately, our knowledge of the amount, character and direction of private foreign investment as well as of the private overseas technical assistance activities is still very inadequate. Nor is there any real understanding of the economic impact of private foreign investment in the developing countries. The ad hoc Group feels that the D.A.C., in co-operation with other interested bodies, could make a particularly useful contribution in attempting to improve our knowledge of the flow of private investment and technical know-how and of its economic impact. Specific recommendations to this effect are put forward in the report.

4. The ad hoc Group feels that there are certain areas of policy where the D.A.C. could, by providing opportunities for review and consultation, advance and orient Government action to promote the flow of private investment and technical knowledge. There was general agreement that the effectiveness of private investment in promoting economic development could be enhanced through improved co-ordination and co-operation between official assistance activities and private investors and that there were a number of problems in this respect which might usefully be included in a D.A.C. work programme. The Group considers that it would be particularly useful for the D.A.C. to improve knowledge of the technical assistance provided by private enterprise and to seek ways of encouraging this kind of assistance. Other areas where the ad hoc Group felt able to put forward positive suggestions include the consideration of practical investment problems in specific countries, donor government development corporations, investment information and government incentives. In some other cases, the Group has come to the conclusion that further work would be desirable, but that the D.A.C. would not necessarily be the appropriate forum.

II. Basic Data on Private Capital

5. There was unanimous agreement in the ad hoc Group that the improvement of statistical information on the international movement of private capital and its impact on the economies of the less-developed countries should be a matter of high priority in the D.A.C. programme of work. Private capital flows from Member countries to less-developed countries have constituted a substantial portion of the total flow of resources in recent years, and the cumulative value of private foreign assets in the less-developed countries represents a significant factor in the development process of these countries. Unlike data on the flow of official capital, however, statistics on private capital movement are clearly inadequate in a number of respects. There are particularly serious gaps, for example, in the information available on the distribution of recorded flows both by sector of origin in the reporting countries and economic sector of utilisation in the recipient countries, and on the cumulative value and distribution of assets held in the less-developed countries, on investment income, in particular on reinvested earnings and repatriated income arising from direct investment, on the flow of portfolio investment and bank lending, and on changes in liabilities to residents of less-developed countries. Even with respect to those flows for which coverage is thought to be relatively good there are wide discrepancies in the concepts and methodology used in compilation and classification of statistics, so that any attempt to develop aggregate data on a balance of payments basis is hampered by problems of comparability as well as availability.

6. In order to overcome these shortcomings, the ad hoc Group recommends that the D.A.C. establish a Group of Experts on Private Capital Statistics with a mandate to explore thoroughly every aspect of the problem. The Expert Group should concentrate its work on a study of the concepts, definitions and methodology employed by Member countries in collecting statistics on private capital movements, with a view to (1) harmonizing these procedures to the maximum extent possible, and (2) improving the coverage and quality of future reporting in this field. In order to get a clear view of the practical problems of obtaining a full picture of the flow of private capital to less-developed countries, the Group of Experts may find it useful to try to develop a comprehensive set of statistics on the flow of private capital from all sources to individual less-developed countries by type of transactions and economic sectors for one or two recent years to serve as a benchmark for improved future reporting. The ad hoc Group considers that the precise work programme and priorities for such a study should be elaborated by the Group of Experts itself.

7. In all phases of its work, the Group of Experts would be expected to adhere to agreed international balance of payments concepts and definitions, and to co-operate to the fullest extent possible with the I.M.F. and other appropriate institutions.

8. While no strict time-table for the work of the Group of Experts can be established, it is hoped that preliminary findings can be reported to the D.A.C. before the end of 1966.

9. It would also be desirable to study in due course the economic impact of private capital on the development process of some selected less-developed countries. The objective of such a study would be to provide a factual statistical basis for assessing the contribution of the major categories of foreign private capital to the economies of the capital importing countries. The B.I.A.C. has indicated interest in this subject and it is hoped that the O.E.C.D. Development Centre would participate in this work. Further details of the scope and character of such a study remain to be worked out. It is hoped that practical suggestions may grow out of the work of the Group of Experts, which should be considered further by the D.A.C. itself or any other Group which may be established to continue the work on private investment.

III. Technical Assistance by Private Enterprise

10. The Group agreed that there was a need for better knowledge of the technical assistance provided in developing countries through private enterprise, as well as of the extent to which official aid might be used to encourage this kind of assistance.

It was agreed to recommend that: (i) the Secretariat, in close co-operation with the B.I.A.C., should undertake an initial pilot survey covering a limited number of firms in D.A.C. Member countries. The firms selected would be those with substantial technical assistance activities benefiting nationals of less-developed countries. The survey would thus demonstrate the possibilities of providing effective technical assistance through private firms rather than constitute a statistical sample of what effort is in fact being made. Due attention would need to be paid to maintaining the anonymity of any firms which so desired;

(ii) information should be collated on the nature of current relationships between official aid and private enterprise in the technical assistance field (e.g. consultative arrangements, placing of trainees, direct or indirect subsidies, co-operation on projects);

(iii) consideration should be given to ways in which these relationships might be strengthened so as to encourage greater participation by private enterprise in technical assistance.

11. The Group also recommended that the role of private enterprise in technical assistance should be considered at a forthcoming meeting of the Expert Group on Requirements for, and Supply of, Technical Assistance which will be concerned with technical assistance in the industrial sector.

IV. Consideration of Private Investment Problems in Specific Countries

12. There is general agreement that the flow of private capital is very much affected by that complex of factors and considerations, obstacles and attractions, which has come to be called “investment climate". The ad hoc Group agreed that action to improve the investment climate is of paramount importance; however, in view of the fact that full information is already available on the conditions and problems faced by foreign investors in the interested capital-importing countries it is not proposed that the D.A.C. should undertake any general studies in this field. (Attention is drawn in this connection to a recent study by the National Industrial Conference Board on “Obstacles and Incentives to Private Foreign Investment 1962–1964").6 Any useful action would have to be directed to specific countries. In this connection two different approaches were considered: (1) consideration of private investment problems in consultative country meetings, and (ii) “investment conferences.”

(a) Consideration of the role of private investment by consultative country meetings

13. The Group felt that it would be useful for the various existing international arrangements set up to co-ordinate aid policies for specific less-developed countries, such as consultative country meetings and consortia, to pay attention to the role of private foreign investment. In particular it would seem useful to invite the I.B.R.D. to explore this possibility and to express its views on the desirability of discussing, in appropriate cases, contribution to development by local and foreign private investment in its consultative groups and consortia. It would also be useful if country or regional meetings held by the D.A.C. would pay due attention to the role of private investment in achieving development objectives.

14. It may be useful for a group of experts of D.A.C. Member countries to meet in advance of such meetings with a view to identifying the issues which may profitably be discussed and to provide relevant material. Such discussions would be directed primarily to the problems of co-ordinating official assistance policies and private investment. B.I.A.C. has indicated that it would be interested to contribute to this preparatory work. The country economic reports which have been or will be prepared by special B.I.A.C. missions will no doubt present useful background information.

(b) Investment Conferences

15. There was agreement that contacts between private investors and government officials of a specific host country to discuss the practical problems facing businessmen contemplating an investment in the country and, in turn, the problems confronting the officials in their attempts to regulate private investment in the context of overall policy can make a useful contribution. Such contacts do already take place in a number of less-developed countries on an informal basis. The ad hoc Group noted a paper submitted by the United States Delegation [DAC/PC(65)4]7 describing recent experiences with “private investment conferences” and putting forward practical suggestions for the way in which effective conferences might be organised and the respective contributions which the D.A.C. and B.I.A.C. might make.

16. While the utility of such investment conferences is recognized it was felt that, in principle, the D.A.C. was not the proper body to directly undertake such exercises. Therefore, the O.E.C.D. Development Centre and B.I.A.C. has been asked to explore the possibility of jointly organising such investment conferences and, if appropriate, to put forward to the D.A.C. practical suggestions to this effect. It was stressed by the ad hoc Group that investment conferences should only be undertaken with the full agreement and co-operation of the less-developed country concerned. In view of the special relationship between the B.I.A.C. and the O.E.C.D., the D.A.C. should be consulted on the selection of countries and subjects for discussion. It will, of course, also be useful for the D.A.C. to evaluate the results of such investment conferences.

V. Donor Country Institutions for providing finance to Private Investment in Developing Countries

17. Some Member countries have established financial institutions with varying public financial participation primarily designed to help finance private investment in less-developed countries. These institutions are the Commonwealth Development Corporation, the Commonwealth Development Finance Company in the United Kingdom, the German Development Corporation and, to some extent also, the Caisse Centrale pour la Cooperation Economique in France. On the multilateral level, the International Finance Corporation (I.F.C.) has similar functions.

18. These institutions encourage the growth of private enterprise by providing financing to firms in less-developed countries in association with private local or foreign investors. The main financial instruments of these institutions usually include: equity investments or participations in the form of equity, or long-term loans to private enterprises and local development institutions. It is recalled that there is also a similar institution, the A.D.E.L.A., which has been established by private investors from the United States, Japan and various European countries to foster the role of private enterprise in Latin America.

19. The ad hoc Group discussed whether the D.A.C. should organise an exchange of views and experience between interested governments. The Group noted that there are already bilateral contacts between the institutions concerned. It was agreed that it would be useful for the D.A.C. to provide an opportunity for discussion between interested Member Governments in particular with a view to making experience available to those Members who do not at present have such institutions.

VI. Provision of Investment Information

20. Member Governments can perform a useful function by providing potential private investors with information on economic, legal and institutional conditions in less-developed countries. The United States have developed a new instrument for the collection and dissemination of relevant data for private investors by setting up a “Catalogue of Investment Information and Opportunities” which brings together, for use by interested investors in all countries (1) studies on specific investment opportunities within a country; (2) studies of an industry within a country; and (3) studies pertaining to economic conditions, investment climate, and pertinent laws and regulations of a country. (A brief description of the “Catalogue” has been given by the United States Delegation in DAC/FC(65))2.)8

21. The ad hoc Group, including the representative of B.I.A.C., agreed that the Catalogue was a useful instrument and that the initiative of the United States Government was to be welcomed. In order to enhance the use of the Catalogue and to improve its coverage Member Governments are recommended to draw the attention of the business community to it and to make available for inclusion in the Catalogue any suitable material in their possession.

22. The German authorities are considering the collection of investment information along similar lines. If other countries should also follow this initiative it might be useful, at a later stage, to examine the possibility of integrating the national information into a multilateral instrument. Meanwhile, continued attention should be given to the optimum utilization of and contribution to the available information system.

VII. Incentives for Private Foreign Investment

23. Several Governments have taken special measures to stimulate the flow of private investment to less-developed countries. Such incentives include special tax measures, government loans to private investors, financial support of feasibility studies, investment guarantees and investment protection agreements, information programmes, etc. In addition, attempts have been directed, at international level, towards removing some of the special risks involved in foreign investment through such schemes as multilateral investment guarantees, the O.E.C.D. Draft Convention on the Protection of Foreign Property and the I.B.R.D. Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes.

24. The Group considered the usefulness of examining the effectiveness of special incentives provided to date by Member Governments. In view of the complexity of the factors determining private investors' decisions and the great differences in Member countries' economic and financial relationships with less-developed countries, several Delegations expressed doubt as to whether any general studies by the D.A.C. would lead to useful results. It was emphasized that conditions and policies of the less-developed countries themselves were by far the most important determinants of the flow of private capital. However, it was felt that a review by the D.A.C. of the experience of D.A.C. Member countries with their own incentives and the evaluation of their impact on the flow of capital might be useful in evaluating the effectiveness of the measures taken and in improving policies.

25. Fiscal incentives. At its Fifth Meeting, held in Tokyo in July 1961, the Development Assistance Group agreed to ask the Council of O.E.E.C. to request the O.E.E.C. Fiscal Committee to study the problem regarding the desirability and character of fiscal incentives in capital exporting countries. A report by the Fiscal Committee on “Fiscal Incentives for Private Investment in Developing Countries” was submitted to the D.A.C. and the Council in October 1964.9 The D.A.C. considered the report of the Fiscal Committee at its meeting on 12th May, 1965 and agreed to report to the Council that the majority of its Members had no objections to publication of the report. The O.E.C.D. Council approved publication at its meeting of 4th July, 1965.10 At a meeting in July 1965 the D.A.C. agreed that the matter of Fiscal Incentives should be included in terms of reference of the proposed ad hoc Working Group on Private Investment.

26. The ad hoc Group has no specific recommendation to make to the D.A.C. on the Fiscal Committee report. The report is now available to the public, and will no doubt be very useful to all concerned with these problems. The Fiscal Committee will probably review from time to time any measures which governments had taken in this field.

VIII. Report by D.A.C. Group of Experts on Access of the Inter-American Development Bank to European and Other Capital Markets

27. This report [DAC(65)12]11 deals with the fiscal and institutional measures governing access by the I.D.B. to the capital markets of various Member countries; it sets out the views expressed by the Members about ways in which its access to the capital markets of all Members could be facilitated and states the conclusions and recommendations put forward by the Group of Experts. The D.A.C. had the report on its agenda at its meeting of 2nd July and 9th July, 1965. However, at that time it was agreed that the ad hoc Group of Experts on Private Investment would take account of the report in making its recommendation on a D.A.C. work programme on Private Investment.

28. The ad hoc Group did not feel that any further study was required of the problems raised in the report. The report should, therefore, be considered directly by the D.A.C. when it considered it opportune.

IX. Arrangements for Future Work on Private Investment in the D.A.C. Frame-Work

29. This report has identified a number of problems on which future work in the D.A.C. frame-work may be useful. The Group agreed that the three following items should receive priority attention in the work programme arrangements: (a) improved statistical information;

(b) the pilot survey of technical assistance activities for private enterprise; and

(c) further discussion on incentives.

It remains to be decided how this work can best be organized. The ad hoc Group agrees that in view of its importance for the economic development of less-developed countries, private foreign investment and the related policy problems must be under continued examination in the D.A.C.

30. Regarding the work on statistical information it is recommended to set up a special Group of Experts on Private Capital Statistics. It remains to be seen, in the light of the work of this Group, whether it should also undertake the suggested studies on the economic impact of private foreign investment, or whether such study could be carried over any other way.

31. The majority of the Members of the ad hoc Group felt it would be useful to establish a continuing working party in order to implement the work programme on private investment proposed to the D.A.C. in this report.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Advisory Committees on Foreign Aid: FRC 73 A 159, GAC Memoranda Jan./June 1966. No classification marking. An attached cover note indicates that the report, which provided suggestions for a “D.A.C. Work Program in the Field of Private Investment,” was prepared by the Secretariat in cooperation with the Chairman of the Ad Hoc Group as a result of discussions in the Group and was submitted for consideration at the March 11 DAC meeting.

2 See Document 112.

3 A summary and assessment of the December 7 (not December 6) meeting are in CEDTO 471 from Paris, December 9, and CEDTO A–398 from Paris, December 31. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, AID 1) A summary of the February 9 meeting was transmitted in CEDTO 700 from Paris, February 11. (Ibid.)

4 Business and Industry Advisory Committee to O.E.C.D., comprised of one business representative from each member country. [Footnote in the source text.]

5 Representatives of the following D.A.C. Members participated in this work: Austria, Belgium, E.E.C. Commission, France, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom and the United States. [Footnote in the source text.]

6 Not found.

7 Brackets in the source text. “Paper Submitted by the United States Delegation on Private Investment Conferences,” November 30. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Program (DAC Work Program) 1965) This paper was the third of three submitted in November 1965 by the U.S. Delegation to the Ad Hoc Group on Private Investment. The first paper was “Suggestion for Proposed Statistical Studies on Economic Effects of Private Foreign Investments” (DAC/PC(65)1), November 25. (Ibid.) For the second, see footnote 8 below.

8 "Catalog of Investment Information and Opportunities,” November 25. (Ibid.)

9 Report by the Fiscal Committee on Fiscal Incentives in Capital Exporting Countries for Private Investment in Developing Countries (C(64)139), October 28. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Private Enterprise—Investment 1964)

10 Not further identified.

11 Not found. Brackets in the source text.

118. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 118. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, March 11, 1966, 2050Z.

CEDTO 857. Subject: DAC Private Investment Work Program. Ref: (A) TOCED 674;2 (B) DAC(66)6.3

1. At March 11 meeting,4 DAC approved report of Ad Hoc Group on Private Investment (DAC(66)1),5 with certain relatively minor modifications suggested by members: (A) Sweden and Japan suggested that specific mention be made in para. 6 of study of reflows from LDCs to industrialized nations as part of work of expert group; (B) U.S. requested inclusion of specific reference to report on details for economic impact study suggested by reftel for para. 9; (C) Italy suggested that para. 23 on incentives should stress investment guarantees as sine qua non of any incentive program to stimulate investments in LDCs.

2. All agreed expert group on statistics should be formed and proceed expeditiously. In addition, group Chairman Lamby clearly favored formation of permanent working party on private investment but Sweden and U.K. questioned whether DAC's role in implementing work program justified permanent working party. Thorp concurred this view, proposing continuation of ad hoc group which can be reactivated at any time Chairman feels there is something to discuss. German Del noted that future function of group somewhat different from group's original mandate, i.e., to help implement rather than simply to design work program, but Thorp did not consider that this presented problem.

3. With respect to U.S. proposal for report by continuing working party on terms of reference for economic impact study (para. 9), Thorp suggested that Secretariat undertake this report within time limit recommended by U.S. in cooperation with BIAC, Development Center and IBRD (which has also indicated desire to cooperate).

4. Other detailed drafting changes in reftel conveyed to Secretariat following meeting and will be incorporated along with other changes either in minutes of meeting or in addendum to report.

Trezise

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use.

2  TOCED 674 to Paris, March 9, said that DAC(66)6 adequately reflected “US views on suitable future work program in the field of private investment” but suggested some changes in working “to fix work program to specific schedule.” (Ibid.)

3  Document 117.

4 The minutes of this meeting are contained in “Summary Record of the 62nd Session, held at the Chateau de la Muette, Paris on Thursday 10th and Friday 11th March, 1966” (DAC/M(66)2(Prov.)), March 30. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Private Enterprise—Investment 1966)

5 "Draft Report by the Ad Hoc Group on Private Investment to the Development Assistance Committee on Suggestions for a D.A.C. Work Programme in the Field of Private Investment,” January 27, 1966. (Ibid.)

119. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) 119. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1

Washington, April 14, 1966.

SUBJECT

DAC Program on the World Food Problem

Pursuant to a U.S. initiative the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the OECD met in Paris on April 4–5 to discuss the world food problem and the attention it might be given within the DAC forum.2 The meeting was quite successful.

The U.S. proposal that the DAC High Level Meeting this July give top priority to the food problem was accepted. This proposal received strong support from most of the other delegations as well as from a senior representative of the FAO. Only the French resisted it. Although the British questioned somewhat the seriousness and urgency of the problem and what DAC could do about it, they agreed to the high level emphasis, and indeed successfully proposed establishment of a special group to prepare for it.

The preparatory group will work up appropriate materials on the food problem and formulate a DAC work program for submission to the high level meeting. The group is to be “self-elected,” that is, it will include delegations which are interested in serving, and will name its own chairman. The work will be done mainly by the OECD Secretariat, with assistance from country delegations, FAO, IBRD, etc. A wisemen group is not to be established, at least at the present time.

It is hoped that both Dr. Sen, Director General of the FAO, and George Woods will attend and address the high level meeting. While the world food problem will be given top priority, the meeting of course will also take up other matters such as the annual report of the DAC Chairman.

Prospects

1. In CEDTO 968 dated April 8 (attached),3 Ambassador Trezise made a strong plea to hold the July 8 high level meeting in Washington rather than in Paris as is customary. He feels that a Washington meeting would be the most effective way to (a) ensure attendance of key political leaders and obtain their consensus of the gravity of the problem; (b) dramatize U.S. humanitarian concern and leadership; (c) commit DAC members to greater and more coordinated efforts; and (d) inject the DAC with new vigor and purpose.

The President has turned this proposal down once. My own feeling is uncertain on this point. I would be agreeable to having the meeting in Washington if that is deemed necessary to get high level U.S. participation. On the other hand, there is much to be said for convincing the Europeans on their home ground. If we want to give the meeting high level attention, we can do it in Paris as well as here. In any case, I suggest that we leave this matter as it stands until Ambassador Trezise comes to Washington for consultations during the first week in May.

2. More important than the location of the meeting is a clear understanding of what we hope to achieve by it. I think we might well aim for the following: a. A reaffirmation of the importance of the food problem and of the essential role of agricultural development in the development process. The resolution, or recommendation on which the OECD Ministers would act, could recommend to DAC members that agricultural development and food aid as appropriate be accorded higher priority in their respective assistance programs. At the same time, it could call on aid receiving countries to recognize the need for faster rates of growth in agricultural productivity and a shift of development priorities in favor of food producers.

b. In conjunction with other organizations, DAC could very usefully survey the prospective supply of fertilizer and other basic inputs in relation to rising requirements. The DAC Secretariat, possibly with some outside assistance, can do this kind of analysis and DAC members can make a real contribution.

c. Given the importance of the problem and the need for sustained efforts, the DAC should agree to establish a permanent group on the Food Problem which would maintain contact with FAO, IBRD consortiums and consultative groups, regional bodies and banks, and other agencies concerned and report to DAC ministers annually on policies and progress. Ambassador Trezise has proposed this in his cable of April 8. Commitments of aid and self-help action would continue to be made through normal bilateral channels and coordinating mechanisms such as consortia and consultative groups. However, the DAC, acting through the permanent group, could play a valuable catalytic role.

DEB

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 69 A 1866, PRM 7–1, Development Assistance Committee, FY 1966. Confidential.

2 An earlier summary and discussion of this U.S. initiative is in Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 749, March 29, 1966, pp. 8–10. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments).

3 Not printed.

120. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 120. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Bell) to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 22, 1966.

SUBJECT

Recommendation by the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs

At its largest meeting, on Monday and Tuesday of this week,2 the General Advisory Committee approved the recommendation in the attached letter, which I am forwarding to you at their request.

Their recommendation is that we urge the Congress to delete an appropriation rider which for the last several years has prevented us from transferring foreign aid funds to the World Bank and its affiliates.

In taking this position, the Committee is supporting a stand we took with the Congress last year, and which I have repeated in testimony before Mr. Passman's subcommittee this week.3 Mr. Passman is strongly against deleting the rider, however, and we do not yet know how the subcommittee and the full committee will end up. We will keep you informed.

The attached letter is the first formal action by the General Advisory Committee. It reflects the fact that the Committee, which you appointed a year ago (March 26, 1965),4 has now acquired considerable knowledge in the foreign aid field and is ready to consider specific policy questions. Earlier this year, the Committee appointed two subcommittees: —one headed by David Rockefeller on private enterprise;

—a second headed by Dwayne Andreas on food and population.

Both these subcommittees are preparing reports on certain matters which will be forwarded to you soon.

At this week's meeting three more subcommittees were established: —one headed by Luther Foster on aid policies in Africa;

—a second headed by Ed Mason on future requirements for aid;

—a third headed by Al Gruenther on military assistance.

In my opinion, the General Advisory Committee has the makings of a very strong and useful group. All the members are keenly interested— at this week's meeting all but two of the 17 members were in attendance. Over the past year, the Committee has held five two-day sessions. In addition, 14 of the members have made visits to a total of 44 countries in which there are aid programs. Deleting duplications, this has meant that one or more members of the Committee have visited no less than 27 of the aid-receiving countries.

Looking ahead, I believe you can expect a growing number of useful suggestions and ideas from this group, and should be able to get from them an increasingly valuable sense of what needs to be done to improve the effectiveness of American assistance around the world. Furthermore, at its meeting this week, the members of the Committee, at the suggestion of David Rockefeller, offered to be of assistance in connection with the Congressional legislation in any way they could.

One problem is always important in the case of such committees of very busy and able individuals—to give them a sense that the time they are putting into their work is really regarded as important by the leaders in the Administration. Over the past year, Bill Gaud and I have been with them at all their meetings, and in addition they have met one or more times with Dean Rusk, Bob McNamara, Orville Freeman, John Gardner, George Woods, Harold Linder, Jack Vaughn, and others. They had hoped to meet with you sometime during their meeting this week, but this could not be arranged.

I know they would very much appreciate having an opportunity to meet briefly with you on the occasion of their next meeting in September or early October, and I strongly recommend you do this.

David E. Bell

Attachment

Washington, April 19, 1966.

Letter From the General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs to President Johnson

Dear Mr. President:

The purpose of this letter is to urge Congressional deletion of a statutory prohibition on use of foreign assistance development loan funds for lending to the International Development Association (IDA). We would urge further that early consideration be given to providing development loans to IDA under the authority of Section 205 of the Foreign Assistance Act.5

IDA plays an important role in the economic development of many of the poorer countries in the world. IDA provides to these countries development capital at low interest rates and for long terms. However, in order to make a significant contribution to the development of these countries, IDA is in need of substantial increases in its resources.

The United States now contributes $104 million per year to IDA, which sum is 41.4% of the total provided by the developed countries. Mr. George Woods, President of the World Bank and of IDA, has advised this Committee that increasing the U.S. grant contribution beyond 50% could well have an adverse effect upon the international character of IDA.

The General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs feels that the best alternative to increasing the U.S. grant contribution would be to make dollar repayable loans to IDA under the authority of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended.

This method of increasing IDA resources would have several advantages. As a loan which would have to be repaid, it would not have the adverse effect upon the international character of IDA which might result from a substantial increase in the U.S. grant contribution. Furthermore, it could well serve as a precedent to encourage other advanced nations to make resources available to IDA over and above what they would otherwise be willing to contribute.

Section 205 of the Foreign Assistance Act specifically authorizes the President to make available to IDA up to 15% of the development loan funds appropriated for the purposes of that Act. Section 205 also provides that these funds may be made available without regard to the requirements of the Foreign Assistance Act or of any other Act. This provision would permit loans to be made to IDA on terms softer than those prescribed for development loans, would permit IDA to administer the funds without a requirement for U.S. approval of plans, specifications and contracts, and would not require loans to IDA to be tied. Thus, Section 205 is designed to permit IDA to utilize these funds on a truly multilateral basis.

Unfortunately, it is now impossible to implement Section 205 by lending development loan funds to IDA. The Foreign Assistance and Related Agency Appropriation Act, 1966,6 provides that no part of the appropriation for development loans may be used to carry out the provisions of Section 205. The appropriation acts for 19647 and 19658 contained a similar provision. This prohibition was originally inserted by the House Appropriations Committee. The Senate Appropriations Committee deleted the prohibition from the FY 1966 appropriation bill and was upheld on the Senate floor. However, the House prevailed in Conference.

We believe that the prohibition in the Appropriation Act is an unfortunate restriction on the ability of the Executive Branch to participate more fully in the multilateral lending activities of IDA. Therefore, we urge that every effort be made to persuade the House Committee on Appropriations that the prohibition not be re-enacted this year.

Should this move be successful in this regard, this Committee would recommend that development loan funds be made available to IDA at the earliest possible time.

Sincerely yours,

James A. Perkins 9
Chairman

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, Advisory Committees on Foreign Aid: FRC 73 A 159, Rpt. #1—Re IDA 4/19/67 (GAC Memo 58 4/22), Mr. Bell's Memo to Pres., 4/22. No classification marking. Transmitted under cover of an April 22 memorandum from C. Tyler Wood to Committee members briefly indicating the contents of the attachments. One attachment, not printed here, is a letter from Senator Jacob Javits (R.-NY) to Bell, April 19, enclosing a copy of his proposed amendment to Section 205 of the pending Foreign Assistance Act of 1966. His amendment provided for an additional $100 million of appropriated funds for FY 1967 to be made available for lending to IDA under specified conditions. Copies were sent to Secretaries Rusk, Fowler, and McNamara, and Walt Rostow.

2 April 18 and 19.

3 Reference is to Bell's testimony before the Subcommittee on Foreign Operations of the House Appropriations Committee on April 20. See Foreign Assistance and Related Agencies Appropriations for 1967: Hearings Before a Subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations, House of Representatives, Eighty-ninth Congress, Second Session (Washington, 1966), Part 2, pp. 1–218.

4 Regarding the origins of and other documentation on this Committee, see Documents 32 ff.

5 The Foreign Assistance and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1967, approved October 15, 1966 (P.L. 89–691; 80 Stat. 1018), amended the Foreign Assistance Act by dropping the prohibition on the use of Section 205 authority and allowing the transfer of up to 10 percent of Development Loan funds to the World Bank family.

6 P.L. 89–273, approved October 20, 1965. (79 Stat. 1002)

7 P.L. 88–258, approved January 6, 1964. (77 Stat. 857)

8 P.L. 88–634, approved October 7, 1964. (78 Stat. 1015)

9 The names of the 16 Committee members are listed below Perkins' signature.

121. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 121. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, June 13, 1966, 1939Z.

CEDTO 1218. Joint State/AID message. Subject: DAC resolution on world food.

1. Following draft recommendation for DAC High Level meeting given to Kristensen and Thorp today for their review of sections relating to them. On receipt their comments, plan circulate to interested delegations as delegation draft, put forward on strictly ad referendum basis. Since desirable to get on with job of negotiating document soonest, request Washington advice on urgent basis.

Begin text (unnecessary words omitted):

DAC, having considered report of preparatory group world food problem,2

1. Noting that there has been relative stagnation food production in developing regions world in face of rapidly rising populations; that whereas these regions were net food exporters before World War II, they are expected to import grain this year at rate of more than thirty million tons; that stocks in major grain-exporting countries have now been drawn down below desirable levels; and that Director General FAO has stated that unless faster rate of agricultural development can be permanently established developing regions, large sectors of world population will soon be exposed to continuous threat of famine and starvation,

2. Recognizing that developed countries must continue to supplement food supply of developing countries, and that additional food supplies [and special disaster reserves] might be provided if appropriate conditions could be created to encourage additional production, (Bracketed phrase not included in text circulated, but may be proposed in course negotiations if atmosphere suitable.)

3. Noting, however, that food imports alone cannot provide permanent solution, since continuation of present trends would lead in relatively near future to situation in which ability of developed countries to supply food would fall far short of requirements,

4. Considering, therefore, that permanent solution to food problem in less-developed regions of work requires marked increase in rate of growth of agriculture in these regions,

5. Noting that agricultural sector accounts for preponderant part of total income and employment in developing regions, and that this sector has largest potential for providing savings and manpower needed for balanced economic growth; that this potential is not being effectively realized; and that this may be consequence of lack of adequate emphasis on agriculture in less-developed regions, both on part of countries of these regions and of developed countries which are providing them development assistance,

6. Recognizing that achievement of accelerated rate agricultural development will require sustained and comprehensive effort on part of governments of developing countries, including such measures as priority attention to food production in development plans; larger allocation of resources, including foreign exchange, to agricultural sector; development of complex of institutions for scientific research, communication of knowledge to farmers, and farm credit; and, perhaps most important, creation of conditions which provide farmers incentive to improve their productivity, and investors incentive to invest funds in agriculture and agriculture-supporting industries,

7. Considering that aid-giving countries can assist developing countries materially in achievement of increased agricultural productivity, both directly through provision of capital and technical assistance, and indirectly through provision of capital and technical assistance, and indirectly by encouraging private investors in food, chemicals and other related industries to provide both capital and technical aid,

8. Noting that there is increasing awareness of urgency of food problem in developing regions of world; that various aspects of questions of food aid and of agricultural development are being treated by wide range of international institutions and bilateral aid donors; and that there is a need for more systematic and effective effort to delineate functions of these various institutions to assess extent to which taken together they constitute adequate attack on problem,

9. Recommends therefore that member governments A) Continue, and, where possible, increase their programs of food aid to developing countries, under conditions which will encourage developing countries to take measures to increase their own production on economic basis,

B) Provide increasing amounts of capital and technical assistance to agricultural sector and to agriculture-related industries in developing countries, giving special attention to those developing countries which are applying domestic policies and measure calculated to encourage increased production on economic basis,

C) Seek to assure that various consortia and consultative groups of which they are members devote appropriate attention to problem of increasing agricultural productivity in developing countries concerned,

10. Requests Council of OECD to authorize Secretary General, A) To consult with heads of other international organizations, with experts in field of agriculture, and with member governments, concerning i. Scope and range of activities of international agencies concerned with various aspects of food and nutrition in developing countries, division of responsibilities among these agencies, and their relations with programs of bilateral donors,

ii. Possible means to increase supply of foods from more productive regions to areas of scarcity and want,

iii. Possible means to improve effectiveness of international and bilateral programs aimed at increasing food production in developing countries, and

B) To report his findings and recommendations to member governments, and to appropriate bodies of OECD,

11. Requests Chairman of DAC to establish working party on world food problem, which should endeavor through appropriate channels to establish and maintain continuing contact with other international organizations concerned with problem of food and nutrition in less developed regions of world, and, in cooperation with these organizations, consider problems related to efficacy of external assistance in raising agricultural productivity in developing countries, with particular reference to following tasks: A) Analysis of data concerning present flow of economic aid to agricultural sector and to agriculture supporting projects in developing countries and assessment of its adequacy in relation to overall development requirements,

B) Assembly of best available estimates of fertilizer and other inputs such as pesticides and farm machinery required in various regions of developing world during next decade and consideration of possible measures to meet such requirements,

C) Preparation of more refined estimates of requirements for various types of advisory and technical assistance personnel in agriculture and consideration of ways and means to make more effective use of such personnel, and to supply additional personnel in areas of acute need,

D) Assembly of data on extent of research problems on food production in developing countries and measures required to make fruits of research usable by farmers; and identification of areas of research where additional donor efforts might be most productive,

E) On basis of its finding, prepare recommendations for further consideration by DAC and member governments. End text.

Trezise

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use; Priority.

2 Not found.

122. Summary Notes of 562d Meeting of the National Security Council 122. Summary Notes of 562d Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, July 19, 1966, 11:45 a.m.–12:45 p.m.

The World Food Problem

The President: This discussion on the current world food problem was called because: 1. The war on hunger is as important as any national security problem we face; 2. The size and urgency of the problem require us to move rapidly to organize a worldwide attack on hunger; and 3. U.S. public opinion polls show a resistance to our assisting foreign countries in the fields of health, welfare, education, and food.

Secretary Rusk: The Development Assistance Committee is meeting in Washington this week. We plan to alert those who are assisting foreign countries in the urgency of the food problem. Up to now, the food producing countries have been looked to to solve the serious world food problem. However, the fight on hunger must include nations other than the food producing nations. We must work out a combination of means to fight hunger. We are disappointed in what the developing states have done to increase their food production. We have also been disappointed by what the donor states in DAC have done in providing food aid.

AID Director Bell: Summarized the AID paper (copy attached).2 He used the charts attached to the paper to illustrate the magnitude of the problem and to emphasize that an agricultural program must be integrated into the national economy of every developing country.3

Secretary Freeman: India is doing what it said it would do in improving seed, developing water resources, and increasing the use and production of fertilizer. Famine is not likely now in India but we must get tough with the Indians to ensure that they achieve a five percent agricultural growth rate.

As to U.S. domestic production, we should return additional U.S. acreage to food production. We need enough food to ensure that famine will not occur in the future. The Indians have lived up to their commitments and we must live up to ours. (Secretary Freeman's paper and tables referred to are attached.)4

The Vice President: We should increase the amount of wheat carried over into the next year in order to block the speculators and to use it as a means of holding down inflation.

Secretary Freeman: A final decision on the increase in U.S. acreage must be taken no later than Labor Day.

The President: Every official taking part in the Development Assistance Committee meeting this week (the Vice President, Secretary Rusk, Secretary Freeman, Ambassador Bell) should make clear that the United States is deadly serious about a worldwide effort to fight hunger and that it is in the interests of all advanced countries to help to the fullest extent that they can.

Secretary Rusk should prepare plans for a State-AID-Agriculture-BOB effort to prepare studies and recommendations as to the next steps to be taken in the war on hunger.5

A major objective of this Administration is the export of food, health, and education. Top priority must be given to getting Congress to authorize adequate resources for this purpose.

Secretary Fowler: The export of U.S. goods and services is desirable if it is done in such ways as to avoid displacing commercial markets. The export of cash is not. We must get on a burden-sharing basis with other countries because of the effect on our balance of payments position of the movement abroad of U.S. resources. We must insist that international organizations find ways to transfer abroad our resources with the least effect on our balance of payments.

Bromley Smith

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 3 Tab 44, 7/19/66, The World Food Problem. Confidential/Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

2 Attached but not printed is a 10-page discussion paper prepared in the Agency for International Development, which David E. Bell approved on July 15. This paper provided background on the worsening world food problem and various short-term and long-term alternative policies the United States might pursue to respond to it.

3 The charts are not attached but are probably the same ones attached to a July 14 memorandum from Bell, Henry Owen, and Walter J. Stoessel, Jr., to Secretary Rusk, which was part of Tab B in the Department of State briefing book prepared for this NSC meeting. (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 318) Also in this briefing book is a July 19 memorandum from Herbert B. Thompson (S/S) to Secretary Rusk, indicating the Executive Secretariat's understanding that the White House had made large-scale reproductions of the charts for display at the NSC meeting.

4 Not found.

5 In a follow-up memorandum to Secretaries Rusk and Freeman, August 1, Walt Rostow wrote that the President requested that a joint State/AID/Agriculture recommendation “be sent to him promptly on the PL 480 India and Pakistan programs and that additional recommendations covering other PL 480 countries follow shortly.” Rostow further noted that “these recommendations should take into account all aspects of our relations with the countries involved;” and because the United States could not meet fully the requests for P.L. 480 commodities, “that allotments worldwide be taken into account in presenting recommendations on individual country programs.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, U.S. Food Aid Policy [1 of 2], Box 15)

123. Editorial Note 123. Editorial Note

The Development Assistance Committee held its Fifth Annual High-Level Meeting in Washington July 20–21, 1966. In a May 28 letter of invitation to Secretary-General Kristensen, Secretary Rusk emphasized, among other things, that the purpose of the invitation was to express the U.S. Government's recognition of the importance of the work of the Development Assistance Committee, “and, in particular, to highlight the recent work of the Committee in developing greater understanding of the world food problem and of the need for increased efforts by donor and recipient nations alike to deal with it.” (Department of State, Central Files, OECD 3) Kristensen accepted for the Development Assistance Committee in a June 21 letter to Rusk. (Ibid.) Secretary Rusk agreed to head the U.S. Delegation and asked David Bell and Orville Freeman to agree to serve as Co-Vice Chairmen. (Letter from Secretary Rusk to Secretary Freeman, June 21; ibid.) For text of the Department of State announcement of the meeting, see Department of State Bulletin, July 11, 1966, page 55.

For the NSC discussion about the upcoming DAC meeting, see Document 122.

For the June 13 draft DAC recommendation on the world food problem prepared for the High-Level meeting, see Document 121.

For text of Secretary Rusk's July 20 statement to the meeting, see Department of State Bulletin, August 8, 1966, pages 199–202. Vice President Humphrey's luncheon statement, July 20, is ibid., pages 202–205; and Secretary Freeman's statement, July 21, is ibid., pages 205–209. President Johnson's message, which Secretary Rusk read at the conclusion of the meeting, is ibid., pages 209–210. Text of the communique, July 21, is ibid., pages 210–212.

For a summary of the meeting, see Document 124.

Documentation on the meeting is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 305, CF 68–69. A summary and evaluation of the meeting is in Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 759, August 2, 1966, pages 1–4. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments)

124. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 124. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 1

Washington, July 25, 1966, 6:50 p.m.

14659. CEDTO-ADCOR. DAC High Level Meeting, Washington, July 20–21.

The High Level Meeting of DAC, July 20–21, was devoted to two principal themes: 1. General policy discussions of members' aid programs in 1965 using Chairman's draft report2 as basis for discussions and

2. Food problems of LDC's.

The first day of the meeting was given over to general policy discussion with all members expressing views on future of the joint aid effort and their own respective aid programs in 1965 and in the future. In addition, statements made by President IBRD and Managing Director IMF. In opening discussion DAC Chairman Thorp indicated importance developments in 1965 as (1) increase of $1 billion in total net flow financial resources (including technical assistance) largely in the form of private capital, (2) some hardening average loan terms in spite of improvement by several members and continuing rapid increase in LDC debt burden, (3) increase in realization of problems resulting from failure agricultural production to keep pace expanding population and (4) increased donor cooperation through formation new consultative groups.

General policy discussions indicated agreement by DAC members, IBRD and IMF of need to augment flow of resources, with emphasis placed on stimulating official flows and inconstant nature private capital flows which accounted for large share increase in 1965. Chairman indicated that total flow of resources to LDC's from all sources in 1965 approximately $11 billion, of which $10.1 billion contributed by DAC members. Committee agreed to work toward larger volume aid and in this connection equitable sharing of burden. Also agreed that additional effort needed in meeting growing debt burden. In this connection approval given to the new proposed expanded reporting system of DAC and IBRD which will improve information on LDC debt and give all donors better appreciation of problem.

In general policy discussion SecState placed primary emphasis on food problems LDC's, suggesting increased collective effort through World Food Program, World Food Reserve and stabilization of population growth.

AID Administrator Bell followed the Secretary and noted the importance of giving serious consideration to the conclusion of Thorp and Woods that the developed countries were not meeting the development needs. He stressed that it was important to distinguish among the various LDC's noting that many were making good progress and can look forward to self-sustaining growth. He felt that some countries are now better able to use aid more effectively than in the past. While recognizing with regret that terms of aid hardened in 1965, he pointed out that US terms were still well within DAC targets. He said that a number of suggested areas of work are significant but proposed that three be given priority attention: (1) Food and agriculture, (2) debt problems, including export credits, and (3) absorptive capacity.

At lunch on first day hosted by SecState, Vice President restated main elements of food problem in US view and called for a collective effort to (1) provide LDC's with aid required to increase food production, (2) meet emergency needs for food shipments while development programs created and put into operation, and (3) to give assistance, on request, in family planning programs.

Discussion of DAC Working Party reports and direction of future work, originally scheduled for first day, deferred until end of second day to allow sufficient time to discuss proposed draft recommendation on food problems in LDC's. Discussion this subject began with statements by Sec General OECD and Director-General FAO Sen and followed by Secretary Freeman who presented facts underlying present US concern overall food problem, including declining world reserves, population growth, needs for agricultural inputs, changing character and magnitude of US production, and need for greater effort by developing countries. Freeman emphasized “urgent importance of allocating greater proportion of assistance to agricultural sector in developing countries” and need to “include accelerated agricultural development in their country plans.” He made clear that the answer could be found “within the resources of the nations that make up DAC” and expressed the hope that they would be “effectively and efficiently coordinated and made available as and where needed.”

Following discussion DAC adopted recommendation essentially as presented to the group.3 Some discussion was devoted to Swedish proposal to augment recommendation with language emphasizing importance of family planning. Swedish proposal not accepted since population and family planning had not been discussed in DAC when draft recommendation being prepared. Recommendation was changed slightly however to reflect importance of an appropriate balance between “growth of population and food supplies.”

The recommendation adopted calls for action by DAC, members individually, and OECD Secretary General. It calls upon the DAC to keep itself informed on the food situation in the LDC's, review activities of members in providing assistance with a view to increasing its effectiveness, consider general issues of policy regarding food aid or long term agricultural development when it appears that the coordinated effort would contribute to meeting the problem of food supply in LDC's. The recommendation calls upon member governments to encourage LDC's to emphasize the agricultural sectors, to give more emphasis to assistance to support domestic policies in LDC's which would lead to greater productivity in agriculture, to ensure that proper attention is given this matter in all international and other agencies and to provide food aid under conditions which will encourage LDC governments and farmers to increase their own agricultural productivity. Finally the recommendation requests the OECD Council to ask the Secretary General to consult with member governments and heads of international organizations and to report on how to increase the effectiveness and coordination of bilateral and multilateral programs aimed at increasing food production and improving nutritional levels in LDC's.

Following adoption of the recommendation on food problems, the Committee reviewed the reports of its various working parties and discussed briefly the future direction of its work. In noting and accepting the reports it was agreed that various substantive issues presented to the Committee would be taken up more fully at meetings of the DAC in Paris in September.

In addition to the formal sessions, several background press briefings were held both before and after the meeting to provide an understanding of the structure and purpose of the DAC and to dramatize the importance of the food issue.4 Receptions were held for participants on the evening of the 20th by SecGeneral OECD and Chairman DAC and 21st by AID Administrator Bell and Secretary Freeman.

At the conclusion of the meeting Secretary Rusk read a Presidential message to the DAC which congratulated DAC on a successful meeting and on its recommendation with respect to food. In his message the President emphasized the need for joint action to prevent “mass famine” in the years ahead and expressed the view that by adopting the recommendation the DAC was joining with the developing nations to win the war on hunger. He pledged the support of the US “to this cause in which all of us now join.”

Copies important statements and the adopted recommendation are being assembled for transmittal to addresses. More detailed account of the proceedings will follow by airgram.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Karmish (AID/PC/FWA) on July 22, cleared by Anthony C. Albrecht (EUR/RPE) in substance and James M. Kearns (AID/EXSEC), and approved by Jo W. Saxe (AID/AA/PC). Sent to all NATO capitals, Bern, Canberra, Dublin, Madrid, Stockholm, Tokyo, and Vienna.

2 Not found.

3 A copy of the adopted resolutions, July 21, which are summarized in the telegram, is attached as an annex to a November 17 talking paper on the world food problem (OECD/TP–24) prepared by the Department of State for the OECD Ministerial Meeting November 24–25, 1966. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Meetings—OECD Ministerial November 24–25, 1966)

4 No transcripts of these background briefings have been found.

125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Italy 125. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Italy 1

Washington, October 19, 1966, 6:55 p.m.

69229. FODAG. CEDTO. Deliver before 9:00 A.M. Sub: Food Production Resources Program. Ref: Rome 2061.2 For: USDel FAO Council.

1. As USDel aware we are most anxious avoid either (a) any action by FAO Council which could be construed as endorsement Sen proposal, or (b) a so-called “compromise” under which FAO would assume primary responsibility for studying plan.

2. Re proposed study, we gather from Canadian and New Zealand Embassies that their governments had initially considered study by FAO Council Committee to be innocuous compromise. Nevertheless, within past 24 hours Canadian and New Zealand Embassies have called at Dept to underscore their concern about Sen's handling of proposal, and their Washington Embassy offs now appear to agree with us that study conducted primarily by FAO would start us on slippery path and are so advising capitals urgently.3 Our central objection to study conducted primarily by FAO is that this would prejudge institutional framework for increasing emphasis on agricultural inputs.

3. In view para 4 reftel, USDel requested proceed along following lines: Either singly, or jointly with other like-minded dels, USDel should, if she perceives no objection, discuss problem with Sen prior to formal consideration proposal by Council, making, inter alia, following points: (a) As indicated by high US officials at Washington High-Level DAC meeting,4 we are seriously interested in studying Sen proposal, (b) we consider it of utmost importance that study be so conducted as to maintain confidence of potential donor countries and major sources of financial assistance within UN system. If study appears, rightly or wrongly, to be effort at FAO aggrandizement we consider proposal doomed from start. Moreover, we must not overlook importance of examining problem in manner calculated to encourage increased assistance, as justified, to agriculture by IBRD/IDA group, UNDP, and bilateral donors. (c) Accordingly, we are not prepared agree to study conducted solely or primarily by FAO. We would, however, be prepared to agree to a joint study by FAO, UN, and IBRD, taking account of work of OECD. In context of such joint study, we would further be prepared to support establishment of FAO Council Committee to consult with Director General on FAO contribution to joint study.

4. We would like a strong demarche to Sen on this matter.

5. In view strong interest New Zealand in Sen proposal, USDel requested explore whether New Zealand Del can be included in GG Meeting dealing with this subject. FYI: New Zealand Embassy Washington has been informed we favor their inclusion this meeting. End FYI.

6. In connection consideration Sen proposal, AID Asst. Administrator Waters advancing ETA to Friday AM.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AGR 3 FAO. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Paris. Drafted by Leighton Van Nort (IO/OES) on October 19; cleared by Fred H. Sanderson (E), Stephen H. Rogers (EUR/RPE), Herbert J. Waters (AID/AA/MR), Dorothy H. Jacobson (Agriculture) in substance, Eskildsen (Agriculture), Ralph Hirschtritt (Treasury), William J. Stibravy (IO/OES), Helen A. Wilson (AID/PC/UN), Paul J. Brynes (IO/OIA), and Joseph J. Sisco (IO) in substance; and approved by Stibravy.

2 Telegram 2061 from Rome, October 18, reported that at its October 17 meeting the Geneva Group (FAO), while recognizing the importance of Sen's proposed $50 million multilateral fund for manufactured agricultural prerequisites such as pesticides and fertilizers, gave it no support and speculated that his proposal for a study on the subject might be a “compromise move in course of debate.” (Ibid.)

3 Subsequently, telegram 70412 to Rome, October 21, reported that the Canadian Embassy had recently “informed us that Ottawa now opposed to Sen ‘compromise' under which FAC would assume primary responsibility for studying plan. Embassy believes Canada will strongly support tactics outlined reftel,” i.e., telegram 69229. (Ibid.)

4 See Document 124.

5 October 21.

126. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 126. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 1

Rome, October 22, 1966, 1515Z.

2149. FODAG. From USDel FAO Council. Subj: Food production resources program. Ref: State 71127.2

1. Mrs. Jacobson privately conveyed to Sen substance para 3 of State 69229.3 She did not, however, in deference GG understanding, disclose our final position of willingness support jointly study plus ad hoc committee.

2. Early in discussion Sen said he had in mind suggesting Council set up ad hoc committee to study his proposal. As discussion progressed Sen volunteered and repeated several times that he had no objection to joint study including UN and IBRD.

3. We believe this meets objectives of State 69229 and 71127 without violating GG agreement reported Rome 2130.4 Will report further following Monday's discussion.5

Reinhardt

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AGR 3 FAO. Limited Official Use; Priority.

2 Telegram 71127 to Rome, October 21, argued that any delay while waiting to hear the “trend of opinion” on Sen's proposal or until he submitted it would make the situation “much more difficult to retrieve,” and it thus instructed Jacobson to “see Sen promptly with or without other Dels and convey to him the substance of para 3 of Deptel 69229.” (Ibid.)

3  Document 125.

4 Telegram 2130 from Rome, October 21, reported that a caucus of the Geneva Group (FAO) on October 20 agreed to listen to the debate at the October 24 meeting; and after Sen made his anticipated study offer, the U.S. Delegation would request a 48-hour postponement to allow for consultations with other governments. (Department of State, Central Files, AGR 3 FAO)

5 No record of a discussion on Monday, October 24, has been found. Telegram 2239 from Rome, October 27, transmitted the text of a report agreed to by the FAO Council and Sen after long discussions on October 26 and 27. (Ibid.) Although the Department of State transmitted a few minor changes in the text, the message arrived 3 hours after the final adjournment of the session, which adopted the report with only other minor revisions and without substantive debate. The approved report provided, among other things, for the creation of an ad hoc committee of 20 nations, divided equally between developed and developing nations, which would consult with Sen on the “conduct and content of a study that would examine problem of increasing the availability of agricultural production resources to developing nations” and make a progress report on the study to the 48th session of the Council. (Telegram 74506 to Rome, October 27, and telegram 2276 from Rome, October 28; both ibid.)

127. Current Economic Developments 127. Current Economic Developments1

Washington, November 8, 1966.

Issue No. 766

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

FAO REPORTS ON WORLD FOOD SITUATION; UNITED STATES MODIFIES PLEDGE TO WFP

Release of the 1966 report of the Food and Agricultural Organization again highlights the increasing demands placed on the world's supply of food. According to the report, The State of Food and Agriculture, 1966,2 world food production failed to rise in 1965/1966, but population increased by about 70 million persons, causing a reduction in per capita food production of four to five percent in the developing regions of Africa, Latin America and East Asia. Although early reports are inconclusive, it appears that this year's crop will be no better. This will place even heavier stress on the world's ability to feed itself, and, notes the report, “will give greater urgency to the re-thinking already under way about the role of food and its provision on a surer basis than that of chance surpluses.”

American concern for the problem was evidenced anew on October 24, with announcement that the United States would increase its contributions to the World Food Program, an international aid organization sponsored jointly by the UN and its specialized agency, the FAO.3 Through the revised US pledge, all contributions in unrestricted cash or commodities made toward the program after July 31, 1966 by other contributors will be matched by the United States. It is likely that this version will result in a greater drawdown on the $130 million of commodities, cash and services which the US originally pledged in January 1966.

Current Food Situation

Surveying production records for the major regions of the world, excluding Communist China, the FAO report finds that a decrease in the world's food supply for 1965/1966 was averted only by good harvests in North America. Yields in all areas of the world except North America, Western Europe and the Middle East dropped. The most serious development in 1965/1966, the report said, was an estimated drop of more than two percent in total grain production, which makes up about one-third of all agricultural production. World production (excluding Communist China) of wheat, barley, rice, sugar, apples, groundnuts, cocoa, and tobacco fell by between four and eight percent. For most other products there was a small rise. Increases in soy-beans and coffee ranged from 15 to almost 50 percent.

The poor harvests of the past year, the report noted, were all the more serious since they came, not in the midst of plenty, but after a long period in which production has only barely kept up with the rapidly mounting population. Until recently, large stocks of grain accumulated in North America had provided a cushion against emergencies. Large-scale shipments of these stocks made it possible to avert disaster in India and other drought stricken areas in 1965/1966. Such shipments, however, along with recent import needs of Communist China and the Soviet Union, and the greater success of the US in limiting its production, “have reduced North American grain stocks to their lowest level in well over a decade,” and made the world food situation “more precarious now than at any time since the period of acute shortage immediately after the Second World War.”

Major Trends

In a survey of major trends in the food situation, the FAO report notes that the increase in demand slowed slightly along with the general retardation of growth of the world economy as a whole. Demands for consumption in light of the poor harvests were satisfied by imports from surplus areas, however, and world food stocks declined to the point where “they could no longer be considered excessive in relation to requirements.” The value of world trade in agricultural, fishery and forest products declined slightly, after a steep rise in 1964, as a result of a more or less stable volume of world trade and a slight fall in average prices. The average drop in the level of agricultural prices was one percent, with a six percent drop recorded for the prices of agricultural raw materials. While prices to farmers in most countries rose in 1965, smaller crops in many countries meant that the increase in receipts failed to offset increased farm expenses.

Prospects for 1966/1967

The report is cautious about prospects for this year's crop. It was not yet possible, on the basis of data available up to July 15, to assess the extent to which production might recover. Excess rainfall had reduced winter wheat plantings in Europe and the Soviet Union, and US wheat production was expected to be down 7 percent from last year's crop. Drought has hit wheat crops in India and Pakistan, and widespread drought was reported in Communist China. Shortage of rain was also expected to reduce wheat production in northwestern Africa and a number of Near Eastern countries. Although early information, especially from developing countries, tends to stress droughts and disasters, it is only later that reports on average or good harvests come in.

Food Aid and Food Production

Stagnation in food production and the sharp reduction of stocks has forced a sweeping reappraisal of the role of food aid and its dependence on “chance surpluses” from the developed nations. In addition to its revised pledge to the WPF, the US had already taken steps to return some unused farmland to production. The problem as seen by the FAO, however, is not only one of increased aid, but of increased production in the recipient countries. The Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development, now being drawn up by FAO, will provide a clearer idea of the contribution needed from agriculture for sound national growth, and make it easier to assess the amount and type of aid needed by the developing countries. Through a cooperative program set up with the International Bank which establishes joint IBRD/FAO team to identify projects suitable for investment, the FAO is becoming more directly concerned with obtaining financial aid for agricultural development. The US, with its Food for Peace Act (see page 11 this issue)4 has made its food aid independent of surpluses as well as conditional upon measures by recipient countries to improve their own production.

US Revises WFP Pledge

In reaction to the ever deepening crisis facing the world's food suppliers, the United States announced on October 24 that it was revising its pledge to the World Food Program, an aid distributing organization jointly sponsored by the UN and the FAO. Under the US commitment, all contribution of restricted cash or commodities made toward the program after July 31 will be matched with commodities by the United States. In addition, the US will pay the shipping costs for all commodities it provides. The effect of this revision of the terms of the US pledge will be to offer commodities and related shipping costs not only against commodities pledged by others, but also as a match for new unrestricted cash pledges. This offer revises the matching provisions with respect to the $130 million that the US had already pledged for the next three years. The WFP now has available $153.8 million toward the goal of $275 million in pledges which it set for itself at the pledging conference in January of this year.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Unclassified. The source text comprises pp. 18–19 of the issue.

2 The report was published by the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations in 1966.

3 For an extract of this announcement made by George L. Killion, Alternate U.S. Representative to the United Nations, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, p. 147.

4 Reference is to the article, “Congress Extends Food for Peace Act for Two Years,” pp. 11–12, which summarizes the legislative compromise leading to enactment of the Food for Peace Act of 1966, approved November 11, 1966. (P.L. 89–808; 80 Stat. 1526)

128. Briefing Paper Prepared by the Agency for International Development 128. Briefing Paper Prepared by the Agency for International Development1

Washington, November 15, 1966.

OECD/CTP–2

MULTILATERAL AID AND IDA REPLENISHMENT

Talking Points

1. The U.S. should express its confidence in the development assistance efforts of existing multilateral institutions and offer support for their continued work.

2. The U.S. is prepared to increase its contribution to IDA substantially, provided that: (a) other Part I members share appropriately in the replenishment, and (b) that satisfactory arrangements are devised to permit donors in balance of payments deficit to make their contributions without further unbalancing their external accounts. The U.S. is awaiting Bank proposals to this end.

3. The U.S. is considering the draft report and recommendations for increasing the resources of the Inter-American Development Bank,2 realizing the vital role that institution should continue to play in furthering the goals of the Alliance for Progress.

4. The U.S. continues to support the recent initiatives in regional development exemplified by the newly created Asian and African Development Banks.

Background

Commitments to developing countries by multilateral assistance institutions were $1.9 billion in 1965, more than two and a half times larger than in 1960, and constituted almost 20 percent of the total aid effort compared to 8 percent in 1960. Assistance agencies in the multilateral field include the World Bank (IBRD), International Development Association (IDA), International Finance Corporation (IFC), Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), European Development Fund (EDF) and Investment Bank (EIB) of the European Economic Community, and United Nations technical assistance and relief agencies. The rise in disbursements, both absolutely and relatively, has been even more dramatic.

The rapid expansion of multilateral activity has been possible despite a substantial decline in official contributions by developed countries to finance the multilateral institutions. DAC member contributions to multilateral agencies decreased from about $660 million in 1962 to about $500 million in 1965. During the same period, however, net bilateral flows to consortia and consultative group countries increased from about $1.4 billion to $2.5 billion. Nevertheless, several multilateral agencies are in imminent need of fresh funds to meet increasing demands for assistance to developing countries.

The most urgent need is for the replenishment of usable resources for IDA, which by the end of October 1966 had fallen to $192 million. At the present rate of commitment, IDA's resources will be exhausted before the end of the current fiscal year. In anticipation of this situation, IBRD/IDA President Woods has called for replenishment totalling $1 billion per year for the next three years compared to the first replenishment of $250 million per year. The U.S. position as stated by Under Secretary Ball is that the U.S. “is prepared to increase its contribution to IDA substantially provided that other Part I members agree to carry an appropriate share of the burden” and that the U.S. is assured that satisfactory arrangements will be devised to “permit donors in balance of payments deficit to make their proper contributions to IDA without further unbalancing their external accounts.”3

The IBRD, which relies on private capital markets for loan funds, anticipates difficulty in borrowing at existing higher interest rates while at the same time desiring to keep its interest rates for borrowers from the Bank as low as possible.

The International Finance Corporation has just made its first $100 million borrowing from the IBRD. An arrangement for the IFC to borrow from the IBRD was initiated in order to allow a higher level of the Corporation's activities.

The IDB has requested that members consider a new replenishment of the resources of the Fund for Special Operations along lines similar to the last replenishment. The latter amounted to $900 million of which $750 million was to be contributed by the U.S. in three equal installments in 1964–1966. The expanded FSO will also assume the functions carried on by the U.S.-funded Social Progress Trust Fund, which is nearly all committed.

Several new regional development banks came into being during the past year. The Asian Development Bank is expected formally to commence operations on December 19, with a subscribed capital of $1 billion, half of which is payable and half callable. The U.S. share is 20 percent of each. The African Development Bank technically began operations on July 1, 1966.

In addition to direct contributions to multilateral agencies, a number of donor countries have channeled an increasing amount of development assistance finance through or in cooperation with multilateral agencies. The Social Progress Trust Fund was established with $525 million of U.S. funds for administration by the IDB within the framework of the Alliance for Progress. Canada, the Netherlands, Germany and Spain have entered into arrangements to channel some aid funds to Latin America in association with the IDB. The Asian and African Development Banks are also considering the use of special funds for administration separate from their regular capital resources.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Meetings—OECD Ministerial November 24–25, 1966. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Edward Zimmermann (AID/PC/FWA) and cleared by Saxe (AA/PC), William F. Courtney (E), Anthony C. Albrecht and Ruth H. Phillips (EUR/RPE), and Finkel (Treasury). The paper was one of several briefing papers prepared for the upcoming OECD Ministerial Meeting in Paris. Regarding this meeting, see Document 130.

2 The draft report and recommendations have not been further identified.

3 Statement of Under Secretary Ball at the 1966 Annual Meetings of the IMF and World Bank group. [Footnote in the source text.]

129. Briefing Paper Prepared by the Agency for International Development 129. Briefing Paper Prepared by the Agency for International Development1

Washington, November 16, 1966.

OECD/TP–18

THE DEBT PROBLEM

Talking Points

1. We feel that DAC should give priority attention to the problem of debt which will have an important bearing on over-all aid requirements, terms policies, and development.

2. We feel that the work done by the DAC, including the studies on the growth of external debt, consolidation, and the Survey of Debt Situations,2 has contributed importantly to members' understanding of the seriousness of the debt problem.

3. We feel DAC with the assistance of IMF should continue its work by examination of specific countries' debt situations so as to inform members more fully of the structure of debt as well as available creditor options.

4. We feel that the Working Party should look especially at the problem of supplier's credits, particularly in the light of the study now being completed by the IBRD.

5. We feel that the proposed new expanded reporting system, developed jointly by IBRD and DAC, will contribute greatly to knowledge of debt and enable DAC members to anticipate and to deal more effectively with debt problems in the future.

Background

A recent IBRD report estimates external medium and long-term public debt (over one year) of 96 developing countries to be approximately $37 billion at the end of 1965.3 This represents a dramatic increase from $33 billion in 1964, $29 billion in 1963, and $10 billion in 1955. The estimated service payments on this public debt for calendar year 1965 amount to $3.3 billion. These figures do not include transactions of the IMF, private non-guaranteed debt or certain other transactions. In the past several years, debt service of an increasing number of LDC's has reached such levels that they have been unable to maintain payments unless debt were refinanced or rescheduled.

The Development Assistance Committee in July 1964 decided to broaden the terms of reference of the then existing Working Party on Terms of Aid to include consideration of the debt problems of LDC's and the role of suppliers' credits and other short-term transfers.4 As a first step, the Working Party addressed itself to the preparation of studies on the growth of external debt and debt service liabilities of developing countries (DAC(65)17, 1st Rev),5 and to debt consolidation problems (DAC(65)24).6 Within the Working Party itself, a great deal of discussion was given over to the problem of advance identification of countries approaching debt crises and of possible creditor options in either preventing or dealing with these crises. To support the Working Party discussion, the Secretariat prepared a Survey of Debt Situations (DAC/FA(66)5) which includes as Part I a classification of LDC's according to the nature and urgency of their debt servicing problems and, as Part II, statistical data sheets on 66 LDC's. The Survey incorporates data available from a variety of sources including multilateral lenders and is, in effect, an effort to bring together the best available indicators of the seriousness of debt in each country.

The efforts of the Working Party thus far have resulted in several positive achievements. First, they have led to the study, preparation and dissemination of useful information on the problem of debt in general and in specific LDC's. A second accomplishment has been the identification of requirements for additional information on debt which led to the formulation of a joint DAC/IRBD proposal for an expanded debt reporting system. The proposed system, which has been approved by DAC and submitted to the OECD Council on October 20, 1966, calls for detailed reporting on each new public transaction of over one year maturity and each private guaranteed transaction of over five years, to begin effective January 1, 1967. In addition, it calls for semi-annual reporting on the status of all transactions. The kind of information which will be elicited once this system is put into effect will lead to a clearer and more realistic understanding of debt in relation to aid requirements, term policies, consolidation and rescheduling.

There is agreement that the debt must continue to be given priority consideration. Recently, the Secretariat explored with the IMF and IBRD the possibilities of closer cooperation in developing the necessary statistical data to improve the survey and support further work on debt. The results of these consultations are to be reported to the next meeting of the Working Party in late November. While the IMF and IBRD are prepared to be of increased assistance, the Secretariat will most likely have to continue to study and provide information on debt to support discussions in DAC.

We have expressed to USOECD our view that the most profitable area of work in the future would be in the area of specific country reviews. We have stated that the purpose of such reviews would be to inform members more fully of development, structure and problems of debt as well as available creditor options. We have emphasized that the purpose of further work would not be to negotiate settlements. We feel that detailed debt study would assist the DAC members in refining terms of aid targets and criteria for lending. We have suggested a number of countries for possible consideration in DAC and have encouraged other members to come forward with suggestions of their own.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Meetings—OECD Ministerial November 24–25, 1966. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Kramish (AID/PC/FWA) and cleared by Saxe (AA/PC), Albert W. Whiting (E) in draft, and Albrecht and Phillips (EUR/RPE). The paper was one of several briefing papers prepared for the upcoming OECD Ministerial Meeting in Paris. Regarding this meeting, see Document 130.

2 Identified below as DAC/FA(66)5; not found.

3 This report has not been found.

4 See Documents 90 and 92.

5 See footnote 11, Document 110.

6 "Economic and Institutional Problems of Debt Consolidation,” July 9, 1965. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, DAC—Ministerial Meeting—Paris, July, 1965)

130. Editorial Note 130. Editorial Note

The meeting of the Ministerial Council of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development was held in Paris November 24–25, 1966. For text of two briefing papers prepared for the meeting, see Documents 128 and 129. Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Eugene V. Rostow headed the U.S. Delegation. For texts of Rostow's statements on economic policy and East-West relations on November 24, and development assistance and trade on November 25, see Department of State Bulletin, January 2, 1967, pages 19–27. Text of the communique is ibid., pages 27–28.

For an account of the discussion on development aid problems on November 25, see Document 131. Telegrams summarizing discussions on trade with the less-developed nations, economic policy, and East-West relations on November 24 and 25 are in Department of State, Central Files, OECD 3.

A summary and appraisal of this OECD meeting is in Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 768, December 6, 1966, pages 6–11. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments) The evaluation of discussions on development and the world food problem is also in Issue No. 768, pages 9–10.

Additional documentation on the meeting, which includes many other background and briefing papers, is ibid., RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Meetings—OECD Ministerial November 24–25, 1966; and Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 67 D 586, CF 101A.

131. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 131. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, November 25, 1966, 2130Z.

8005. CEDTO. Subject: OECD Ministerial Meeting, November 24–25—Development aid problems. Friday morning's session2 of Ministerial devoted to development aid with primary emphasis on world food problem. Abiding DAC preoccupations, volume and terms, also frequently mentioned, but mainly in passing. Clear indication that more converts being won to doctrine that self-help performance essential to development process and several testimonials to desirability of international organizations as aid channels. French made customary plea for market organization as most effective contribution to development process. U.S. proposed OECD study fund to stimulate agricultural development by guaranteeing investment and subsidizing interest rate in agriculture-related projects in LDCs. General reaction to proposal implied need further study but not unsympathetic.

Following is summary of principal points made by speakers during course of discussion: 1. SecGen (Kristensen). A. Pointing out there has been no real increase in assistance since 1961. Kristensen suggested that explanation lies both in LDC's and OECD member countries. LDC record far from perfect both in planning and execution and had provided justification for critics of aid. Aid programs of number of member countries are new, and not yet established element of economic policy. Some donors tended to consider aid simply as means for promoting exports. Moreover, in period of general full employment pressure on resources, and budgetary stringency lack of priority accorded and frequently resulted in severe cuts.

B. Turning to problem of food he pointed to fundamental change which had occurred in past generation. Regions which had been net exporters of food before war are now net importers and need for imports likely to increase. Seriousness of problem concealed in past by existence of substantial surplus stocks in some developed countries, but these stocks now drawn down and growing requirements of LDCs will have to be supplied out of current production.

C. Increasing food demand should improve position of agriculture in developed countries, and permit progressive reduction of agricultural subsidies these countries. But increasing needs of LDCs can be met only partially on commercial basis; part must be met by aid. This raises problem, since only relatively small number of countries have exportable surplus of food production, and should be considered in general context equitable sharing of aid burden.

D. Kristensen referred to Faure3 suggestion at Agricultural Ministerial4 that possibilities of expanding agricultural production in developed countries with view to increasing exports to LDCs should be considered. He said this matter now under study.

E. Kristensen stated also that population is integral part of total problem, that useful development center study of problem had just been published and that matter would require further consideration.

F. Summarizing OECD role in development process he emphasized following points: i) Organization should keep aid policies of member countries under review;

ii) Organization should give particular attention to need for increased contributions of technical assistance, which in many cases was more important than capital assistance, and which was especially needed in field of agriculture. In agriculture, research particularly important and there are great needs for adaptive research which can be carried on only within LDCs;

iii) OECD could do much to help make science the driving force in LDCs it had become in member countries;

iv) Increased attention should be given to contribution private investment can make to development. Foreign investment also can contribute technical assistance and DAC and BIAC are cooperating in assessing nature and scope of TA provided by private firms.

2. U.S. (Rostow). A. Under Secretary stated that evolution of OECD agenda reflects changing pattern world policies and economics. Initial preoccupation of organization with Europe but concern has widened as time passed. Development assistance a key current issue, and U.S. sees several areas for urgent DAC attention this field: a) world food problem; b) self-help performance standards, and c) growing burden of indebtedness of developing countries. Re world food problem Under Secretary suggested that OECD members collectively mark twentieth anniversary Marshall Plan and provide tangible evidence desire help developing countries by establishing fund to simulate agricultural development in LDCs. Object would be to encourage investment in agriculture and related industries in LDCs. Means would be to guarantee approved investments in agricultural and agriculture-related projects. Results would be to stimulate with limited public resources a maximum flow of private capital to critical agricultural sector LDCs.

B. Under Secretary also suggested time had come for further DAC work on self-help performance questions.

C. On debt problem, asked for further study looking to means of forestalling impending debt crises, and for further increase in volume of aid and improvement of terms to increase net transfers to LDCs. He called for support of IDA replenishment. (Full text Rostow statement cabled separately.)5

3. U.S. (Schnittker). A. Under Secretary Schnittker outlined gravity of world food problem and focussed specifically on immediate Indian situation where acute crisis looms again. He called on OECD countries to begin at once to mobilize resources, food, cash, equipment, and medicines, which would be needed. He stated that India's emergency reminds us that longer-term world food problem calls for action now.

B. Action Required: i) Food aid to meet famine crises and to provide time for developing countries to improve their agricultural performance; ii) a substantial increase in agricultural productivity in LDCs. More important way to accomplish this is through agricultural inputs, principally fertilizer. OECD members can help by providing inputs and technical assistance needed to make their use effective. Wherever economically justifiable, facilities to produce these inputs should be constructed in LDCs.

C. Under Secretary pointed out that progress in increasing agricultural productivity required cooperative effort between aid donors and recipients; that donors and recipients must understand each other. DAC work would benefit from exchanges with LDCs at profressional level. He suggested that purpose might be served in this area, and on a range of problems of concern to DAC by closer working relations between DAC and development center, with development center serving as channel of communication with developing world. (Full text Schnittker statement cabled separately.)6

4. Italy (Zagari). A. While conceding importance of food problem, Zagari emphasized necessity of viewing development in global perspective. He advocated global strategy for development and suggested OECD members agree to stress: i) increased channelling of aid through international organizations; ii) increased effort to utilize science to accelerate economic development; iii) increased attention to principles of burden-sharing among donor countries, with appropriate consideration of economic capacity and principle of progressivity.

5. France (Debre). A. French Minister stressed moral and human-itarian aspects aid and need for sincerity both with ourselves and LDCs. Made three points: 1) Time has come to recognize can only help others if prepared make sacrifices and give up something ourselves. LDCs also obliged to make sacrifices, must give up old habits and traditions if are to achieve necessary increases in savings, agricultural production, 2) Inaccurate to talk of “developing countries” in generic sense; actually three categories: a) those where immediate problem is one of sheer existence; b) those where food problem not basic, and question one of overall development (i.e., mainly Africa); and c) those which are not too far behind OECD countries where problem is one of accelerating process already underway (i.e., those of European continent and LA). For each, problems very different, requiring different approaches and types assistance. (Presentation these neat categories somewhat unbalanced by extended invocation of favored French remedy—organization of markets. This followed familiar line, with perhaps somewhat more than customary emphasis on its “realism” and uniqueness as effective treatment of problems of category B countries.) 3) AID, however, is intellectual problem with thread of common need in fields education and training, particularly vocational training; also medicine and health. Agreed with SecGen and U.S. problem of aid likely be more important and increasingly complex in future; saw this as underscoring repeated French appeals for realistic assessment requirements and steps to meet long-range needs. Concluding, Debre expressed view Organization should take certain initiatives now in three areas: increase agricultural production, organize commodity markets, and increase industrialization countries category C. French Government prepared give fullest support efforts along these lines.

6. Canada (Winters). A. Canadian Minister coupled recognition of need for increased effort and more aid with requirement for softer terms, better planning and coordination, and improved performance part of LDCs ensure most effective uses of resources. Suggested desirability establishing criteria to measure extent to which aid has contributed to economic development as one means better convincing public of utility of aid.

B. On agriculture, felt long-term solution required immediate intensified efforts increase food production in LDCs, combined with appropriate policies maintain balance between population growth and food supplies. Saw role of DAC as encouraging adequate responses both donors and recipients; role for both multilateral and bilateral programs, and expressed hope Bank, FAO and UNDP would make their experience this field available to both developing and donor nations. Canada prepared to increase own contributions in food and agriculture field even in face this entailing some diversion Canadian resources which might otherwise be utilized in expanding other forms aid. He spoke of importance of wheat sales to Canadian economy and balance of payments, pointing out that to give wheat as aid was only possible if Canada foregoes sale. He thought that food aid should not be sole responsibility of those few countries which were food exporters.

C. Canadian Del. referred also to mounting debt burden as acute problem of increasing gravity and having immediate relevance to broaden issue of promoting economic development. Noted problem of diversities in aid terms among donors, and urged continuance DAC efforts arrive at some basic criteria for harmonization of terms.

D. Finally, Winters commented economic aid alone will not close gap between available resources and requirements; expansion export trade developing countries equally essential. In this context, noted one of key problems trade field is chronic short-term fluctuations in prices tropical commodities such as sugar, cocoa and coffee. Canada, a large importer tropical products, cooperating in efforts to stabilize prices; saw successful completion KR as important step this regard.

7. Switzerland (Schaffner)—Swiss Del. focused on need for OECD work out priorities development plan. Suggested as priorities 1) development agricultural production; 2) development industries based on agriculture; and 3) regional cooperation and integration. In support this thesis, commented any examination conscience would prove results our efforts thus far both aid and trade fields modest indeed; noted, for example, problem of preferences discussed in OECD and other forums for many years, with little more than psychological benefits. After KR we will have to see what more can be done for LDCs. LDCs wrong to develop manufacturing industries for sales on markets industrialized countries; should consider possibilities of regional cooperation and integration among themselves, with view to practicing on each other before trying to compete on harder markets. Expressed fear industrialization in LDCs present time too closely linked to prestige; should concentrate on production food and food supplies. In concluding remark, Swiss Del. announced Switzerland would become member Greek consortium.

8. United Kingdom (Abie)—In unilluminating statement, British Del. recorded U.K. full acceptance OECD objectives on aid, welcomed DAC res. last July to concentrate on AARs and preparations UNCTAD II, noted aid established part British foreign policy for long time, agreed one most important aspect food problem is assist LDCs increase own agricultural production. He expressed interest in U.S. proposal for fund, noting particularly prospects thereby subsidizing interest rates. Noted also U.K. support IDA replenishment on high level. Agreed with Debre donor nations have moral obligation to narrow the gap, and some sacrifices necessary. Agreed also with French Del's categories of countries, but warned against being too rigid; felt we had suffered in the past from too many illusions about rate of development and forms of aid which could be most effective.

9. Germany (Lahr)—German Del. agreed with SecGen there yet much to do, but did not feel results efforts so far disappointing. Noted $10 billion flow last year and qualitative improvements; primary need is for LDCs make more effort help themselves. Opposed any formal link between aid flows and requirements, and any tendency focus exclusively on public aid. Important to increase private flows, and in this connection stressed need for OECD move ahead on multilateral convention for protection private property striving have it adopted by as large number countries as possible. On agriculture, Germany in complete accord with initiatives being undertaken OECD; 40 percent German aid now devoted agricultural development and food; intention is to increase aid this sector.

10. Australia (Walker)—Australian Del., noting concern re effects population growth on food and agriculture problem, stressed implications demographic trends for capital requirements in future. Noted impact population growth on capital investment needs in turn will have marked impact on political structure of world, problem very acutely felt in SEAsia. Commented GOA very concerned over political orientation neighboring Indonesia, and not certain whether arrangements for rescheduling Indonesian debt will meet political exigencies facing country. On debt problem generally, GOA of view aid should be more in form of grants; noted in light encouraging trends incomes and production OECD countries would seem they could afford be more liberal this direction. Felt sustained effort relate terms to needs LDCs required. On food problem, noted all countries not similarly affected. Australia being food exporter very much aware relatedness trade and aid; in KR had stressed need for considering together since in GOA view problem cannot be solved unless reasonable prices available to agricultural producers assured. In final comment, said IDA replenishment early on government agenda after elections.

11. The Netherlands (Bot)—Dutch Del. repeated recommendation made at HLM that consortia and CGS should pay particular attention to agricultural development. Re U.S. proposal for agricultural development fund, showed some doubt re desirability of another fund; objective should be to assure limited resources are used in most effective manner possible. Agreed with U.S. on continuation work of special group on preferences with prospect developing proposals for Ministerial consideration next July. Finally, in keeping with SecGen's statement that development aid should be integral part of foreign policy all member nations, called for Council review all activities of organization from standpoint their merits for development assistance.

12. Japan—Noted Japan has for some time stressed importance food production, and has been helping LDCs SEA through technical assistance, training and extension activities. GOJ would continue make food aid available those LDCs in need, while at same time helping them improve production. Commented all participating countries at conference Asian countries in Tokyo last April had agreed on importance role agriculture in economic development and urgent need improving production; as followup agricultural experts to meet in Tokyo December 6–7 consider ways improving rice production. Efforts underway also promote regional cooperation in agricultural production.

13. Austria—stressed importance providing aid on terms and conditions most conducive to effective use resources in LDCs; noted vast needs developing countries frequently lead them accept conditions too onerous to handle, and suggested OECD could do more in direction amelioration terms. Stressed also importance private sector flows, and suggested OECD move more deeply into this aspect aid. Noting Agriculture Ministers' decision set up study group consider optimum development agricultural production member OECD countries, suggested should be pilot projects and series similar undertakings designed assist LDCs.

14. Ireland (O'Colla)—expressed agreement OECD undertaking to study and act with FAO on food and agriculture problem; agreed also on need for LDCs improve own agricultural production. Made point that Ireland's own experience with pilot project in Tanzania proved it not easy to transfer agricultural techniques developed countries to LDCs. Saw important role for OECD, possibly through development center research, examine what further could be done to adapt modern agricultural techniques to particular problems and situations LDCs.

15. Norway—After noting Norway prepared cooperate other donor nations in giving assistance particular aspects agricultural production, e.g., fertilizer production and for development agriculture and fisheries, seized opportunity to raise once more “tied aid” perennial; pointed out some countries who practice tied aid policy would any event receive largest portion export orders if aid were untied. Finally, identified GON with Swiss suggestion OECD undertake study various parts of organization to determine extent to which they really focused on most essential aspects development assistance.

Trezise

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, OECD 3. Limited Official Use. Repeated to the NATO capitals, (Brussels for USEC and Geneva for GATT), Belgrade, Bern, Dublin, the Mission in Geneva, Madrid, Stockholm, Tokyo, Vienna, and Helsinki.

2 November 25.

3 Edgar Faure, French Minister of Agriculture.

4 Reference is to a meeting of the OECD Ministers of Agriculture in October.

5 Text in telegram 7999 from Paris, November 25. (Department of State, Central Files, OECD 3)

6 Not found.

132. Note by the Secretariat of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 132. Note by the Secretariat of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development1

Paris, December 6, 1966.

C(66)133

WORK PROGRAMME OF THE DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE COMMITTEE FOR 1966–67

The attached text was approved by the Development Assistance Committee at its meeting of 20th September, 1966.2

With regard to paragraph 6, the Committee met on 29th-30th November to consider Secretariat proposals for a work programme on Food and Agriculture, as set out in DAC(66)31.3 The Committee concluded that: (a) with regard to the question of food aid, it should not, at this stage, undertake a substantive programme of work but should be kept informed of the results of studies proceeding in other bodies;

(b) that it should concentrate initially on making a carefully prepared review of the policies and programmes of aid donors in providing capital and technical assistance for agricultural development in developing countries. The object of this review would be to ascertain the ways in which aid for agricultural development could most usefully be extended and rendered more effective in the future. It would focus on issues common to a number of donors in this sector, where an exchange of experience might be productive of results;

(c) that, having conducted such a review, the Committee would then decide whether it wished to proceed to an examination of agricultural policies and aid needs in selected developing countries; and, if so, how such an examination might be organised.

In addition to the above, the Committee will be holding in December some preliminary discussions on three specific matters—namely, the F.A.O. proposal for a Food Production Resources Programme, the situation of the World Food Programme, and the Development Centre study on “Population Control and Economic Development".4

Attachment

WORK PROGRAMME OF THE DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE COMMITTEE FOR 1966/67

A. Procedural Priorities

1. The major forum for a comprehensive review of aid policies within D.A.C. is the Annual Aid Review. The first priority must be to continue the Review and, where possible, improve it. When the remaining 1965 country aid examinations have been completed this autumn, there should be a thorough reconsideration in D.A.C. of the desirability of further changes to increase its impact on policies. While the statistical record must always be on an annual basis, it might be possible to examine selected aid policies in greater depth at less frequent intervals. Further consideration should be given to the problem of publicity of the results. It is also proposed to examine how the Review, and other D.A.C. work, can be organised so as to take more fully into account the special problems of countries with small and medium-sized aid programmes.

2. The D.A.C. has certain major responsibilities with respect to UNCTAD . Preparations for the second UNCTAD Conference, provisionally scheduled for Summer 1967, give a special urgency to substantive examination of a number of subjects. These include consideration of the results of the I.B.R.D. studies on Supplementary Financial Measures and on Export Credits,5 of the expert group study on the “Horowitz Proposal",6 and of the discussions in UNCTAD of the Adequacy of Rates of Growth.7 Beyond this, D.A.C. Members are concerned to seize upon the constructive possibilities of the UNCTAD discussions. It may be possible through them to move toward a common sense of purpose and shared understanding of economic and technical problems between the economically advanced nations and the less-developed countries.

3. These procedural priorities to some extent determine the degree of attention to be given to the various subjects to be covered in the work programme in 1966–67. A number of the subjects listed below will be brought forward in the Annual Aid Review or in the preparation for items on the agenda of various UNCTAD bodies. Other criteria which have entered into the determination of priorities are the intrinsic importance of the subject with respect to accelerating economic development, the relation of the subject to necessary decisions by governments, and the likelihood that progress can be made in furthering the areas of agreement among D.A.C. Members.

B. Subject Priorities

4. Volume of Aid. It is agreed that the volume of aid falls short of what is desirable. This is partly the result of limited efforts by D.A.C. Members. It also reflects the difficulty which developing countries have in making effective use of aid provided under various conditions and in various forms. The Committee proposes to continue this work along the following lines, largely through its Working Party on Assistance Requirements: (a) further examination of problems of defining and measuring relative assistance efforts, with a view to securing a greater measure of agreement on principles for burden sharing;

(b) examining what can be done to remove factors which limit the capacity of developing countries to utilise external assistance effectively, either through appropriate policy measures by those countries themselves, or through adjustments in aid policies and practices (e.g. more extensive non-project aid, meeting of certain local costs of aid projects, closer linking of capital and technical assistance, project preparation);

(c) study of the amounts, causes, and impact of private capital flows to the less-developed countries. In the first stage of this work, attention will be devoted to the improvement of statistical information on such flows, for which a Group of Experts on Private Capital Statistics has been created. In addition, a pilot study on the transfer of skills through the operations of foreign business enterprises in developing countries is in process with the co-operation of B.I.A.C. At a subsequent stage, when a better statistical basis has been laid, studies could be made of the various consequences which appear to result from external private investment in developing countries;

(d) consideration of requirements in the technical assistance field and of how the supply of such assistance can be improved. A report prepared by an Expert Group, covering main sectors to which technical assistance flows (agriculture, education, public administration and industry) will be submitted in early autumn; the policy implications of the report should be examined.

5. Debt Problems and Terms of Assistance. It is recognized that the growing debt servicing problems of many developing countries create a series of priority problems. D.A.C. adopted in July 1965 a recommendation of Financial Terms and Conditions which, for the first time, set numerical targets for aid terms.8 The Annual Aid Review provides a means of keeping individual Member's progress in the achievement of these targets under examination and the Working Party on Financial Aspects of Development Assistance will continue to make regular comparative analyses. The Working Party has been instructed by the D.A.C. to concentrate its work during the next year on the following issues: (a) further exploration of problems related to harmonising the terms of aid extended to particular less-developed countries;

(b) the advance identification of potential debt servicing difficulties. While action has been taken to improve the data on existing debt situations, the problem remains of how to evaluate the data and of agreeing upon ways and means of carrying out preventive action to forestall those difficulties;

(c) consideration of the forthcoming I.B.R.D. report to UNCTAD on export credits in relation to debt servicing problems of developing countries—in particular, the respective responsibilities of developed and developing countries for avoiding excessive recourse to such credits.

6. Food and Agriculture. This is a new priority subject for D.A.C. and provides the first occasion for full consideration in the Committee of the problems of a particular sector of aid. The Committee has not yet set out in detailed form its work programme in this field. The Recommendation adopted at the High-Level Meeting described the problem and recommended that the D.A.C. should: (a) keep itself informed on the food situation in the less-developed countries;

(b) review from time to time the activities of its Members in providing capital and technical assistance with a view to increasing its effectiveness; and

(c) consider general issues of policy relating to interim food aid or long-term agricultural development wherever it appears that a more co-ordinated approach among its Members would contribute to meeting the problem of food supply in the less-developed countries.

At its meeting on 20th September the D.A.C. agreed that the Secretariat should canvass the Members and present suggestions on topics for consideration and appropriate organizational arrangements.

7. At the High-Level Meeting, several speakers emphasized the need for a closer working relationship between the Committee and other bodies of the Organization. During the past year, there were a number of points where intra-secretariat co-operation took place, but the D.A.C. itself was directly involved with another O.E.C.D. body only on the subject of export credits. It is clear that during the next year there will be an involvement with the Committee for Agriculture and with the related activities in this field to be carried out by the Secretary-General. However, there are many other areas of possible mutual interest such as trade and commodity arrangements, balance of payments problems, capital markets, invisibles, industrialisation, manpower and education, technology, and the Greek and Turkish Consortia. Consideration should be given during the year to ways and means of developing effective inter-Committee co-operation wherever appropriate.

8. Other Subjects. Since new problems are continually arising and old ones shifting in importance, and since government decisions may be required in various international settings, particularly UNCTAD, it is important to maintain some flexibility in D.A.C.'s work programme, though this should not be at the expense of the priority items. Members have expressed interest in a number of other subjects not included on the above priority list. Depending upon the degree to which it may be possible easily to obtain background material and the extent to which experts from Member countries would be available for meetings, it may be feasible to consider some of them during the year without interfering with the priority work programme outlined above. These subjects include such broad areas as the relationship between aid and trade, and population policies; and various questions such as aid-tying and the encouragement of activity by voluntary agencies. In addition, as in the past, there may be problems of assistance policy with respect to particular less-developed countries where a number of Members may feel that an ad hoc meeting of those particularly concerned would be useful.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Program (DAC Work Program) 1966–67. Restricted.

2 A text (DAC(66)19(4th Revision)), September 27, identical to the attachment below, is ibid.

3 Not found.

4 Not further identified.

5 These two IBRD studies have not been found but are summarized in Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 744, January 4, 1966, pp. 11–12. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments)

6 Reference is to the proposal developed by David Horowitz, Governor of the Bank of Israel, for development financing. Under his plan international institutions would borrow money at commercial rates from private investors, with government guarantees of principal and interest, and lend the funds on “soft” terms. An interest equalization fund maintained by annual appropriations by the developed countries would be used to make up the difference between the market cost of borrowing and the charges on loans. (Ibid., p. 13) The expert group report on this proposal, prepared under the direction of the UNCTAD Secretariat, has not been found but is summarized ibid., pp. 11–12.

7 Not further identified.

8 See Document 123.

133. Current Economic Developments 133. Current Economic Developments1

Washington, January 17, 1967.

Issue No. 771

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

ECONOMIC ACTIONS OF THE 21ST UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY

The UN General Assembly, at its 21st session which concluded December 20th, approved a number of resolutions in the economic field. Among other things, it approved establishment of a UN Capital Development Fund,2 approved the charter for the UN Industrial Development Organization3 and chose Vienna for UNIDO headquarters,4 and postponed the date for convening the second UNCTAD Conference.5 A summary of key economic actions is given below.

UNIDO

The General Assembly gave its unanimous approval to a resolution containing a charter for the UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) established last year by the 20th General Assembly. The US played a leading role in the negotiation of this charter, achieving most of its objectives. The charter sets forth the functions, operating procedures and administrative arrangements of the Organization, which is intended to promote industrial development and accelerate the industrialization of the developing countries.

An autonomous body within the UN, its administrative and research expenses will be met from the UN regular budget while its operational activities will be financed by voluntary contributions and through participation in the UN Development Program and the UN regular program of technical assistance. We stated that we hoped that the UN Development Program will be the major source of UNIDO operational funds and that any US contributions to UNIDO for operational activities would be made through the UNDP. Abdel-Rahman, the UN Commissioner for Industrial Development, was named Executive Director of UNIDO, and US was elected to UNIDO's 45-member Industrial Development Board. Vienna was chosen as UNIDO's headquarters seat. Vienna was our third choice after UN headquarters at New York and Geneva, which were never in real contention in the voting for a site. We opposed Paris, the principal contender after Vienna.

UN Capital Development Fund

The US was unable to turn aside a determined drive by developing countries in the second committee which led to the establishment of a UN Capital Development Fund. The fund is empowered to make grants and loans to developing countries. Its operational resources are to come from voluntary contributions made at an annual pledging conference, but its administrative expenses are to be met from the regular budget of the UN.

We maintained our long-standing objection to the creation of a UN Capital Development Fund additional to the IBRD/IDA and the IDA regional development banks. We found particularly objectionable, as the largest contributor to the regular budget of the UN, the addition to that budget of an assessment for the administration of the fund. Since the Managing Director of the fund is expected to assume office on January 1, 1968, the UN Secretariat estimates initial staff and related administrative expenses will cost $335,000 in 1968.

The US and other major potential contributors have indicated they will not contribute to the resources of the fund so that the fund's Managing Director is expected to preside over an expensive empty shell should the Assembly's decision be put into effect. Even so, an attempt to have the provision for the payment of administrative expenses out of the UN regular budget considered an important budgetary question, necessitating a two-thirds majority for approval, was unsuccessful. The World Bank's system of weighted voting proportional to subscriptions will not be followed by the fund. Most Western developed countries and Japan joined the US in voting against creation of the fund. Bloc countries and a few developing countries abstained.

Permanent Sovereignty over Natural Resources

The US was able to tone down in the second committee a number of objectionable passages in a resolution on the permanent sovereignty of nations over natural resources that was sponsored by a number of developing and bloc countries. We were, however, unable to secure modification of a passage we considered particularly objectionable and abstained on the resolution as a whole.6 The passage in question recognized, the “right", particularly of the developing countries, to “secure and increase their share in the administration” of foreign-financed enterprises and “to a greater share in the advantages and profits” of these enterprises. It also contains wording which can be read to mean that developed countries should not take diplomatic measures in support of their nationals who invest abroad. We were unsuccessful in winning acceptance of four alternatives we proposed for this passage and, while we were prepared to accept a resolution which contained, from our point of view, a number of other drawbacks, we were unwilling to accept one containing a passage with such blatant anti-foreign bias.

Marine Science and Resources

On US initiative, the General Assembly at its 21st session adopted a resolution requesting the Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive survey of activities in marine science and resources, both mineral and living, with a view to formulating proposals (a) to further international arrangements for an expanded program of international cooperation, and (b) to strengthen marine education and training programs.7 The Secretary-General was asked to set up a small group of experts to assist him in this task.

At the request of the Department, the US Mission has proposed to the Secretary-General that eminently qualified experts be appointed by him to this group. The names of a number of experts were suggested. In addition, we have proposed that the Secretary-General appoint a highly-qualified American oceanographer, Dr. Warren Wooster, to serve as the principal professional on the Secretariat while the survey is under way the next two years (1967–68). Dr. Wooster is a former Director of the UNESCO Secretariat Staff on Oceanography and the current Secretary of the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research of ICSU. He is presently at the University of California Scripps Institute of Oceanography.

Marine science and resources activities are going forward at the present time in the United Nations itself as well as in a number of UN agencies and other organizations. The Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission is in UNESCO, the fisheries program in FAO, natural resources development in the United Nations, charting in the International Hydrographic Bureau. Other UN agencies concerned with various aspects of this subject are the WMO, IMCO, WHO, and IAEA. In addition, outside the UN system, there are eight multilateral intergovernmental bodies concerned with fisheries and marine science.

ECOSOC at its 40th session in March 1966 asked the Secretary-General to survey technological know-how relating to resource development other than in the field of fisheries.8 This survey may be combined with the broader survey requested by the General Assembly.9

The National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development established by the June 1966 Congressional Act10 is spearheading a US Government survey of this subject.

UNCTAD

In a unanimous resolution, the GA decided to convene the Second UNCTAD Conference February 1–March 25, 1968, in New Delhi. In emphasizing the need for UNCTAD II “to concentrate on a limited number of fundamental and specific subjects with a view to achieving practical and concrete results,” the GA called upon the Trade and Development Board and its subsidiary bodies to identify those issues for which specific action programs can be drawn up at UNCTAD II.

In other separate resolutions relating to UNCTAD, the GA called again on member governments to make maximum progress toward implementation of UNCTAD recommendations as well as on certain specific issues before UNCTAD II convenes.11 In a resolution on cocoa, the GA deplored the breakdown of the recent cocoa consultations and, in calling for early resumption of consultations, singled out consuming countries to exert maximum effort to arrive at an agreement on all outstanding matters.12 Because of the latter provision, the US abstained, although all other countries voted for the resolution. In endorsing the need for both developed and developing countries, which so desire, to be represented in preparations for any new international monetary reform arrangements, the GA requested the UNCTAD SYG to consult with the IMF Managing Director of the progress of reform and report to the fifth session of the Trade and Development Board.

Other Actions

In other resolutions, the General Assembly: —Decided to establish a United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) for the promotion to the progressive harmonization and unification of the law of international trade;13

—Asked that the Commission for Social Development prepare a draft Declaration on Social Development;14

—Called on the Economic and Social Council and other bodies of the United Nations family concerned to assist, when requested, in strengthening national and regional facilities for training, research, information and advisory services in the field of population;15

—Asked the Secretary-General to prepare “a preliminary framework of international development strategy for the 1970's,” following the Development Decade.16

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Limited Official Use. The source text comprises pp. 24–26 of the issue.

2 Resolution 2186 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 13 by a vote of 76–19 (including the United States), with 14 abstentions; text in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 81–86.

3 Resolution 2152 (XXI), adopted unanimously by the U.N. General Assembly on November 17; text ibid., pp. 75–80.

4 Resolution 2212 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 17; text in Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its Twenty-First Session, 20 September–20 December 1966, General Assembly, Official Records: Twentieth Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/6316) (New York: United Nations, 1967), p. 42.

5 Resolution 2206 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 17; text ibid., p. 39.

6 Resolution 2158 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on November 25 by a vote of 104 to 0, with 6 abstentions (including the United States); text in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 213–215.

7 Resolution 2172 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 6; text in Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its Twenty-First Session, p. 32.

8 Resolution 1113 (XL), approved March 7; text in Yearbook of the United Nations, 1966 (New York: United Nations, 1968), p. 325.

9 Resolution 2173 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 6; text in Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its Twenty-First Session, pp. 32–33.

10 P.L. 89–454, approved June 17. (80 Stat. 203)

11 Resolution 2209 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 17; text in Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its Twenty-First Session, p. 40.

12 Resolution 2210 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 17; text ibid., p. 41.

13 Resolution 2205 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 17; text in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 218–221.

14 Resolution 2215 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 19; text in Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its Twenty-First Session, pp. 60–61.

15 Resolution 2211 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 17; text in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1966, pp. 89–90.

16 Resolution 2218 (XXI), adopted by the U.N. General Assembly on December 19; text in Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly during its Twenty-First Session, pp. 42–43.

134. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson 134. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 28, 1967, 1:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Replenishment of the International Development Association (IDA)

Your advisers are now agreed, subject to your approval, on the initial approach we should take with George Woods concerning more money for IDA, the soft-loan window of the World Bank. (You will recall Joe Fowler's long memorandum on this (tab B),2 and your instruction to me to get the relevant people together and work out an agreed recommendation.)3

The agreement is as follows: 1. Fowler would write Woods a letter setting forth the U.S. position. (Proposed text at tab A.)4

2. The letter would propose: (i) An increase in total contributions to IDA from all donors from the present $250 million per year to $600 million in the first year of replenishment, $800 million in the second year, and $1 billion in the third. (A good part of the increase is required just to keep IDA operating at its present rate. Financed in part by carryover of old funds and from other sources, IDA is now lending at a rate of $450–$500 million per year.)

(ii) A cut in the U.S. percentage share from the present 42% to 40%—or $240 million in the first year, $320 million in the second, and $400 million in the third. These compare with current annual appropriations of $104 million. Because of the complicated way IDA is financed, new appropriations would not be needed until FY1969–70–71.

(iii) A complicated new arrangement to protect our balance of payments. This would (a) tie 40% of our contribution to U.S. procurement, and (b) give us the right to postpone use of the remainder for at least three years if we continue to be in balance of payments difficulties.

3. Fowler's letter would also mention—but not propose—an alternative, less formal balance of payments arrangement. Under this alternative scheme, we could not demand that the Bank postpone use of the untied 60% of our contribution. But the Bank would promise to use this money only when funds from countries with payments surpluses were exhausted. (This procedure would probably provide about as much protection as the more formal one, but Fowler thinks it would be much less useful on the Hill. It would be mentioned in the letter as something we may be prepared to consider if it turns out that some softening of our position is necessary to get the other donors to cooperate.)

All of us—Rusk, Fowler, Katzenbach, Gaud, Schultze, Walt and I —believe it is very important to get more money for IDA. All of us are also agreed that we should start with the above, high money targets, and back George Woods to the limit when he goes after the Europeans for their 60%. Joe's balance of payments proposal (or, the rest of us think, the alternative scheme) would give us ample protection, both in fact and in argument on the Hill.

Fowler's memorandum at tab B contains his judgment of prospects in the Congress (marked in the margin). It is clear that the sledding won't be easy, and that it will probably take your personal intervention to swing it. However, IDA is the key multilateral organization in the aid business. If we want to get the Europeans to face up to the development job, more money for IDA is the best way to do it.

FMB

Approve draft letter from Fowler to Woods (tab A)

Disapprove

Speak to me5

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central File, IT 14–1, International Development Association, Box 58. No classification marking. An attached note from Bator to President Johnson, January 31, reads: “Secretary Fowler is seeing George Woods tomorrow morning—between his bouts on the Hill—and is anxious to have a decision to communicate to Woods.” Two handwritten notes on this note read: “Fowler wants a meeting on this” and, “Juanita [Roberts]: This was used at 1:00 lunch today. W[alt]” On January 31 from 2:20 to 3:20 p.m., the President had lunch with General Taylor, Rostow, McNamara, Rusk, Komer, and Christian on Vietnam. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary) No formal record of this luncheon meeting has been found.

2 A 6-page memorandum to President Johnson, December 31, 1966, not printed.

3 In a January 2 note, attached to the source text, President Johnson noted: “Get Bator to read that—it is too much for me to read. Get somebody to boil this down.” Bator “canvassed other parties in town,” and he and Edward Hamilton prepared a 4-page memorandum to the President, January 7, on the same subject. This memorandum noted areas of agreement and disagreement between the President's advisers. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Box 20) Apparently this memorandum was still too long and complicated for the President who asked Bator to develop an agreed position, as set forth in the memorandum printed here.

4 Draft memorandum, dated January 17, not printed.

5 None of the options is checked.

135. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of State Rusk 135. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, February 3, 1967.

SUBJECT

IDA Replenishment—White House Meeting

1. The Department, AID, and the Bureau of the Budget have strongly endorsed Secretary Fowler's recommendation to the President that the United States support replenishment of the International Development Association (IDA) at the levels of $600, $800, and $1,000 million for the fiscal years 1969, 1970, and 1971 respectively, on two conditions: (a) that the U.S. share of the replenishment not exceed 40%; and (b) that certain balance of payments safeguards be instituted.2

2. The President is reported to have said: (a) that the recommended replenishment levels are too high. The Congress could not be expected to support a threefold increase in IDA resources from $750 million for FY 66–68, the amount agreed to in the first replenishment, to $2.4 billion for FY 69–71, the amount proposed for this second replenishment; and (b) that Mr. Woods should go to the Europeans first and see what they are proposing to put up.3

3. We believe there are compelling reasons for supporting the recommended threefold increase in IDA resources and that the Congress will find these persuasive: a. Better distribution of the aid burden among donors. The U.S. share of total official free world aid is currently 60%. The share of other donors is 40%. In IDA, the ratio is reserved. Other donors put in $60 for every $40 we contribute. Moreover, their contributions are on a grant basis, not high interest, short maturity exporter credits masquerading as aid.

b. A hard-headed institution: an Eisenhower initiative. The World Bank and its affiliates are seasoned, respected institutions which enjoy wide public support in the United States. IDA's performance standards are known to be exacting. The Eisenhower Administration took the initiative in 1960 in establishing IDA as a World Bank affiliate because of the widespread confidence the Bank enjoys.

c. The need for substantially increased IDA resources, (i) Official free world aid has been stagnant since 1961 (at about $6 billion a year) although LDC needs have been rising as population presses harder on resources and debt service payments eat into earnings. (ii) The war on hunger will hardly be more than a skirmish without added resources for fertilizer, pesticides, agricultural tools, rural education, farm credit, port and storage facilities, improved transportation. (iii) India and Pakistan alone will need a minimum of $450 million from IDA in the coming year if consortium targets (exclusive of food) are to be met. (AID planned its FY '68 program for the Asian subcontinent on the assumption that IDA would be replenished at $600 million in the first year.) (iv) Because of the pressing claims of India and Pakistan on IDA resources (75% of total IDA commitments to date) other countries have been short-changed. Indonesia will need substantial concessional assistance. The Korry Report looks to IDA for African aid. (v) Mr. Woods asked for $1 billion a year for 3 years. If IDA doesn't get substantially increased resources, more aid will have to come from bilateral sources, on the 60/40 ratio unfavorable to us rather than the 40/60 ratio of IDA.

d. An act of statesmanship. For the U.S. to respond generously to LDC needs while we are carrying a heavy burden in Viet Nam will be recognized as an act of statesmanship throughout the world. It is all the more important at this juncture to give concrete evidence of our positive purposes, our policy of attainment, while we are pursuing the necessary but negative policy of containment.

e. The sums are small; the threefold increase more apparent than real. IDA commitments have been rising; in the past year the rate was $500 million. The threefold rise in country contributions is necessary to maintain and modestly increase the rising IDA commitment level. Expenditures, which always lag behind commitments, are modest. The burden on the U.S. budget will rise very slowly, from about $120 million in FY '68 (based on the first replenishment) to perhaps $150 million in FY '69, $175 in FY '70, etc. if IDA is replenished at $600, $800 and $1,000 million for '69– '71. It is these expenditures that are reflected in the U.S. administrative budget, the national income budget, and the cash budget; not the authorization we will be asking this year or the appropriations we will require in '69– '71.

4. The President should recognize that Mr. Woods cannot go to other donors without being able to indicate to them what the U.S. is prepared to do. They will take our silence as evidence of retreat and will be governed accordingly. The U.S. has always had to take the leadership. Even so, other donors will try to bargain down; but it will be more difficult for them to do so if we strengthen Mr. Woods' hand by a generous response. The amounts we will actually seek from the Congress later this year will be our 40% share of the level all donors agree to support. That level may well be less than $2.4 billion for 3 years. It will certainly be less if we hang back now. In that case, we will have lost an opportunity to redistribute the aid burden more fairly.

5. Attached is a copy of the memorandum AID prepared for Mr. Gaud for the IDA White House meeting today.4 It gives key facts on India-Pakistan needs and IDA.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Papers of Anthony M. Solomon, Chron File—February 1967, Box 15. Confidential. Drafted by Ruth S. Gold (E) on February 3. A copy was sent to Gaud.

2 As set forth in Fowler's December 31 memorandum to President Johnson; see footnote 2, Document 134.

3  In a February 2 memorandum to President Johnson, in preparation for the White House meeting on IDA replenishment on February 3, Bator summarized these concerns:

"I understand your concern that our proposal calls for too much money and is likely to be badly beaten on the Hill. One point you will want to keep in mind, however, is that the main reason for starting with such a large figure is to give George Woods a chance to squeeze more money out of the Europeans. His chances of getting them to increase their contributions are far better if he can say he has a U.S. commitment—subject to Congressional approval—to go for a big increase. It is almost certain that the Europeans will not, in fact, come close to 60% of the proposed $600–800–1 billion target. To the extent that they fall short, our final proposal to the Congress will be cut accordingly.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Box 20)

4 Memorandum from Gustav Ranis (AA/PC) to Gaud, February 2, not printed. The off-the-record meeting on IDA replenishment was held in the Cabinet Room at the White House on February 3 from 5:30 to 6:25 p.m. A list of participants, which included Secretaries Rusk and Fowler, Katzenbach, Gaud, Schultze, Bator, and Eugene and Walt Rostow, is in the Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary. A handwritten note after Bator's name on this list reads, “will send resume of mtg Mon, 2/6/67,” but no formal record of this meeting has been found.

136. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 136. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 1

Washington, May 16, 1967, 3:59 p.m.

195187. Subject: IDA Replenishment.

1. IBRD VP Knapp chaired meeting Paris May 8–9 of IDA Part I donors all attending except Kuwait, South Africa. Assistant Secretary Treasury Knowlton led US delegation.

2. Documents at meeting included: a) Woods call July 14, 1966 for $3 billion IDA replenishment (RPL) over 3-year period;2 b) Fowler letter to Woods March 31, 1967 on US proposal $2.4 billion over three years, i.e. $600 million in FY 1969; $800 million in 1970 and $1 billion in FY 1971.3 US share maximum 40 percent. RPL including balance of payments safeguards proposed by the US, retaining as central feature international competitive bidding. US proposal calls for 40 percent conditional and 60 percent unconditional commitment. In expenditures made under commitments, one-half procurement in contributing country would be financed from conditional tranche. Conditional tranche not usable otherwise except at option of contributing country, i.e. when in surplus. IDA could draw from unconditional tranche as at present except for country in balance of payments difficulty where call would be for remaining 50 cents per dollar of procurement in country. Any country in balance of payments difficulty could ask postponement of unconditional tranche not used for donor country procurement which would be granted for 3 years. c) Woods' memo of April 12, 1967 transmitting Fowler letter to Executive Directors IDA, giving alternative method balance of payments protection and IDA analysis of impact of RPL on donors, donors' economic capacity and IDA commitments and uncommitted funds (only $12 million) as of March 31, 19674 (see para 4); d) IDA identified foreign procurement by country cumulative through CY 1966 and in years 1964, 1965 and 1966. All participants preferred no agreed minute but IDA staff preparing summary record of discussion without attribution and text of Knapp's opening remarks and comments on Fowler proposal and US rep (Knowlton) comments.

3. Knapp opening statement emphasized his neutral role in leading negotiations among donors, delicacy of IDA position as potential recipient of funds. Spoke of three-fold role—a) facilitate RPL by orderly discussion issues; b) give facts on IDA operations; c) explain expected impact of proposals on IDA operations. Neutral posture carried throughout meeting prevented endorsement of Fowler proposal as result of extended discussions between USG and IDA management. Stressed urgent need RPL enable IDA make any new commitments especially meet pressing needs India, Pakistan consortia in 1967–1968. Striking feature only made clear in later discussion was IDA management request for funds in FY 1969 (beginning Nov. 1968) as opposed to original Woods' proposal skip FY 1969 and have FY 1970 as first year of 3-year RPL.

4. Knapp comments on US proposal limited to effects on IDA operations. Clearly stated US plan would not require any change present IDA policies on allocation resources to borrowing countries or projects or on international competitive bidding. In analysis Knapp assumed IBRD able continue transfer $75 billion per year to IDA in FY 1967 through FY 1970, total $300 million. Concluded US proposal that 40 percent of $600, $800, $1,000 million RPL be “conditional” i.e., usable only to finance a portion of the procurement that results in the donor country from international bidding, would permit IDA commit “80 to 85 percent” of RPL funds. (Note—earlier Bank calculations showed 90 percent.) Pointed out no further limitation on IDA commitment capacity except that US provision unused contributions in donor's unconditional 60 percent tranche be postponed 3 years at option donor if in balance of payments difficulties would “create such a degree of uncertainty in administration IDA's finances that its capacity make firm commitments would in fact be very seriously curtailed.” Emphasized Woods counterproposal that all funds in RPL be available unconditionally with agreement IDA management “at request contributor in serious balance of payments difficulties would postpone, maximum extent permitted by disbursement, drawings on country's contribution, above IDA-financed procurement in that country, until after contributions other donors used.” Later discussion emphasized differences Woods' end-of-queue approach (drawing on countries not in balance of payments difficulties first) from US proposal 3-year postponement of unused unconditional tranche.

5. First day other donors critical IDA management call for quick action after taking 9 months negotiate with US and focused quickly on US proposal. Summary of positions: a) Amount RPL—Canada, and to an extent Sweden, Denmark, Norway supported US $2.4 billion. Netherlands, Australia commended US generosity but GOA said could not meet. Italy, Japan said too large, FRG and UK vague and France vague but negative. b) Tying all agreed undesirable. Dutch said US proposal “deception” for IDA tying. c) Balance of payments difficulties should not be excuse cut aid was criticism of FRG, Japan, Netherlands, Sweden, Denmark. Dutch and French cited para 60 OECD report on adjustment process this point.5 Canada sympathetic US but preferred end-of-queue relief and hoped conditionality could be confined to donors in balance of payments difficulty. In discussion on means and terms defining balance of payments difficulties French opposed IMF management role but inclined toward IMF Directors using position in IMF credit tranche as a test. Dutch also cited unpredictable “mischief” in allowing use of balance of payments difficulties as basis rescind international agreement. FRG stressed budgetary problem. d) Donors shares subject little discussion with no objections voiced US 40 percent. France said US postponement scheme merely way cut US share. e) Administration of IDA complimented by most except France critical overemphasis on south Asia, too rapid disbursement funds from first RPL and too much use IDA funds for recipient balance of payments support; Australia critical on Board's control of disbursement; Japan critical on choice recipients. French pressed idea change allocation of IDA funds as condition of replenishment. f) Question legal form of RPL raised by FRG preferring subscription to contribution scheme of first RPL.

6. US rep (Knowlton) opened second day with strong explanation US proposal as requested by other countries. Said US motive was maximum replenishment at least cost in change IDA policies. Pointed out all countries including US have budgetary problems; some currently have or future may have balance of payments problems. Said US developed plan with cooperation IDA staff and in such discussions US made clear could not seek IDA RPL without balance of payments safeguards. Emphasized this was difficult budgetary year for US with many other requests appropriations for multilateral organizations. Pointed out conditionality in proposed safeguards would appeal Congress and other countries' parliaments since enabled deficit countries make greater proportion of contribution in form real resources in form exports. Also discussed fact disbursements under second RPL would flow over extended period starting in 1968 in which US expected solve its current balance of payments problems. Even though US expected solve balance of payments problems safeguards required in order get Congressional support now; also expected safeguards would give beneficial relief other donors in future and recalled balance of payments considerations in 18 percent portion original IBRD subscriptions. Emphasized Knapp conclusion that US proposal would not force change IDA policies and gave US endorsement competitive bidding.

7. US statement well received. Meeting thereafter moved quickly to focus on real issues. Major donors reluctant go along with RPL level US proposal. French in devious mathematical exercise hinted at not going beyond level of first RPL and joined with FRG in pushing for commitments beginning FY 1969 (rather than as soon as replenishment agreed among Part I countries). French suggested Bank, not French, may want to propose alternative of one-year RPL but got no support. UK in between with effort to get US commit for reduced level unconditional RPL. Canada, Australia endorsed postponability of Woods' end-of-queue scheme.

8. Knapp outlined IDA management bilateral discussions with most donors in following three weeks and emphasized desire get agreement on second RPL by IMF/IBRD Rio meeting in September. Review of legislative timetables showed most countries could not get parliamentary approval before then, some not until early 1968. Nonetheless Knapp emphasized urgent need work for intergovernmental agreement ad referendum. No decision requested on future meeting of donors.

9. Bilateral discussions after meeting emphasized a) FRG constrained by budgetary problems, offered hope that more for IDA possible if legislation generally successful in providing more assistance funds. b) Italy could support US proposal although was noncommittal at meeting.

10. Paris Herald Tribune May 10 reported some details of supposedly closed meeting, emphasizing EEC reluctance increase IDA contributions, UK objection to US tying efforts.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(IDA). Limited Official Use. Drafted by John C. Coleman (E/OMA) on May 15, cleared by Knowlton (Treasury) and E. Rice and Livingston T. Merchant (IBRD), and approved by John F. L. Ghiardi (E/IMA). Sent to all NATO capitals except Athens, Ankara, and Reykjavik, and to Canberra, Helsinki, Kuwait, Pretoria, Stockholm, Tokyo, Vienna, New Delhi, and Rawalpindi.

2 Not further identified.

3 Not found.

4 Neither Woods' memorandum nor Fowler's letter has been found.

5 Not further identified.

137. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright) 137. Letter From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to the Chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee (Fulbright)1

Washington, May 29, 1967.

Dear Mr. Chairman:

Some months ago I told you of my conversations with George Woods about a possible transfer of some of our Development Loan funds to the IDA under Section 205 of the Foreign Assistance Act.2 He told me then, and I gathered from talking to you that he had also told you, that he wanted to postpone consideration of such a transfer until the IDA replenishment was out of the way.

It looks as if the negotiations with respect to IDA replenishment will continue for quite a while. Nonetheless, over the past several weeks I have again explored the possibility of a Section 205 transfer with the interested departments and agencies of the U.S. Government and the World Bank.

George Woods says he is willing to accept a Section 205 transfer if it takes the form of an untied loan. This poses a tough problem for us in view of the present state of the IDA replenishment negotiations. For the U.S. has taken the position in those negotiations that it will not contribute any further funds to IDA without some balance-of-payments safeguards. Neither the Bank nor the other IDA contributors have yet accepted this proposition. It is still under active negotiation.

We would directly undercut our position on this issue if we made an untied loan to IDA under Section 205. Furthermore, the amount of the IDA replenishment is still being discussed, and there is considerable feeling that an unmatched transfer of U.S. funds to IDA at this time would make it even harder for us to persuade some of the European countries to increase their contributions to IDA.

I am sorry the situation is not more favorable. I had hoped to initiate use of the transfer authority this year. But I do not think we should do anything to jeopardize a substantial IDA replenishment, which is of great importance to the United States and the less developed countries. It therefore looks to me as if we had better go along with George Woods' earlier suggestion of postponing further consideration of a Section 205 transfer until the IDA replenishment exercise is over.

Please let me know if you would like to discuss this matter further or if you have any other views. Meanwhile, knowing of Chairman Morgan's interest in the matter, I am sending him a copy of this letter.

Sincerely yours,

Bill

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. IV [2], Box 2. No classification marking.

2 These conversations have not been further identified. Regarding Section 205 of the Foreign Assistance Act, see footnotes 1 and 5, Document 120.

138. Research Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rusk 138. Research Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, July 26, 1967.

RSF–6

SUBJECT

International Flow of Economic Aid, 1966

The recently released draft report for 1966 of the Chairman of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC)2 permits an overall view of the volume of aid given to less developed countries (LDC's).

ABSTRACT

LDC receipts from economic aid donors fell off slightly in 1966. The flow of US private investment and credits was halved, and the consequent drop in the total private flow exceeded the rise in official grants and loans. The prospect for 1967 is for a rise in the total, especially because of greater official disbursements by the US and some pick-up in US private capital outflow.

The aid of Communist states to the LDC's rose slightly in 1966 but still represents only a fraction of the action contributed by DAC members taken as a whole (Western Europe, the US, Canada, Australia, and Japan). Only about a fifth of the aid receipts of the LDC's comes from Communist countries.

The gross official flow of aid extended by DAC members rose in 1966, except in the case of Belgium and France. For the past four years the official contributions of France have declined steadily. The US accounted for 56.9 percent of the gross official flow of DAC aid in 1966. Its average share for the previous three years was 59.4 percent.

The sharp decline in 1966 of private investments and credits granted by DAC members contrasted with the jump the year before, and was largely due to the high interest rates prevailing in 1966. But high interest rates did not preclude sizeable advances by private firms and banks in France, Italy, Japan, Canada, Norway and the Netherlands; however, the advances for most of these countries were primarily in the form of export credits rather than direct or portfolio investments.

[Here follows a List of Tables, which are identified in the footnotes below.]

I. Total Receipts

A. Total Slightly Lower in 1966

Table 1 provides the most comprehensive view of LDC receipts of all forms of economic aid, including official grants and loans, private credits and investment and the value of technical assistance.3 The table covers not only the aid of the 15 members of DAC, plus the Commission of the EEC, but also of the Communist countries. Only excluded are the capital and technical assistance contributed by the LDC's themselves, notably Kuwait, India and Israel, and also the increasing volume of donations by non-profit voluntary organizations.

The total of LDC receipts fell off slightly in 1966. It was the second occasion since 1960 that the annual total declined. The drop in contributions of DAC members contrasts with a slight rise in 1966 in Communist aid. The sharp fall-off in private investments and credits in 1966 was greater than the rate in official grants and loans.

B. Communist Aid Small

Communist countries have accounted for about a fifth of LDC aid receipts in recent years. This share has not risen. In fact, table 1 shows that Communist contributions have advanced much less since 1961 than that from DAC members taken as a whole. Though the Communist total rose in 1966, it did not exceed the level of 1961 and was much lower than in 1962 and 1963.

C. General Trend Slowly Upward

The general impression of table 1 is of a modest advance since 1961 in aid flows from all donors. Were the rise in price levels taken into account, however, the upward trend would be modest indeed. Hopes in the early sixties for a steady, vigorous rise have not proved realistic.

The volume of debt service by the LDC's taken as a whole has advanced much more rapidly than aid flows. More than a tenth of their export earnings now go for the payment of interest and principal, for example, and this burden will rise.

The prospect for 1967 is for a sharp rise in official contributions, thanks largely to greater US disbursements, and a moderate rise in the private flow. The total for 1967 will thus be distinctly higher than in 1966. It is too early to predict, however, if this rise will carry over into later years; the damage done by the Middle East crisis, for example, cannot yet be fully assessed.

II. DAC Members: Official Flow

A. Total Rising Slowly but France Down

Two-thirds of the financial resources provided by DAC members are supplied by official agencies. Table 1 shows these receipts net of loan repayments, while table 2 shows the gross flow as a more direct indicator of the action taken by DAC governments in behalf of LDC economies.4 The gross official flow has risen in each of the last two years and in 1966 was almost double that of 1956, but the period of vigorous advance came before 1962; since then the rise has been paltry and unsteady.

Table 3 provides the annual data on the official flow for individual DAC members.5 The total rose in 1966 for all countries shown except Belgium and France. For the past four years there has been a steady and sizeable decline in the gross official flow of France, accounted for in part by shrinking contributions to Algeria. This decline for the second largest donor among DAC members helps account for the failure of the DAC total to rise vigorously in the period covered by this table.

The US accounted for 56.9 percent of the gross official flow of all DAC members in 1966. Its average in the three previous years was 59.4 percent. There was then no basic change during the period covered in the relative importance of the official US contribution. The total of its official contributions, given in table 3, was generally stable since 1963.

B. Some Newcomers Up but Effect Small

Some newcomers to aid activities, notably Austria, Denmark, and Sweden, have come up quickly in the last four years, while Norway is distinctly laggard in comparison. Australia is coming along slowly but steadily. The totals of some traditional donors, especially Britain, Germany and Italy, have risen only slightly, while sharp jumps characterize the annual contributions of Canada and Japan.

III. DAC Members: Private Flow

A. Total Sharply Down

Table 4 provides yearly figures on private long-term investments and export credits.6 Year-to-year totals have recently fluctuated much more than those representing official contributions. The steady growth shown up in the trend of world trade is considerably less apparent in these private capital outflow figures.

That the private flow has not risen vigorously over the years covered is disappointing to governments of donors and recipients alike. The investment climate in many LDC's has not become more favorable and the Middle East fracas will certainly not help.

B. US Contribution Cut in Half

Private investments and loans from the US in particular have dropped sharply in 1966. Table 5 shows that the US private total was about a half of the high volume of the year earlier.7 It was the chief reason for the DAC decline in 1966.

Many causes enter the ups and downs of the US private flow. The exceptionally high interest rates of 1966 were certainly a leading factor. Others were vigorous repayments of bank loans made in volume in earlier years and reduced royalties accruing to some oil-producing countries.

C. Others Expanding at Uneven Rates

The private flow from France has risen without interruption since 1963, though the rate of expansion has slowed down in the last two years. There is also some let-up in the expansion of the private total of Germany (which was only about half that provided by France). The private flow of the UK also declined in 1966. High interest rates discouraged overseas landing in these countries as well as in the US.

The private total of Italy rose sharply in 1966, while the expansion of capital outflow from Japan has been more steady and in fact without interruption since 1963. Export credits rather than direct investment are important in the private flow of these two countries. Private entities in Canada, Norway and the Netherlands also contributed larger sums in 1966. Table 5 also shows that all other DAC members taken together are not large donors of private funds.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Limited Official Use.

2 Not found, but probably a reference to the DAC paper, “Situation in Development Aid” (DAC(67)19(1st Revision)), some of which Thorp summarized in his oral statement to the Development Assistance Committee on July 19. (Summary Record of the 94th Session, held at the Chateau de la Muette, Paris, on 19th and 20th July, 1967, DAC/M(67)12(preliminary version), pp. 7–12; Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Program (DAC Work Program) 1966–67)

3 "Net Flows to LDC's, 1960–1966,” not printed.

4 "Gross Official Flow of DAC Members to LDC's, 1956–1966,” not printed.

5 "Gross Official Flow to LDC's, 1963–1966,” not printed.

6 "Net Private Flow of DAC Members to LDC's, 1956–1966,” not printed.

7 "Net Private Flows of Selected DAC Members to LDC's, 1963, 1966,” not printed.

139. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 139. Memorandum From the Administrator of the Agency for International Development (Gaud) to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 26, 1967.

SUBJECT

Annual Meeting of the Development Assistance Committee

Last week the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD held its annual meeting in Paris.2 The purpose of the meeting was to review last year's aid activities and discuss plans for the future.

These are some of the highlights of the Chairman's report on aid activities for Calendar Year 1966:3

—The total net flow of resources, public and private, from DAC members to developing countries declined from $10.3 billion in 1965 to $9.9 billion in 1966;

—This decline was due to a drop of some $600 million in private investment (from $4.0 billion to $3.4 billion) which was partially offset by a rise of about $200 million in government aid (from $6.2 billion to $6.4 billion);

—The U.S. is primarily responsible for the decline in the 1966 overall figure. Our government aid was $3.6 billion in each year. But U.S. private investment in the developing countries dropped from $1.9 billion in 1965 to $1.0 billion in 1966;

—If we go back to 1963 instead of just to 1965, we find that the total amount of government aid from DAC members has increased by $300 million—due to a doubting of the aid programs of six small countries (Austria, Canada, Denmark, Japan, the Netherlands and Sweden). By contrast, the four big countries which accounted for 84% of the total government aid in 1966—the U.S., France, the U.K. and Germany—together gave $55 million less in 1966 than in 1963;

—While the U.S. ranks well ahead of all other aid donors in per capita national income, it ranks fifth in terms of the percentage of its national income devoted to government aid, and eighth in terms of the percentage of its national income devoted to both government aid and private investment in the developing countries. Our aid, public and private, as a percent of national income dropped from .99 percent in 1965 to .76 percent in 1966;

—The debt of developing countries rose faster in 1966 than in any previous year. This has serious implications also for the terms of new aid. At present, several countries are offering aid at more generous terms than we, including the U.K., Canada, Sweden, Denmark and Belgium.

(Note: Do not try to match the above figures with those we use here in the U.S. The DAC deals in calendar years, whereas we deal in fiscal years. It also has its own definition of aid, which for the U.S. includes the A.I.D. program, PL 480, the Peace Corps, Contributions to International Organizations and certain loans made by the ExIm Bank.)

The Committee agreed that its biggest task is to persuade its members to increase the volume and quality of their aid. Considerable attention was devoted to such other matters as how to cope with the increasing debt burdens of the developing countries, how to improve the volume of private investment in those countries and how best to tackle the world food and population problem.

The U.S. Delegation laid particular stress on the last item. We distributed to the other delegations copies of the report on the world food problem recently prepared by your Science Advisory Committee,4 and urged them to study it fully and carefully.

We also urged the Committee to undertake a study of how to inform public opinion more fully on the need for increasing the aid effort, and of how to overcome existing obstacles to securing greater support for aid budgets. This the Committee agreed to do.

We will keep pushing the other donors to increase their aid effort. However, as the above figures show, we no longer have the leverage which comes from being the front runner.

WSG

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Agency File, AID, Vol. IV [2], Box 2. Limited Official Use. An attached July 26 note from Walt Rostow to the President briefly summarized Gaud's report as follows: “the small countries are doing better; the bigger countries are doing relatively less; as a world community they all agree aid is inadequate.”

2 The sixth High-Level DAC meeting met July 19–20. AID Administrator Gaud led the U.S. Delegation, and Phillip H. Trezise served as Alternate Representative. (Memorandum from William G. Jones (IO/OIC) to Joseph J. Sisco (IO), June 27; Department of State, Central Files, AID 1)

3 See footnote 2, Document 138.

4 Panel on the World Food Supply, The World Food Problem: A Report (3 vols., Washington: Government Printing Office, 1967). Volume I is a summary of the world food problem and recommendations for policy and action, volume II is subpanel reports, and volume III publishes the resource papers. For text of a White House announcement accompanying the release of volume I, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1967, pp. 134–135. For a summary of volume III, see Department of State Bulletin, December 25, 1967, p. 874. A summary and analysis of the full report is in Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 786, August 15, 1967, pp. 10–13. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments)

140. Memorandum of Conversation 140. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, November 13, 1967.

SUBJECT

Mr. Stikker's report for UNCTAD on the role of private investment in the developing countries (LDCs)

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Dirk Stikker, former Secretary General of NATO, UNCTAD consultant

Mr. Joseph A. Greenwald, Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Trade Policy (E/ITP)

Mr. Felix S. Bloch, EUR/RPE

Mr. Chadwick Johnson, E/ITP/OT/GCP

Mr. Stikker said his report, advance copies of which he had circulated, has been well received.2 Dr. Prebisch and the UNCTAD Secretariat have also given the report their blessing, subject to some minor wording changes. (Mr. Stikker handed Mr. Greenwald an UNCTAD Secretariat memorandum of his conversation with Dr. Prebisch and Secretariat officials, noting that we should treat the memorandum as confidential.)3

Mr. Greenwald said he also thought the report was very good. He asked if Mr. Stikker had given any thought as to how the report's recommendations might be implemented. He noted our interest in directing attention at UNCTAD-II to the OECD draft Convention on the Protection of Foreign Property.

Mr. Stikker replied that his job was finished and that it was up to others to follow up on the report. In recent discussions at the UN with Prebisch, Lachmann (Chief, Fiscal and Financial Branch, Department of Economic and Social Affairs), Hoffman (Administrator of the UNDP), and De Seynes (Under Secretary for Economic and Social Affairs), it was agreed that the dialogue between the DCs and the LDCs on the role of private investment should be continued after UNCTAD-II. Mr. Stikker mentioned the UN Secretariat's recommendation (E/4293/Add.2) for the establishment of a panel of government and private persons to consider how to follow up on the ECOSOC “Summary and Conclusions” (E/4293) of a report (still in preparation) on the promotion of private foreign investment in the LDCs. He noted that the U.S. had “not given a very good reception” to a similar recommendation made at last summer's ECOSOC. He said that the UN Secretariat's recommendation for a panel was, in his view, deficient in two major respects. First, the panel members should be responsible to governments and parent organizations rather than participate—as the Secretariat suggests—in their personal capacity only. Second, it is not possible to “evolve a set of commonly acceptable terms” (page 3 of E/4293/Add.2) for the widely disparate situations in which private investment might be involved in LDCs. He said that Dr. Prebisch was wondering whether it would be possible to make both the ECOSOC report and his (Stikker) report the subjects of a resolution proposing the setting up of a panel to see which recommendations in the reports could be acted upon. Mr. Stikker said Hoffman, De Seynes, and Lachmann all favored such a resolution. Mr. Stikker hoped that the U.S. could use its influence to improve the resolution now before ECOSOC.

As for the OECD Property Convention, Stikker said there was no chance at all of getting UNCTAD-II to endorse it. He doubted whether the Convention should even be discussed at the Conference. Perhaps it would be better to leave it to the panel to consider how the Convention might be used.

Mr. Greenwald asked under which UNCTAD-II agenda item the report would be considered. Mr. Stikker said he did not know how the Secretariat planned to use the report. He noted, however, that the report dealt with many of the UNCTAD-II agenda subjects, e.g., flow of private capital, transfer of technology, preferences, regional integration.

In response to a question, Mr. Stikker said he did not know whether the UNCTAD Secretariat would circulate the report under a covering note. Stikker said he had prepared, at Prebisch's request, a 30-page summary, which he thought UNCTAD would be circulating soon. (Mr. Stikker handed Mr. Greenwald a copy.)4 Prebisch plans to have the report itself mimeographed for the Conference, and printed thereafter. De Seynes and Hoffman want the report printed now, fearing that a bulky mimeographed version would not be read.

Mr. Stikker said that the reaction of the business community to the report had been quite favorable to date. James Linen of Time-Life wanted to use parts of it at a meeting in Geneva of American and European business leaders (e.g., David Rockefeller, Eugene Black, Herman Abst) and high-level Indonesian officials (Stikker said he understood Suharto himself would be there, along with Malik and the Sultan). Mr. Stikker said he had OK'd the use of the report, noting that it as yet had no official status. He said George Moore, Chairman of the Board of the First National City Bank of N.Y., had also asked to use the report for some Mexican talks he was having.

Mr. Greenwald said we would be seeking the reactions of U.S. business groups, e.g., U.S. Chamber of Commerce, N.A.M., to the Stikker report. At a later stage, they might also be consulted on how the report should be handled at UNCTAD-II.

In response to Mr. Greenwald's question, Mr. Stikker said he had no desire to attend UNCTAD-II. However, if Prebisch asked him to introduce the report, he might be persuaded to come.

Mr. Stikker reported that Miller of the UNCTAD Secretariat ventured the opinion that the Stikker report might “save the Conference” from failure. Mr. Stikker and Mr. Greenwald agreed that Muller's view was rather unrealistic, and that the most that could be expected was that the report would keep the dialogue on private investment going in the permanent machinery of UNCTAD.

Mr. Greenwald thanked Mr. Stikker for keeping us posted on the status of the report, and said we would try to carry on from here.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Private Investment 1967. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Chadwick Johnson (E/ITP/OT/GCP) on November 13.

2 The full text of Dirk U. Stikker's 336-page typewritten report, The Role of Private Enterprise in Investment and Promotion of Exports in Developing Countries, has not been found, but the conclusions and 63 recommendations (pp. 268–285) are ibid. The full report was subsequently published with the same title, by the United Nations in 1968.

3 Not found.

4 Not found.

141. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 141. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, November 17, 1967.

CEDTO A-270

SUBJECT

DAC Meeting November 6–7, 1967; Private Enterprise

REF

(A) Paris 6428;2 (B) CEDTO A-265;3 (C) DAC/A(67)144

1. Ref. (C) agenda item 7 reported herein. Agenda items 3 through 5 reported REF. (A). Agenda item 6 reported ref. (B).

2. Agenda item 7. The discussion on private enterprise centered entirely on the previous U.S. proposal for a WP on private enterprise,5 rather than any consideration of the substantive issues set forth in the Secretariat documentation. In the most open, verbal confrontation in the DAC for some time, France, categorically opposing any procedural arrangement for further work on private enterprise, was pitted against the DAC Chairman and U.S. delegation, supported by Canada, favoring some type of procedural arrangement which would at least permit a systematic examination of the subject. The DAC Chairman and the U.S. reps employed timely interventions to achieve an agreement that an early DAC meeting be scheduled for the purpose of substantive discussion (which has not taken place to date) on private enterprise issues raised in the Secretariat documentation, with the exception that an ad hoc group would carry on the work based on terms of reference to be developed at the meeting. Further, the Chairman made it clear that “expectation,” as used above, means that the burden of proof that an ad hoc group would be a waste of time rests with those in opposition.

3. The Chairman opened the discussion with a review of DAC interests in private enterprise, the increasing importance of private sector financial flows, the former ad hoc working group,6 the U.S. proposal for a WP, etc., and suggested that a WP be created for a limited period (as previously proposed by the U.K.). After a long silence, France stated categorically that it was not in favor of a WP of whatever duration and could not agree. No substantive support for the position indicated by France was offered—only an allusion to no need for a WP and opposition in principle to any additional WPs. In a surprising change of position the FRG supported France, stating that many items in DAC(67)377 needed no discussion in DAC (the item on capital markets was particularly noted) and there was no need for a WP now. The U.S. delegation clearly restated the U.S. position on private enterprise and the need for procedural arrangement which would ensure continued examination and attention to the subject in the DAC. The U.S. position was supported by Canada and Norway. The FRG somewhat qualified its position by noting it did not oppose discussion of private enterprise in the DAC, or, perhaps, an ad hoc group, but did oppose a WP. France sought to reinforce its position with its well-known logic designed to obstruct progress, pointing out the lack of knowledge concerning the private sector role, and, thus, it is unrealistic to go on since we don't know where we are going (which, from the U.S. point of view, is one of the principal reasons why a WP would be useful). Belgium supported France and the FRG (see below).

4. The Chairman then noted the disagreement appeared to be not on discussing the issues, but rather on procedure. The position of France, the FRG and Belgium, appears to be that discussion of the subject in the DAC would be acceptable and, if very special situations come up, maybe in an ad hoc group. The Chairman continued that this is not a major issue and that the important thing is to move ahead. Therefore, it would be possible to have DAC meetings with the entire agenda devoted to private enterprise and, in a sense, this gives the subject special importance. We will simply have more DAC meetings (for this purpose). Belgium (in a curious intervention) appeared to reverse its above position supporting France and the FRG, by stating that if it opposed a WP it was because the problem was so important that it belongs in the DAC context rather than a DAC WP context. It was unclear whether this was truly a reversal of position or whether the Belgium delegation did not fully comprehend the trend of the discussion.

5. The Chairman's foregoing remarks led to further interventions by France, FRG and U.S., basically restating their positions, but also permitting discussion of an ad hoc group and what it might accomplish in, for example, one year. This discussion became somewhat extended and, while positions did not appear to have changed, the passage of time and the weight of the U.S. and the Chairman's exchanges with France and the FRG permitted the Chairman to suggest, and seek specific agreement from the U.S., France and the FRG, the compromise set forth in para. 2 above.

6. Comment. The FRG statement was surprising, since, at the last meeting on this subject, the German rep informed the U.S. delegation that they had been instructed to support a WP.

In the Mission's view, the arrangement in para. 2 above, is the best which could be obtained under the circumstances. The important point is the Chairman's interpretation of “expectation,” with which there was no dissension. In discussions after the meeting, it seemed clear to the Mission and the DAC Secretariat that the proposed DAC meeting (which could take place in late February or early March) must be very carefully prepared for, and deal with the substantive issues in depth, which the DAC has, heretofore, avoided. The current thinking is for a meeting of three to four days with participation of experts from governments and the private sector. As the next step, the Mission intends to discuss with the Secretariat and concerned delegations the approach to be taken to this meeting and preparation of the necessary documentation.

Trezise

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, OECD 8–4. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by J. W. Koehring on November 16; cleared by Edward C. Fei and I. A. Heyman (in draft), and P. R. Cook, Jr.; and contents approved by Fei. Repeated to Bonn and London.

2 Dated November 9. (Ibid., AID 1)

3 Dated November 16. (Ibid., OECD 8–4)

4 Not found.

5 Reference probably is to the undated “Note from the United States Delegation Concerning a Working Party on Private Enterprise,” which was circulated as DAC(67)27, June 29, for consideration at the DAC meeting July 4–5. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Private Investment 1967)

6 Regarding the ad hoc working group on private investment, see Documents 117 and 118.

7 "Further Work on Private Investment Flows to Developing Countries,” October 23. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Private Investment 1967)

142. Editorial Note 142. Editorial Note

The meeting of the Ministerial Council of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development was held in Paris November 30–December 1. Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Eugene V. Rostow headed the U.S. Delegation. For text of Rostow's statement on November 30, see Department of State Bulletin, December 25, 1967, pages 876–881. Text of the communique, December 1, is ibid., pages 881–883.

A summary and appraisal of this OECD meeting is in Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 794, December 5, 1967, pages 1–3. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments) The evaluation of discussions on development and the world food problem is also in Issue No. 794, page 3.

Documentation on the meeting, which includes several briefing and talking papers, is in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 68 D 453, CF 241; and Washington National Records Center, RG 286, DAC Material: FRC 70 A 5922, Meetings—OECD Ministerial November 30–December 1, 1967. A copy of the minutes of the 2-day meeting (C/M(67)21(Final), July 18, 1968), is ibid.

143. Current Economic Developments 143. Current Economic Developments1

Washington, February 27, 1968.

Issue No. 800

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

DEPUTIES AGREE ON IDA REPLENISHMENT

The Deputies of the Part I member countries have reached agreement on the two major issues that have been delaying the second IDA replenishment for the past year. The amount of the replenishment was set at $1,200 million over a three-year period. The US is essentially getting what it wants, including balance-of-payments safeguards. Formal approval of the plan is expected in March.

Background

IDA, the affiliate of the IBRD which operates the so-called soft loan window, has been able to make no new commitments because of the inability of the Part I countries to agree on the second IDA replenishment. (The Part I countries are the 18 members that have contributed the bulk of usable resources available to IDA.) Last month, IBRD President Woods announced that he had made a new proposal for the replenishment of IDA's resources which took into consideration the views of the contributing countries and on the basis of which he expected that an early agreement could be reached.2 He proposed that the amount of replenishment be set at $1,200 million, payable in three yearly installments of $400 million each. The first payment would be made in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1969. The funds provided would be for commitment during the period up to June 30, 1970.

President Woods' proposal envisaged the continuation of IDA's present policy of requiring full international competition for procurement of goods and services financed by IDA. In view of the present balance-of-payments difficulties of the US, provision was included that, for the three years ending June 30, 1971, IDA would call for payment only of that portion of the US contribution needed to finance procurement within the US.

Replenishment Plan

At a meeting in Washington February 19–21, the Deputies of the Part I donor countries agreed, despite France's intransigence, on: a) a $400 million annual replenishment level for three years, and b) a deferment for at least three years for 100 percent of the US contribution not used for procurement in the US. (See page 11, November 21, 1967 issue.)3

The French insisted on cutting their allotted share to match a planned cutback in the US percent. This action, plus other minor shortfalls, thus far yields total commitments for the three years of slightly under $1,200 million, although IBRD President Woods expects to achieve the target fully by mid-March when the replenishment is to be formally approved. France, Austria, and Australia refused to permit accelerated drawings on their pledges as have the other Part I countries to accommodate the US deferment. Australia's reason was balance of payments, Austria's budgetary, and France's political.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Limited Official Use. The source text comprises p. 3 of the issue.

2  Woods' proposal, announced on January 18, is summarized ibid., Issue No. 798, January 30, p. 19.

3 This article, “No Decision Yet on IDA Replenishment,” ibid., Issue No. 793, November 21, 1967, pp. 11–13, mainly summarized a meeting of the Deputies at The Hague November 6–7.

144. Memorandum of Conversation 144. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 15, 1968.

SUBJECT

Ambassador Martin's Review of the DAC Operations and Related Development Subjects

PARTICIPANTS

John M. Leddy, Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

Edwin Martin, Chairman of the DAC

George S. Springsteen, Deputy Assistant Secretary for European Affairs

Abraham Katz, Director, EUR:RPE

Ruth H. Phillips, Deputy Director, EUR:RPE

1. Recent Conversations in DAC Capitals

Ottawa. Martin 2 has recently seen Maurice Strong and Langley in the Canadian Foreign Office and is pleased with their high level of interest in expanding their aid program. In particular, the Canadians want to increase their role in the Caribbean where they have significant commercial interests and think they can make a difference. They are also interested in doing something in the Francophone area in Africa. It was agreed among the participants that these are good developments. Martin was told by the Canadians that they plan to increase their aid in the next year. There is no problem in obtaining approval of aid programs in the Parliament—in Canada public opinion in favor of aid is ahead of the government.

London. Martin saw Sir Andrew Cohen, Jeffrey Wilson and Denis Ricketts and was also pleased with what he learned from these sources. Despite austerity in the U.K., the British will be committing more funds for aid in 1968 than in 1967 and are also doing some intelligent things in the technical assistance field.

United States: Informal Meeting with Key DAC Countries. Martin spoke with top UN officials and with influential people in nongovernmental organizations and private industry, covering a wide range of subjects related to aid and development. As a result of these conversations, particularly with the Ford Foundation (Dave Bell), Martin said he had decided to organize the small, informal meeting of representatives from key DAC countries—the U.S., Canada, France, Germany and Japan—on May 4 and 5 in the U.S., probably at Airlie House, if this is acceptable to Bill Gaud. This is a change from his earlier idea to have the meeting in Europe, possibly under Ditchley auspices. Martin has invited, on a tenative basis, Andrew Cohen, Dave Bell, Paul Hoffman, Maurice Strong and others and will be talking to Bill Gaud later today. He is also attempting to get George Woods to attend, on an informal basis, possibly along with McNamara.

Martin is now thinking in terms of having the Society for International Development (SID) sponsor this meeting and said he would be in touch with Bob Asher before he left Washington to initiate this approach. The agenda Martin proposed for the meeting is: 1) an appraisal of the development situation following UNCTAD II; 2) how to make the Woods proposal for a “Grand Assize” most useful; 3) consideration of priorities in the DAC work program; 4) discussion of how to minimize the impact of the balance of payments problem on development and the geographic distribution of aid.

2. Proposed Parliamentarians' Meeting on Development

Martin has been following up the idea of another DAC Parliamentarians' meeting with Senators Harris and JAVITS, Red Dowling and Joe Johnson. The proposal for a meeting in the U.S., Martin has learned, was blocked by Senator Fulbright and there is generally a feeling here that there are too many Parliamentary groups already meeting. Martin is now considering an informal, ad hoc, but permanent, arrangement for DAC Parliamentarians' meetings. He is thinking in terms of either SID or SAIS sponsorship. Dave Bell has told Martin that Ford would provide the money for the meeting.

3. DAC—Public Relations

Madame Tenzer, formerly of the Belgian OECD Delegation, is now working for DAC on public relations, attempting to translate technical aid material into popular form. She will be coming to Washington in March for an AID meeting and Martin suggests that we talk with her at that time. Martin is looking for snappy success stories on development, involving people. He has been promised help on this by the Canadians and British and assumes we will also contribute.

4. “Grand Assize"—-The Woods Proposal

Martin reported on his conversation with Woods on the Grande Assize, in which Woods emphasized that he considers this a purely personal operation and does not want anyone else to intervene on arrangements or representation to the meeting. Woods is emphatic that Sir Oliver Franks head the group as Chairman. Franks would consult with key governments for appointees to the group. Despite the personal aspect of the operation, Woods has also said there would be Bank money for the operation. He told Martin he wanted a DAC observer in the group. Woods has resisted pressure for UNCTAD sponsorship for this operation. It is now agreed that this will be a donor countries operation and that it will continue after McNamara comes on board. The Dutch have recently stated their opposition to the Woods proposal, insisting that it be done through the UN. Although the U.S. has at some levels been generally favorable toward the Woods proposal, the official U.S. position is not entirely clear and Martin hopes there will be further consideration and clarification.

5. DAC Operations

a. Portugal. Ambassador Martin wanted advice on how to treat Portugal which is refusing to take part in the annual aid review and generally not playing the game in the DAC. He was advised that if they did not abide by DAC rules, they should not remain a member of the Committee.

b. Work Program. On the DAC work program, Martin said he was planning to play down the financial and statistical work in the DAC, improve the quality of the focus and content of the work program, in particular to emphasize coordination of technical assistance and research.

c. Food. Martin is planning a new initiative on the food problem, taking off from the Secretary General's report on food and agriculture. He is proposing to examine the food situation in the five principal deficit countries hoping to utilize the DAC, bilateral channels and the staff of multilateral organizations. The major obstacles to food production in these countries would first be reviewed with the donor countries, with a view to determining their programs to assist in meeting LDC needs. Later, there would be consultations with the recipient countries, possibly through the Development Center, to determine what they were doing to match their programs and resources with the donor country programs. Martin said that in the review with the donor countries the emphasis would be on adaptive research and technical assistance. He has discussed this approach with the IBRD, UN and War on Hunger people in Washington and has their support. Martin has also been in touch with the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations which are active in the food research field. They are particularly interested in determining where smaller applied centers for food research should be located.

Martin said that the DAC was planning an informal meeting in June on family planning. There is an April meeting on the sector approach to education. The DAC is also planning a meeting in May on private enterprise—this is a U.S. initiative.

The next area Martin plans to concentrate on is the adaption of science and technology to the less developed countries. He noted that this had been attempted before, but not through development channels in the governments of the DAC countries. He plans to use these channels, such as Sir Andrew Cohen in the U.K. Martin said he has SYG Kristensen's support for this approach. Martin emphasized his interest in having the donor countries examine the question of proliferation of multilateral agencies for financing development. He is inclined to believe that we are overextended and he wants the DAC countries to take a hard look at the questions of organization and coordination of aid. At the same time, he also wants consideration of the staging of replenishment arrangements. He indicated his interest in continuing to develop countries up and out of the soft loan category and wants to work closely with the IBRD on this problem.

Development Center. He said that the relations between the DAC and the Development Center under Andre Philip were good and he was pleased with the cooperation and usefulness of the Development Center.

6. Proposed Cooperation with the Soviets and Eastern Europe

Ambassador Martin asked how we would react to informal cooperation between the DAC and the USSR and/or Eastern European countries. Mr. Leddy indicated that he was skeptical of the possibilities in this area, particularly on the part of the Soviet Union. Martin indicated that what he had in mind was not formal arrangements, but using the DAC as an intermediary with Soviet and/or Eastern European countries who might be interested in cooperation on development in specific countries, such as Indonesia. In this context, Mr. Leddy thought it might be worth pursuing in the framework of our East-West bridge-building exercise.

7. Coordination of Aid Strategy

Mr. Katz asked Ambassador Martin whether he planned to pursue coordination of aid strategy in the DAC. Martin said this was very much on his mind and that he considered the question of burdensharing, such as greater participation of Canada in Francophone areas in Africa, as an example of what could be done in this field. He indicated that he thought dependency on one country for development assistance, such as Latin American dependency on the U.S., was not a healthy situation and he hoped to involve countries in broadening the geographic scope of their aid programs, particularly in the technical assistance field.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID 1. Confidential. Drafted by Ruth H. Phillips (EUR/RPE).

2 President Johnson announced on November 21 that the Development Assistance Committee had elected Martin to succeed Willard Thorp as Chairman. For text of his statement, see Department of State Bulletin, December 11, 1967, pp. 808–809.

145. Report of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs 145. Report of the President's General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs1

Washington, October 25, 1968.

DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE IN THE NEW ADMINISTRATION

[Here follow pages 1–21 [Pgs. 1–21 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10] of the report.]

2. Expanded multilateral assistance

The Committee recommends that the United Sates enlarge the share of its development assistance provided through multilateral agencies as rapidly as larger flows can be managed effectively and as other industrialized countries will participate.

The role of multilateral agencies in the development assistance process has grown in recent years. Cost-sharing among advanced countries through those agencies has been promoted by the United States, and the contributions of the other countries have increased. As shown in Table 3, net multilateral flows are now about $1.3 billion, approximately a sixth of the combined total of multilateral and official bilateral assistance. Only about two-thirds of the multilateral total comes from current official contributions, however, the remainder being provided from private borrowings and drawing down past contributions.

Table 3

MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE FLOWS TO LESS DEVELOPED COUNTRIES

(Disbursements, net of repayments, in $ millions)

Calendar year

1963 1965 1967

Official contriutions1 364 450 770

Private purchases of multilateral securities -31 247 280

Other multilateral outflow2 469 349 238

Total Multilateral Flows 802 1,046 1,288

Official bilateral, D.A.C. Countries 5,707 5,753 6,203

Total Multilateral Plus Official Bilateral 6,509 6,799 7,491

Private investment3 2,575 3,980 4,110

Total Development Assistance Flows 9,084 10,779 11,601

Multilateral Flows By Agency

World Bank Family 431 569 694

Inter-American Development Bank 75 109 146

Asian Development Bank — — —

African Development Bank — — —

European Economic Community Institutions 67 116 143

United Nations 229 252 305

Total 802 1,046 1,288

The World Bank family provides over half of net multilateral flows, divided more or less evenly between hard-term loans of the Bank itself and easy-term loans of the International Development Association (IDA). The UN agencies provide about a quarter, almost all of it for technical assistance. The rest goes through the Inter-American Development Bank, supported largely by the U.S. and limited to the Latin American countries, and the European Economic Community institutions, limited to associated countries in Africa and Europe. The Asian Development Bank and the African Development Bank are just getting into operation.

There are some significant differences among these agencies. The World Bank family has a very high quality staff, well-established stand-ards of operation, and a clear capacity to expand its operations if additional funds were available, particularly for IDA. The UN has difficulties in coordinating independent agencies and allocating funds objectively—difficulties that are only gradually being overcome. The regional development banks face in different ways the problem of accommodating sound standards with borrower control, and the Asian and African Banks must still build staff and experience.

The Committee believes that the United States should increase its contributions to competent international banks, along with other contributors, as rapidly as the banks are prepared to undertake the additional responsibilities. This approach will take advantage of the experience and acceptability of the multilateral agencies, avoid some of the Congressional and diplomatic tribulations of A.I.D., and put pressure on all advanced countries to share in the development assistance system.

A particular problem arises because of the size and wealth of the United States. Our share in the GNP of the D.A.C. countries exceed 50 percent, but if our share in the financing of the multilateral banks increased to more than half, their multilateral character would be weakened. The Committee endorses three possibilities for meeting this problem. First, the United States should offer to raise its share in the next replenishment of IDA from 40 to 45 percent, and to forego special balance of payments protection. Second, the U.S. should be willing to contribute shares at a proportion higher than 45 percent to Special Funds administered by the regional development banks. Third, if the World Bank and IDA will agree to accept Special Funds for particular countries, the U.S. should be prepared to make transfers of bilateral assistance funds in appropriate cases, where the advantages of multilateral administration are strong.

The Committee recognizes that bilateral assistance has important special strengths which make a combination of multilateral and bilateral programs desirable in the world system. As noted above, A.I.D. has played a leadership role in relation to both the other advanced nations and the multilateral institutions. Other larger donor countries, particularly Germany, France, Japan, and Italy, are committed to bilateral programs, because of distinctive geographical interests and problems of domestic political support. The United States has mutual interests with most of our present large-scale aid recipients that are better developed on a bilateral basis. Our ability to work with them in the future is an important part of the rationale for development assistance. Finally, starting from where the multilateral agencies now are, doubling their rate of disbursements over the next five years would be a considerable management achievement. But as shown in Table 5 below,2 even this would still leave a need for bilateral assistance programs larger than at present.

The Committee emphasizes that an equally important aspect of multilateralism is closer coordination of all assistance to individual countries through various forms of consultative groups of aid-supplying countries. There are now eighteen such groups—in India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Turkey, Greece, Morocco, Tunisia, Nigeria, Ghana, Sudan, East Africa, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and Korea. They cover close to half of worldwide development assistance. Some are still weak. But where the staffs of multilateral institutions have provided leadership, supported by the U.S., such groups have permitted reasonably objective negotiation of the types and amounts of assistance that are most needed, the terms on which it should be made available, and the economic policy measures that should be adopted.

The multilateral agencies, however, need to strengthen themselves as development agencies to take full advantage of these opportunities. In particular, the World Bank should play a more energetic role as leader in consultative groups, provide more program loans, and encourage self-help through country programming. It should take the lead in debt rescheduling negotiations, offer more high-level technical assistance to the planning process in host countries, and establish small field staffs in major aid-receiving countries. It would be helpful if it modified its procedures to accept Special Funds for individual countries. Under its new president the Bank is moving along several of these lines. Further steps would strengthen the promising trends in multilateral cooperation already under way.

[Here follow pages 25–43 [Pgs. 25–43 include portions of Doc. 12, Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, Doc. 16, Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, and Doc. 20] of the report.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Foreign Assistance Programs—President's Advisory Committee on (Perkins) [1 of 3], Box 17. No classification marking. The source text comprises pages 21–24 of the Committee's 43-page report. For another extract from the report, see Document 79. For additional documentation on this Committee, under the chairmanship of James A. Perkins, see Documents 32 ff.

1 Net of principal repayments only; excludes contributions from non-D.A.C. members.

2 Difference between disbursements and receipts of multilateral organizations, largely disbursements out of prior years' official contirbutions and private investments, but net of contributions, investments and repayments from less developed countries.

3 Includes direct investment, reinvested earnings, net private export credits, and portfolio investment.

2 Not printed.

146. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 146. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 1, 1968, 2:25 p.m.

SUBJECT

Consideration of IDA in a Special Session of The Congress

Attached is Secretary Fowler's memo recommending that, if you call the Senate into special session to consider the Non-Proliferation Treaty, you add IDA replenishment to the agenda and call the House in session as well.

Congressional inaction has brought IDA to a standstill.2 If we moved, other donor countries who are waiting for us would quickly follow and IDA would be back in business. Fowler argues that we led the international negotiations for this package and are strongly obligated to follow it through. He points out that IDA has traditionally had bipartisan backing and that according to his soundings, it would be possible to get substantial Republican support for it in the House.

Barefoot Saunders sees serious problems with Fowler's proposal.3 I am sending him a copy of Joe's memo so he can give you his own views.

You know my views on the foreign policy importance of IDA. Joe is right in saying that we are the sole obstacle to its renewal. If there is a chance of getting it, I believe we should go after it—but you can judge better than I whether Barefoot is right.4

Walt

Attachment5

Washington, October 29, 1968.

Memorandum From Secretary of the Treasury Fowler to President Johnson

SUBJECT

Critical Importance of U.S. Action on IDA

You have initiated two major international actions for moving toward an enduring world peace which are still unfinished legislative business but could be pushed over in a short resumed session in November or December: —the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,6

—an enlarged replenishment of the International Development Association.

If you call back the Senate to consider the Non-Proliferation Treaty, I think it equally important to move simultaneously to secure passage of IDA. I, therefore, recommend that you call back the House as well as the Senate, to secure the enactment into law of IDA.

You said in your September 30 address to the Governors of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund that they “are the custodians of the world's economic welfare—and ultimately of its security.”7 You pointed out that “the new replenishment of IDA resources is a first priority development need.” It places a first call in the international community and on our own Congress.

The international community has responded to this call. The IDA Governors of 89 countries approved the resolution on the terms and conditions of a replenishment. Of all the developed countries, only the United States Governor has not voted—because Congress has not acted. Our failure to act places us in a position alongside Algeria, Congo, Costa Rica, Gabon, Guyana, Jordan, and a handful of others whose failure to act does not have the consequences of our failure because they are not contributing countries.

U.S. action on IDA is essential for the Agreement to go into effect. This is so because of the usual practice which is followed in this Agreement of stipulating ratification by a minimum in terms of both the number of countries and over-all contribution, before implementation can start. Because of the size of the U.S. contribution, the “trigger” amount cannot be reached without our participation. Eight of 17 other contributing countries which have voted the resolution but have not yet pledged resources will follow quickly after U.S. action. Without our action, $720 million pledged, or to be pledged by others, will be lost or delayed beyond repair.

Our failure to act thus far has caused a general belief throughout other nations that “IDA is dead.” In my opinion, the importance of our relations with the rest of the world (through the World Bank and IDA) warrants a special session of Congress. Although the IDA package is technically not a treaty, it has equal significance insofar as preserving the respect of other countries for the good will of the United States is concerned. Moreover, as with the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the United States was the moving force in achieving the negotiated IDA package. Win or lose in a special session, I believe that you should make every effort to cause the United States to live up to its moral commitment.

As I see it, the particular outcome of the election would not affect this recommendation.

From its inception IDA has received strong bipartisan support. In 1959, Republican Secretaries of State, Commerce and Treasury formally approved the project.8 The World Bank itself drew up the Articles of Agreement which were submitted by President Eisenhower to a Democratic Congress which, in turn, approved U.S. participation at the urging of a broad range of private American organizations, including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the American Farm Bureau Federation and the AFL-CIO.

President Eisenhower authorized the negotiation of IDA and requested Congress to give approval to U.S. participation. IDA has had continuing bipartisan support as the best way to achieve our development objectives. The current legislation has had bipartisan support in the House Banking and Currency Committee and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

If Humphrey and Muskie are elected our responsibility to go forward without delay seems clear in the light of your solid and continuing support of the proposed replenishment. If Nixon and Agnew are elected or the election is not decided in the electoral college, I believe, on the basis of lengthy conversations I had before Congress adjourned with Congressmen Ford, Widnall, Laird and Arends, that we could get some substantial Republican support in the House. The Senate should not present any problem.

Henry H. Fowler

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Box 20. Confidential. Another copy of the memorandum shows that Fried drafted it. (Ibid., Memos to the President, Rostow, Vol. 103)

2 An earlier status report on problems with the IDA replenishment in the Senate is in Joseph W. Barr's July 3 memorandum to the President. (Washington National Records Center, RG 286, AID Administrator Files: FRC 73 A 518, BUD Budget (Oct.-Dec.) FY 1969) Joseph M. Bowman's July 3 memorandum to the President, which provided a report on the same issue in the House, is ibid.

3 Saunders' views have not been further identified.

4 The last phrase in this sentence, beginning with the word “but,” has been added by hand.

5 Confidential.

6 Documentation on the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XI.

7 Text in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1968–69, Book II, pp. 987–989.

8 For documentation on the U.S. role in the creation of the International Development Association, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, volume IV.

147. Current Economic Developments 147. Current Economic Developments1

Washington, November 19, 1968.

Issue No. 819

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

DAC HIGH-LEVEL MEETING CONSIDERS TERMS, VOLUME, AND DIRECTION OF AID

The seventh high-level meeting of the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD, held in Paris October 30–31, reviewed current aid programs and developments including volume, terms and direction of aid, and considered the means of improving and increasing present aid programs. The members welcomed the presence of Switzerland which recently became one of the seventeen members of the DAC, who, among them, provide well over nine-tenths of total world flows of official and private resources to developing countries. In agreeing to its work program for the coming year, the Committee laid stress on the need to define a more explicit long-run aid and development strategy so as to increase the impact of individual efforts. The main document before the Committee was the 1968 report of the DAC Chairman, Ambassador Edwin M. Martin, which is shortly to be published.2

DAC Chairman's Report

In his general review of the aid situation, DAC Chairman Martin stated that there is no question that the economic and social progress of the developing countries, which contain most of the desperately poor majority of mankind, is entering a critical and decisive phase. The international development assistance effort, designed to speed up the date of that progress, is being re-examined and called into question. Far too little sense of urgency exists either in the majority of aid-providing countries or in many developing countries about taking practical steps to meet obvious and pressing development needs.

Achievements. It is tempting, Martin points out, to point a uniformly black picture of past achievements and future prospects. But this would neither correspond to the facts nor would it constitute sound tactics. Progress has been and is being made—but at a rate which is too slow to make the morally and politically acceptable difference to the economic and social situation of the developing countries. The extra effort which is required now to make this difference, both from aid donors and developing countries, is well within their capacities—and is vital if the progress already made is not to be thrown away.

The DAC Chairman points out that the only internationally agreed goal for the first Development Decade was contained in a UN Resolution of 1961—that the 1960's should see a minimum increase in average growth of gross national product of five percent a year.3 Based on what must be considered as still provisional estimates for 1967, this goal had been just about reached in the period 1960–67. That this has been possible, despite the failure of the developed countries as a group to meet in most years the goal they accepted of an average net resource transfer (aid and private flows) of at least one percent of their national incomes, is a tribute to the efforts of the developing countries and to the value of other factors, such as their export earnings, up an average of 5.6 percent a year in this period.

Also on the positive side of the ledger are the almost spectacular changes in the prospects for increasing food production and controlling population growth. In the case of food, it is now clear that we know what to do to avoid the threat of famine for a good many years in the future. More important is the fact that in a good many developing countries famine is now being averted. The expected obstacle of peasant and farmer resistance to new methods of cultivation has usually proved illusory if prices for outputs are right and if they can be shown what needs to be done. Perhaps even more important in the long run than the increased output now being secured from the new “miracle” seeds is the widening awareness of our capacity, through intensive breeding programs, to continue to improve on nature. Many problems remain—in keeping the prices right, in providing credit, in radically improving storage and marketing systems—and we still face challenging problems in developing cheap and palatable proteins of the sort humans need, in enabling all families to afford to buy enough of these foods, and in persuading families in developing countries to consume a more balanced diet.

Equally striking has been the wave of support for family planning over the past two years. Not only international bodies and aid-giving and recipient governments but also parents themselves are adopting positive attitudes in place of apathy or opposition. It is clear, however, that we cannot yet be content with the efficiency of our current techniques. The task of reaching and persuading tens of millions of parents is so enormous that a breakthrough to a simpler, cheaper, surer method, with no side effects, is still an urgent challenge to our best scientific skills.

Negative Aspects. On the negative side of the ledger, the DAC report points to the frustration and disappointment of the developing countries. Many have accumulated a burden of debt service which weighs heavily on their current and future balance of payments. Most have found that even a 5 percent overall growth per year brings too little visible improvement in the living standards of their people because of the rapid increase in their populations and the low base from which they start. Countries having more than two-thirds of the less-developed countries' population—or over one billion people—have average incomes of $100 per capita per year or less and annual population growths of two or three percent. Perhaps more fundamental as a cause of dissatisfaction is the increasing realization that overall economic growth satisfies only partially their ambitions for a better life. Better distribution of income, creation of enough new job opportunities, reform of outdated institutions, extension of education, achievement of national unity and political maturity, and the ability to generate as well as adapt to rapid rates of changes in attitudes are all fundamental elements in the progress toward a more modern and more satisfying society.

Volume of Aid. From the standpoint of the DAC aid donor nations, the Chairman's report states that the short-falls in aid performance have certainly been significant and generally unjustifiable. But it is a great mistake to talk of a “decline” in the flow of resources. There was an 8 percent increase in total net official and private flow from DAC members in 1967, passing $11 billion for the first time, up to 7–1/2 percent from 1966. Six countries, including the US, had the largest actual disbursements of aid funds ever. Data now available indicates that net official aid disbursements will increase also this year and probably again in 1969. However, these increases are not expected to be large enough to raise the level to the UNCTAD target of 1 percent of gross national product which was in the form of a resolution at the UNCTAD II meeting in New Delhi in March 1968, which if achieved by the DAC members would raise the sights for the volume of resources they provide by about 25 percent above the DAC's present national income based target. In part, this expected rising flow will result in emptying the accumulated pipeline of aid funds in some countries, and the talk of a decline in aid may be right two or three years from now. But, the Chairman points out, there is still time to prevent this happening if certain donor governments take action promptly to refill the pipeline with new appropriations and commitments.

The Soviet Bloc countries, though they are considered as developed countries, have not accepted either the previous DAC target of one percent of net national product not the higher UNCTAD II target for net resources flows. Data on their disbursements, as distinct from commitments, are only rough estimates, but it would appear that they have reached a level of only about 0.1 percent of national income. The flow of funds from these countries would thus have to increase some tenfold to reach even the DAC national product target.

Terms of Aid. The improvement in the volume of 1967 aid flows was unfortunately accompanied by a modest deterioration in the average terms of DAC bilateral aid committed in 1967, especially as to interest rates. This did not, however, reflect any major change in terms policy—on the contrary, official aid terms have softened in a number of countries—but rather a shift in the composition of financing flows from several countries, with large proportions being committed by government export creditor organizations whose terms generally are close to those in private capital markets. Further, there was no lessening of the degree to which aid funds were tied to purchases in the donor country, though there was increased use of general devices to minimize the effect of this requirement on recipient costs.

Quality of Aid. Mr. Martin also points out that the quality of donor aid and cooperation is just as important as the quality of development itself. DAC members are seeking to make aid resources produce more development by adapting the types of aid to the needs of developing countries in widely differing situations; fitting terms of loans to the capacities of each recipient; distributing the total available resources among receiving countries in ways which will best promote rapid and sound development; supplementing the self-help efforts of the LDCs; and directing resources toward those sectors of the economy or those aspects of the overall development process which should be given the highest priority.

High-Level DAC Meeting

The DAC high-level meeting agreed that the present assistance effort needs to be further strengthened in order to supplement the efforts of developing countries toward economic and social progress. It was noted that prospects depend heavily on the actions of the four major donors—the US, France, Germany and the UK.

The situation in the US is important both because the US provides half of the total DAC assistance and because of its possible impact on the collective efforts of the DAC countries. The fact that the US currently ranks tenth among DAC members in net public and private flow as a percentage of its national income was a matter of concern to DAC members. Actual US assistance expenditures will be maintained for the next year or two through drawing on undisbursed appropriations. However, the proposed reduction in new commitments and the fact that the International Development Association (IDA) can continue to operate only on condition that the US participates in reconstituting its resources create a disturbing situation for the future. There was concern also about the difficulty other donors have in matching US reductions with increases in their own programs. On the other hand, there were encouraging expressions of willingness of a number of members to go ahead with their IDA contributions regardless of the status of the US contribution. Our delegation informed DAC members that reductions in appropriations would not permit us to finance an important part (approximately $100 million) of needed fertilizer imports for Pakistan and India and strongly urged the Europeans to take advantage of their unutilized excess fertilizer production capacity to fill this need.

As to the other chief donors, France, in spite of its economic and budgetary difficulties, has not retrenched on its aid commitments and policies though as a result of French inflationary pressures the value of its aid to recipients will probably decline. The UK over the past year maintained its aid effort, in spite of its economic difficulties. Germany has taken steps to ensure a steady expansion of its aid over the next years, but the terms of German assistance, like that of several other donors, do not yet meet the targets of the 1965 DAC recommendation.

A striking and welcome feature in the aid volume picture is the continued rapid growth in the efforts of Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden to increase their aid efforts, although several of the countries named are still far from the one percent target.

Mr. Martin told the OECD Council that in his view terms of aid was the most important subject taken up by the high-level meeting. Prior to the meeting the DAC Working Party on Financial Aspects had been unsuccessful in getting agreement on any proposal for revision of the 1965 terms for aid. Japan, Italy and the Federal Republic of Germany were particularly opposed to any additional obligations.The 1965 agreement had contained a mandate for revision of the objectives after three years “in the light of relevant factors.” One of these factors was the UNCTAD II Conference which noted “with appreciation” that such a review was underway and expressed hope it would result in a liberalization of terms. The high-level meeting agreed to instruct the Working Party on Financial Aspects to complete, as soon as possible, its efforts to reach agreement on revised terms recommendations and report to the plenary session early in February 1969. Chairman Martin told the OECD Council he was struck by the emphasis, from those countries with soft terms, that it would be difficult for them to improve soft terms, or even maintain them, if others maintained hard terms and did not clearly show willingness to improve their terms.

The DAC work program was discussed principally in relation to the Pearson Commission (see page 17, August 27, 1968 issue)4 and Development Decade II. In Chairman Martin's view, the sense of the high-level meeting was that, without committing itself to conclusions, DAC should seek to cooperate with these groups. He referred to the importance of the connection between aid and trade and suggested to the OECD Council that coordination might be of interest to the OECD. Also, he thought the Council would be interested in the suggestion at the high-level meeting regarding insulating aid from the fluctuations of the economic fortunes of donor countries. This will be a matter that will be considered further, he said.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Limited Official Use. The source text comprises pp. 10–14 of the issue.

2 Not found.

3 Resolution 1710 (XVI), adopted unanimously by the U.N. General Assembly on December 19, 1961; text in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 153–156.

4 "McNamara Establishes Pearson Commission To Study Development Strategy and IBRD Role,” Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 813, August 27, 1968, pp. 17–19. (Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments)

Economic Defense PolicyEconomic Defense Policy

148. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, January 14, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 15–10. No classification marking. Drafted by George S. Springsteen (U).

149. Minutes of Meeting of the Export Control Review Board

Washington, January 20, 1964, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 8, 4/16/64, East-West Trade, Box 1. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. The time and place of the meeting, which was held at the Department of Commerce, are taken from Secretary Rusk's Appointment Book. (Ibid.) Another account of this meeting, drafted by Trezise, is in Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. The January 21 date of the meeting given in that memorandum of conversation has been corrected to January 20 on a note listing the participants in Rusk's Appointment Book, which also confirms that the only meeting of the Board attended by Secretary Rusk in this period was on January 20.

150. Memorandum From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, February 27, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [2 of 2], Box 49. Secret.

151. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, March 11, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [2 of 2], Box 49. Secret.

152. Editorial Note

153. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, April 14, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [2 of 2], Box 49. Secret.

154. Summary of Record of the 527th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, April 16, 1964, noon.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 8, 4/16/64, East-West Trade, Box 1. Secret. Drafted by Bromley K. Smith.

155. National Security Council Record of Action No. 2481

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, S/PC Files: Lot 70 D 199, NSC Record of Actions. Secret. The action was taken at the 527th meeting of the NSC on April 16; see Document 154. A draft record of actions proposed by Secretary Hodges is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 8, 4/16/64, East-West Trade, Box 1.

156. Letter From Secretary of Agriculture Freeman to Secretary of Commerce Hodges

Washington, April 16, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Agriculture. No classification marking. An attached note from an unidentified secretary, dated February 16, 1965, indicates that Thau (presumably Theodore L. Thau, Executive Secretary of the Advisory Committee on Export Policy) had requested this letter; and although the original could not be found, Thau was given a copy.

157. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson

Washington, May 13, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) 15–10. Confidential. An attached copy of the memorandum indicates that it was drafted by Peter F. Warker (EUR/EE) on May 8 and concurred in by U, E, L/E, E/MDC, the Export-Import Bank, and the White House.

158. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator)

Washington, June 25, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. No classification marking.

159. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to President Johnson

Washington, June 25, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, White House, May–June. No classification marking. Drafted by Hodges. An attached abstract of secretarial correspondence prepared by Jack N. Behrman for Secretary Hodges on June 24 summarizes the status of an agricultural quid pro quo on East-West trade. Also attached is a note to Behrman saying that Secretary Hodges wanted him to see the Secretary's letter before it was sent and asking him to initial the note after reading. Handwritten on this note is “O.K.” followed by Behrman's initials and a June 25 date.

160. Report of Meeting

Washington, August 19, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Balance of Payments. No classification marking. Drafted by John R. Collins on August 20. The meeting was held at 1201 E Street, N.W. A handwritten note on the first page of the source text from T. W. (not further identified) to Jack N. Behrman, August 25, reads: “I think this should be most thoroughly studied.” Attached to the source text is an August 25 handwritten note, from Behrman to Secretary Hodges, that reads: “This one you will want to read and follow.”

161. Report of the President's Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Economic Policy—1964. Secret. The source text comprises pp. 22–24 of the Introduction and Summary and pp. 19–26 of Chapter Two, Trade. The full report was transmitted to President Johnson under cover of a November 25 letter from Carl Kaysen, Chairman of the Task Force. Kaysen's letter, pages 1–5 of the Introduction and Summary, and Chapter Three, “Money,” are printed in vol. VIII, Document 18. For text of Chapter One, “Aid,” see Document 20.

162. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson

Washington, December 14, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 49. Secret. Originally drafted in E and S/P and sent to Secretary Rusk along with an explanatory memorandum from Walt W. Rostow (S/P) and G. Griffith Johnson (E), drafted on December 10. Because a typed notation on another copy, attached to this explanatory memorandum, indicates that the memorandum printed here was retyped in U, Ball or his staff may have redrafted parts of it. No earlier draft has been found.

163. Airgram From the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations to the Department of State

Paris, January 6, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 4. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Philip M. Lindsay and F. D. Hockersmith (ST) on January 5, and contents approved by Patten D. Allen (ST). Repeated to the NATO capitals except Luxembourg, Ottawa, and Reykjavik, and to Berlin, Algiers, Beirut, Belgrade, Bern, Bucharest, Budapest, Helsinki, Madrid, Prague, Rabat, Sofia, Stockholm, Vienna, Warsaw, Amsterdam, Antwerp, Barcelona, Bilbao, Birmingham, Bremen, Casablanca, Dusseldorf, Frankfurt, Genoa, Goteborg, Hamburg, Liverpool, Munich, Naples, Rotterdam, Stuttgart, Trieste, Zurich, EUCOM J4, USA-COMZEUR, USAFE, and PDD-Frankfurt.

164. Editorial Note

165. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, February 17, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 8, Box 2. No classification marking.

166. Letter From the Chairman of the Board of Radio Corporation of America (Sarnoff) to President Johnson

New York, March 5, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, TEL 9. No classification marking. An attached short covering letter from Sarnoff to Secretary Rusk, March 5, indicates that he was sending Rusk a copy of his letter to the President. Also attached is a letter from G. Griffith Johnson to Sarnoff, March 19, which thanked him for sending a copy of his letter to the President and concluded: “I trust that you find the recent interagency decision a satisfactory resolution of the matter.” Johnson was apparently referring to a recent interdepartmental meeting during which it was agreed that if the Soviet Union was seriously interested in buying the U.S. color television system, then the U.S. Government would also be willing to include the video recorders. U.S. officials believed that COCOM would probably approve export of the recorders as part of a larger package. RCA was to be informed of the U.S. decision on March 15. (E Bureau Staff Minutes, March 15; Washington National Records Center, E/CBA/REP Files: Lot 72 A 6248)

167. National Security Action Memorandum No. 324

Washington, March 9, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAM File, NSAM 324, Box 6. Secret. An attached March 9 note from Bator to Buddy reads: “If you think it appropriate, would you sign?"

168. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carter) to Secretary of Commerce Connor

Washington, March 10, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, Miscellaneous CIA Intelligence Memorandum [2 of 3], Box 5. Top Secret;[codeword not declassified]. Copies were sent to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara and McGeorge Bundy.

169. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, March 11, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Meetings, Box 16. Confidential. Sent via pouch and received on March 22 at 5:27 p.m. Repeated to Paris for USRO.

170. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State of Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, March 24, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 1. Limited Official Use. Sent through S/S. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “U saw.”

171. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, April 29, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 10, Box 3. No classification marking.

172. Letter From the Chairman of the President's Special Committee on Trade With East European Nations and the Soviet Union (Miller) to President Johnson

Washington, May 3, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Box 25. No classification marking. A memorandum from Bator to the President, May 3, notes that Miller prepared this letter “at the suggestion of Under Secretary Mann” and that “None of the people on whom Miller called appeared to oppose release” of the report. He added that if the President decided on an early release of the report, Miller could provide the Business Council with a brief account of the contents at its May 7 meeting. (Ibid.) Regarding the actual release, see Document 173.

173. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 17, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAM File, NSAM 333, Box 7–8. Confidential. Copies were sent to the Secretary of Commerce and the Deputy Secretary of Defense.

174. Memorandum From Secretary of Commerce Connor to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 21, 1965.

Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316. Confidential. Copies were sent to Mann and Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance.

175. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson

Washington, July 1, 1965, 8:20 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 49. No classification marking.

176. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Holders of NSAM Nos. 324 and 333

Washington, July 27, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAM File, NSAM 324, Box 6. No classification marking.

177. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, January 7, 1966.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 217. Confidential. Drafted by Rusk.

178. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson

Washington, January 25, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, C.F., F.O. 3–2, Jan-Mar 1966. No classification marking. This letter and a second letter and two proposed memoranda for the President's signature, cited in footnotes 3 and 5 below, were sent under cover of a January 25 letter from Mann to the President.

179. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, February 18, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [1 of 2]. No classification marking.

180. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to Representative Craig Hosmer

Washington, March 4, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. No classification marking. Drafted by Wright (E/EWT) and Knute Malmborg (L/E) on March 1 and cleared in draft by Joseph A. Greenwald (E/ITED), Nelson F. Sievering, Jr. (SCI), Mark J. Garrison (EUR/EE), and Alexander Schnee (H). An attached February 21 note from an E Staff Assistant to Wright requested an appropriate reply to Hosmer's letter for Solomon's signature. A handwritten notation at the top of the source text reads: “Because of urgent nature of the response, the original was handcarried to addressee on 3/4/66.”

181. Editorial Note

182. Airgram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State

Rome, November 23, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by Melvin H. Levine (ECON) on November 21, cleared by Alan W. Ford (POL) in draft and Theodore J. Hadraba (COMSEC), and contents approved by R.V. Korp (ECON). Repeated to Geneva and Paris for USRO and OECD.

183. Airgram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, December 7, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by Arthur P. Allen (FIN) and Selma G. Freedman and William A. Hayne (CTP), cleared by Richard Long (POL), and contents approved by Stanley M. Cleveland (MINECON).

184. Airgram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, December, 9, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by John J. St. John (E/GEN) on December 8, cleared in draft by Willis C. Armstrong (E/MIN), and contents approved by Arthur A. Hartman (E/GEN). Repeated to Ankara, Athens, Bonn, Brussels, Copenhagen, The Hague, Lisbon, Luxembourg, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, Bern, Stockholm, Vienna, and the Mission in Geneva.

185. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, January 20, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 1 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Joseph A. Greenwald on January 20. The meeting was held in Boggs' office.

186. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (MacArthur) to Senator Walter F. Mondale

Washington, February 8, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, TP 7–1. No classification marking. Drafted by Thomas M.T. Niles (EUR/SOV) on February 6 and cleared by Malcolm Toon and James L. Colbert (EUR/SOV) and Jack M. Fleischer (E/IS). A January 8, 1967, date stamped on the dateline is incorrect.

187. Letter From the Secretary of the Treasury's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Albright) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy (Greenwald)

Washington, March 14, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential.

188. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy (Greenwald) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon)

Washington, July 10, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by William A. Root (E/EWT) on July 10. The date is handwritten on the source text. A notation on the source text indicates that Solomon saw the memorandum.

189. Current Economic Developments

Washington, September 26, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Confidential. The source text comprises pages 1–2 of the issue.

190. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, October 27, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 14–1. Confidential. Drafted by William A. Root (E/ITP/EWT) on October 27 and cleared by Stephen H. Rogers (EUR).

191. Letter From the Minister for Economic Affairs in the Embassy in France (Brand) to the Director, Office of European Community and Atlantic Political Economic Affairs (Katz)

Paris, January 19, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Limited Official Use; Official-Informal.

192. Editorial Note

193. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, March 29, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by Roger C. Dixon (USOECD/STC) on March 28 and contents approved by Dixon. Repeated to Stockholm.

194. Current Economic Developments

Washington, April 23, 1968.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Confidential. The source text comprises page 11 of the issue.

195. Editorial Note

196. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, December 21, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Attached to it is a December 22 memorandum from John P. Walsh to Bromley Smith which indicates that Secretary Rusk authorized him to send the memorandum to Smith. Walsh added that if Secretary Clifford's memorandum referred to in the source text was sent to the participants in the meeting on this question, then the Department of State suggested that this memorandum also be given to them. Secretary Clifford's memorandum has not been found.

148. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 148. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 14, 1964.

SUBJECT

Export-Import Bank Activities in Soviet Bloc Countries

I concur in the two memoranda submitted to you by Harold Linder, President of Export-Import Bank, requesting Presidential Determinations with regard to the Bank's extending short and medium term credit guarantees on transactions with Yugoslavia and for guarantees in connection with the sale and US agricultural products to the USSR and enumerated European Soviet Bloc countries.2 These Determinations are called for pursuant to Title III of the Foreign Aid and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of 1964.3

Both of these requests for Determinations are presently limited to the aforesaid guarantees. These are the types of transactions on which the Bank has been requested to move most immediately by our exporters.

Additional Determinations for other types of Bank financing may be sought as the Bank proceeds with its examination of various requests for its assistance in financing US exports to these areas. These Determinations might provide for Bank participation in longer term credits to Yugoslavia, and perhaps one or more of the European Bloc countries, or for guarantees on US non-agricultural product transactions with the latter. For the present, however, the two requests now being submitted to you are limited to covering the most immediate business at hand.

Dean Rusk 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 15–10. No classification marking. Drafted by George S. Springsteen (U).

2  Linder's two memoranda to President Johnson, both dated January 10, and his January 10 covering memorandum to Secretary Rusk and McGeorge Bundy are attached. Also attached are a memorandum from Benjamin Read (S/S) to Secretary Rusk, January 11, summarizing Linder's memoranda and indicating that Rusk's January 14 memorandum had the concurrences of EUR, L, the Under Secretary, and McGeorge Bundy, and two undated draft Presidential determinations, one for each of Linder's memoranda. None of the attachments is printed.

3 P.L. 88–258, approved January 6, 1964. (77 Stat. 857)

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

149. Minutes of Meeting of the Export Control Review Board 149. Minutes of Meeting of the Export Control Review Board1

Washington, January 20, 1964, 4:30 p.m.

Secretary Freeman stated that approval of the beet harvester machinery would mean opening the flood gates for mass production from U.S. prototypes of agricultural machinery at a time when a key Soviet problem is getting the crops out of the field at the proper time. The Soviets have declared economic war on us, but, as per the CIA report,2 the serious agricultural problem is a major factor in the slowdown of their whole economy. It is not in the U.S. interest to speed the recovery of the agricultural sector of the economy with advanced-design agricultural machinery and contribute to their capability to conduct an ideological war with economic weapons and to support communist oriented economics in developing nations. This particular beet harvester is far advanced over anything else available, being able to handle 1,200 tons of beets in a ten-hour period compared to an average at the most of 120 tons currently being handled in Soviet areas (a maximum of 210 tons in one area and a minimum of 75 tons with most areas recorded in the range of 75 to 120 tons).

Secretaries Hodges and Vance indicated that they would approve of shipping such machines if we could get something back over and above the price paid. Secretary Rusk argued that the quid pro quo lay in the turning of the Soviet economy into production of consumer goods, which an expansion of agricultural production would do. He argued further that we were not in a posture of economic warfare with the Soviets and that denial of such equipment implied that we were. He questioned what we would do about fertilizer plants if we denied such equipment as the beet harvesters. Secretary Freeman saw a distinction between (1) the beet harvesters which were technologically advanced, could not be procured anywhere else, and would be used as a prototype; and (2) such machines and/or plants as are readily available from other countries in the world to do precisely the same job. For example, our denial of some types of fertilizer plants would not prevent the Russians from acquiring them. On the other hand, if they get certain advanced-design machines from the U.S., they might succeed in their drive to improve agricultural production if they get a break in the weather.

Secretary Vance inquired as to whether it would not be better to keep machinery away from the Soviets if it was important to keep consumer pressure on the economy. Secretary Rusk replied that we should be cooperative in helping the Soviets to move resources from the military to the consumer field rather than keeping pressure on the Soviets at all points. Also agriculture was not going to be the strategic area in any nuclear exchange nor was it an appropriate area for economic warfare. In addition, since we had already denied a petroleum refinery, to follow it with a denial of a beet harvester would in his view signal an economic warfare approach on our part. The U.S. would also be in a position of having to deny more items than our Allies do for some time to come and therefore shouldn't be in a position of denying more items than we need to.

Secretary Hodges agreed that it would be desirable to ship these items but only if we could obtain a quid pro quo for this and other advanced agricultural machinery. Secretary Rusk asked what quid pro quo would be requested, to which it was replied that agreements on copyrights, patents, or use of technology gained from prototypes would provide a means of protecting advanced technology and demonstrate to the country that we were in fact obtaining a quid pro quo of relaxed economic relations. Secretary Rusk stated that insisting on a quid pro quo would itself signal that we were thinking in terms of economic warfare and that he saw no reasons for the Russians to want to offer a quid pro quo over and above the sales prices. In fact they have stated that they would not pay anything more than the going price for fertilizer plants and other items which they can obtain readily in the free world.

Secretary Freeman argued that agriculture might be a more important area in which to slow down on our contribution to the Soviet economy since they may have more difficulties there than in the petroleum field. He insisted that we carefully examine the question of where we wished to maintain pressure and where we would like to relax. His interpretation of Secretary Rusk's view was that it was “good” to assist the Soviets in developing agriculture whereas, it was not good to assist them in an area such as petroleum. Secretary Rusk replied that we should certainly not aid the Soviets in any area, such as would be the result of 15 years credit as proposed by the U.K., but we should not shy away from normal trade. He stressed that the issue before the ECRB was essentially that of economic warfare and how best it might be waged, to which Secretary Freeman agreed. Secretary Rusk then pointed out that we had sold hybrid seeds and other items, which would assist in the agricultural field, to which Secretary Freeman replied that even so there was a need for mechanized equipment which would assist them in getting the crops harvested at the right time so that they would not rot in the fields.

Secretary Hodges stressed the desirability of insisting on a non-reproduction covenant from the Soviets in the purchase of advanced equipment and an agreement covering patent and other rights. Secretary Rusk asserted that U.S. exporters had in the past insisted upon that themselves, but Secretary Hodges urged that the Government itself insist on such arrangements.

Secretary Rusk again stressed that our policy was not economic warfare but rather should be economic competition, which we faced from all countries. Secretary Freeman indicated there was a difference when the economic competition seeks to disrupt rather than to excel, if the aim is political destruction rather than monetary gain.

Secretary Vance returned to the discussion of the diversion of resources and asked whether State Department's position was that resources put into agriculture would cut the volume of resources dedicated to the military. Secretary Rusk said that the main objective was to develop a stake on the part of the Soviets in good relations with us, which could be based on an improvement in their standard of living and which in turn would necessitate the opening of trade relations and a continued high level of trade with the West. In this way the Soviets would have a stake in maintaining peace.

The Board reached a consensus that these were issues on which the President should focus on since he had not previously discussed this range of programs and policies with the Cabinet, and it agreed therefore to present them to the President after members return from Japan.

The positions which would be taken before the President by the four Cabinet members were:

Secretary Rusk for approval of the shipment on general policy grounds. Secretary Freeman against the export unless a quid pro quo is obtained over and above selling price which correspondingly contributes to the strength of the U.S. Secretaries Hodges and Vance for approval dependent on obtaining an appropriate quid pro quo over and above the selling price.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 8, 4/16/64, East-West Trade, Box 1. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. The time and place of the meeting, which was held at the Department of Commerce, are taken from Secretary Rusk's Appointment Book. (Ibid.) Another account of this meeting, drafted by Trezise, is in Department of State, Secretary's Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. The January 21 date of the meeting given in that memorandum of conversation has been corrected to January 20 on a note listing the participants in Rusk's Appointment Book, which also confirms that the only meeting of the Board attended by Secretary Rusk in this period was on January 20.

2 Not further identified.

150. Memorandum From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 150. Memorandum From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, February 27, 1964.

SUBJECT

Quid Pro Quo from the Soviets

Following our conversation of yesterday I would like to specify for you the nature of quid pro quo which we might obtain from the Soviets for a relaxation of our trade restrictions—such as in the area of agricultural machinery.

To begin with, we would couch this shift in terms of a real, far-ranging objective of assisting the Soviets in conquering their agricultural problems through techniques, new seeds, and machinery, including plants for production of fertilizers and agricultural and food processing plants.

For this shift in policy, which would certainly be desired by the Soviets, we could gain little in the agricultural field save possibly their agreement to purchase larger quantities of various agricultural items (if we can decide on a real policy) or we might seek a specific quid pro quo on matters on which they are close to coming to an agreement with us but have not found the means of doing so, such as

(1) patent and copyright protection in the USSR,

(2) their participation in international commodity agreements,

(3) opening of their markets to the less developed countries,

(4) an agreement on a much wider policy on civil aviation extending further than the bilateral agreement which we have been working out with them for some time,

(5) agreement on methods of handling commercial arbitration, and

(6) participation in United Nations technical assistance committees.

These and other suggestions are included in a study by the State Department, May 25, 1961,2 and they have been under consideration by various administrations for some time, but we seem to make no headway on them.

I do not even mention the numerous other concessions which the Soviets might make in the political area which it would be useful for us to have. You know these from your vantage point better than we do. They could include lend lease, etc.

A longer range program of achieving an even wider agreement on trade with the Soviets was, of course, discussed interdepartmentally last year and a recommendation was made by President Kennedy and approved by him in August.3 It is within this wider framework of attempting to gain some political advantage for our relaxations that we feel some significant quid pro quo should be obtained if we agree to ship items which assist in solving their agricultural problems.

Luther H. Hodges

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [2 of 2], Box 49. Secret.

2 Reference may be to an updated Department of State paper, “US Economic Relations with the Soviet Bloc,” which is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, volume V.

3 See the memorandum from the Export Control Review Board to President Kennedy, August 15, 1963, ibid., vol. IX, pp. 733–737, and President Kennedy's memorandum to the Export Control Review Board, September 19, 1963, ibid., p. 740.

151. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 151. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 11, 1964.

SUBJECT

Beet Harvesters for the Soviet Union

The Government has been faced for some weeks with an unresolved problem with respect to an application for a license to export five 6-row beet harvesters to the Soviet Union. The Export Control Review Board, set up by President Kennedy in May 1961, has reviewed the matter and is firmly divided.2 All members of the Board but the State Department wish to widen the issue to the more general issue of policy on exports of advanced technical equipment, and there is no doubt that this case does raise a question that will come up again and again in different forms.

The State Department argument, which you looked at briefly at lunch yesterday, is at Tab 1.3 The argument of the Secretary of Commerce is at Tab 2.4 And the argument of the Secretary of Agriculture is at Tab 3.5 In summary, the State Department feels that beet harvesters are non-strategic and should be sold without fuss. Agriculture thinks that these particular advanced beet harvesters will help the Soviet Union in the cold war of economic competition. Commerce thinks that the Soviets will use these harvesters as prototypes and make more of their own, and it would reject the license unless the Soviets agreed to make concessions on other issues, like patent protection, commodity agreements, and other commercial issues. Defense sides with Commerce. Everyone agrees that the Soviets would make no such concession for a sale of this sort.

The parties differ as to whether, under the policy of the Kennedy Administration, this sale would have been permitted. The matter is not really relevant, since you will want to decide for yourself, but to me it is self-evident that President Kennedy would have approved this sale. His last memo on the general subject is at Tab 4.6 The economic warriors who see only the Soviet advantage in every trade never persuaded him, any more than they did President Eisenhower, but they come back to the surface in each new Administration.

You will already have seen how splendidly impartial I am on this issue. And in the light of this unhelpful partisanship, as well as the exist-ence of strong feelings in Commerce and Agriculture, you may wish to have a brief meeting of the interested parties before you decide.

Another advantage of a meeting is that you can state your own views clearly at a time when members of the Board are about to be asked for their opinion by the Foreign Relations Committee.

McG. B.

Harvesters approved for export7

Harvesters not approved for export

Call a meeting

Speak to me

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [2 of 2], Box 49. Secret.

2 See Documents 149 and 150.

3 None of the tabs is attached. Tab 1 is presumably an undated Department of State position paper on the issue, which is attached to a memorandum from Benjamin H. Read to Buddy, March 3. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [2 of 2], Box 49)

4 Tab 2 is probably a February 24 memorandum from Hodges to Buddy, not found, which Freeman briefly referenced in a March 31 memorandum to President Johnson. (Department of State, Central Files, STR 6) Also see Document 150.

5 Not found.

6 Not further identified here, but Tab 4 may be Kennedy's memorandum cited in footnote 3, Document 150.

7 None of the options is checked.

152. Editorial Note 152. Editorial Note

On March 13, 1964, Secretary of State Rusk, accompanied by Under Secretary Ball, testified on East-West trade before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. A detailed draft outline of the Secretary's testimony, prepared in S/P on March 3, is attached to a March 3 memorandum from Edward Fried to Springsteen. (Department of State, S/PC Files: Lot 70 D 199, Economic Policy—1964) The transcript of his prepared statement (Department of State Press Release No. 108, March 13) is ibid. Rusk and Ball's entire testimony was subsequently published in East-West Trade: Hearings Before the Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, Eighty-eighth Congress, Second Session (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1964), Part I, pp. 2–42. Part II of these hearings took place in February 1965.

153. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 153. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 14, 1964.

This folder deals with the tough problem of decisions on export licenses for the Soviet Union which will come before the National Security Council at noon on April 16.2

The administrative heart of this problem is that responsibility is shared by departments which have sharply different views, and that in the last three years no one short of the President has had authority to make clear-cut decisions. The Secretary of Commerce has the immediate statutory responsibility, but the instinct of Luther Hodges was often different from that of others, and it became necessary to appeal individual cases over and over again to President Kennedy. The President in turn preferred to take it case by case, and indeed no blanket instruction could possibly be issued that does not leave individual cases open for individual judgment.

The difficulty is that each sale of nonstrategic items involves a balance of the value of the Soviet Union as against the commercial value to the United States. And each of these estimates in turn is affected by whether one thinks that peaceful trade with the Russians, in and of itself, is a good thing. In any given case, one can always predict the reaction of any individual more from his basic attitudes than from the evidence presented. The close cases are always open to subjective judgment.

Ideally, we ought to have a general review and reach a new basic and solid policy, but this is not the year for that, and nobody really thinks that we can put ourselves in the position to have basic negotiation with the Russians in the next few months. Therefore, the real question is how to handle a relatively small number of controversial items between now and November.

My suggestion is (1) that you listen to argument in the NSC from State, Commerce, Agriculture and Defense, (2) that you then state your own basic attitude, and (3) that you announce that you expect to summarize these basic views in an appropriate memorandum, which will also indicate the procedure which you wish to have followed in meeting these general rules.

McG.B.

P.S. My own judgment, for what it is worth, is that the right way to deal with these cases is to approve industrial licenses much more broadly than Commerce wishes to do. I do not agree with the argument of Agriculture that a few advanced technical tools will solve an otherwise insoluble problem. I do not agree that we can or should try to negotiate political concessions in return for straight commercial deals, and I think our manufacturers should be required to bargain for their own licensing agreements, if necessary (though they won't get much). Except in the field of strategic goods, there is nearly always an alternative supplier somewhere in the Free World, and I think our restrictive practices hurt us without hurting the Soviet Union. I have heard you speak of your general support for peaceful trade, and I think these are cases in which that principle can safely be allowed to govern.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [2 of 2], Box 49. Secret.

2 Reference is to four tabs, not attached to the source text but to another copy of the memorandum. They are identified as follows: A. Cabinet Positions; B. Pending Cases; C. Kennedy Position; and D. Eisenhower Policy. (Ibid., Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 3, Box 1)

154. Summary of Record of the 527th Meeting of the National Security Council 154. Summary of Record of the 527th Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, April 16, 1964, noon.

U.S. Trade Relations with the USSR, East European Communist Countries

Secretary Hodges, as Chairman of the Export Control Review Board, briefly summarized the Board's discussion and inability to reach agreement.2 He gave in detail the Commerce Department's view.

Secretary Freeman, speaking with emotion, said the decision on the beet harvesters involved a decision as to how much we want to help Soviet agriculture. He argued that beet harvesters and fertilizer plants (see attached list),3 as well as any other advanced technology, would help the Russians deal with one of their most difficult problems, i.e., how to increase their food production.

Secretary Ball pointed out that the beet harvesters involved could be bought elsewhere in Europe. Soviet possession of the beet harvesters would be marginal because if the Soviets wanted to get the machines they could get them if they paid enough for them elsewhere. The Soviets can make effective propaganda use of our refusal to sell them machines which increase their food production. He asked whether anyone thought we were now conducting economic warfare against the USSR. If we decide to do so we would lose much and gain very little. To adopt the policy of trying to suppress agricultural production in the USSR would be to follow a different course of action than we were now following. As regards the sale of petro-chemical plants, this is a different issue because such plants verge on being strategic by definition.

Ambassador Thompson said our only hope of achieving peaceful coexistence lies with the Soviet people. If they are led to believe that we are refusing to assist their government in increasing food production, they might then turn against us. In addition, the sale of the machines to the Soviet Union would be a helpful move at a time when they are in deep trouble with the Chinese. There appears to be no way to prevent the Russians from getting the machines from other buyers in Europe.

Secretary Freeman asked again whether we wanted to help the Russians overcome their agricultural failure. When they are in trouble, do we want to make them look good?

Secretary Ball said an issue of broad policy is involved. What we can do in this field of trade is very small. We can get no support from our allies if we try to prevent trade in peaceful goods. Mr. McGeorge Bundy said the question came down to one of whether we wanted to delay their getting the beet harvesters for a short time, at the cost of giving up Soviet peaceful trade and forfeiting important political advantages.

Secretary Hodges said he was not proposing to engage in economic warfare with the USSR. He merely wanted to try to see if we could get some quid pro quo from the Soviets in return for selling them advanced agricultural machines and technological data. Could we not do some of the negotiating now and more later after the elections?

Secretary Ball said that after the elections we could consider broad trade negotiations with the Soviets. In such negotiations the Russians would want to talk about credits and most-favored-nation trade treatment. In such negotiation we might be able to gain such advantages as protection of patent rights, etc. However, we cannot get a quid pro quo for a small sale. We must either sell these machines unconditionally or give up the idea of selling them.

Ambassador Stevenson asked whether we could license the equipment rather than sell it to the Russians. Secretary Hodges said it might be possible to do this. In addition, we could ask the Soviets to give us a written agreement that they would not copy the machines.

Secretary Freeman said the case was not a small one because the Russians wanted huge fertilizer plants involving highly advanced technology. If we gave them such technology the amount of fertilizer they would produce would be sufficient to make a big difference in their total agricultural production.

Director McCone said that as regards the fertilizer plants, the Russians could get them in Europe. In flat opposition to the statement made by Secretary Freemen, Mr. McCone said we had no corner on technology covering fertilizer plants and that the difference between our plants and European plants, including Russian plants, was very little indeed.

In response to the President's question, Deputy Secretary Vance said his view was a very simple one, i.e., we have something unique to sell; therefore, let us get a quid pro quo for it.

Secretary McNamara pointed out that if the Russians wanted to obtain the machines or the plants they could do so either by secretly blueprinting one in the U.S. or purchasing them elsewhere. He did not think that we should pay a substantial price for not making the sales, especially if a political loss is involved. He thought that we ought to try to get a higher price for the technical data which would be involved, but that this would be for the sellers to try to get.

Mr. Buddy asked whether the manufacturers or the U.S. Government should attempt to get a higher price for the technical data involved. Secretary McNamara replied that the Government should attempt to get a general agreement covering all sales and that individual sellers could operate under this cover.

Secretary Ball said it was up to the manufacturers to protect their technology. They could obtain a price for the technology by increasing the price of the produce sold to the Soviets. He said that the U.S. Government should not go in to try to protect a private dealer. The Government is not in a position to police any such agreement in the USSR. We must rely on the seller to include in his sales price a sufficient amount to cover the technology involved.

Mr. Buddy pointed out that although we have tried over the years we have so far not yet solved even the simple problem of protecting U.S. copyrights. Ambassador Stevenson pointed out that he himself had negotiated unsuccessfully with the Russians as the representative of the writers and publishers.

Mr. McCone said the Soviet lag in agriculture is due to disorganization and lack of incentive. Modern machines will not solve this problem nor will they have a major effect on Soviet production. In response to the President's question, Mr. McCone recommended that we approve only small transactions until a broad policy decision is reached. He recalled that a Congressional committee has questioned him closely on the sale of U.S. wheat to the USSR. He said if we sold agricultural equipment to the USSR and not to Cuba we would have difficulty in explaining why. He then read U.S.-Soviet trade figures and made the point that U.S. trade of approximately $44 million is a tiny part of the total Soviet trade of approximately $4 billion annually.

Secretary Freeman said he had had the same trouble as Mr. McCone in explaining to a Congressional committee why we were selling wheat to the Communists and opposing peaceful trade with Cuba. He thought we should try to avoid further discussion of this matter until after November. (The President intervened to add that after November we may not have to answer Congressional questioners.)

In response to the President's request for his views, the Speaker said he wondered what our position would be if the situation were reversed. He reminded those present that he had always fought for foreign aid and that he always put the national interest uppermost. He then noted that the ability of the Soviets to carry on their economy is a part of the cold war.

There followed a discussion on how long it would take the Russians to mass produce a U.S. machine used as a prototype. Secretary Freeman said it would take two to four years. Secretary McNamara said it would take a very short time.

Secretary Freeman said that if we helped the Russians to produce sugar surplus to their domestic needs they would then try to affect the world sugar market. Mr. Buddy pointed out that any reduction in the world price of sugar would create real difficulties for Castro.

The President asked how we answered the argument about why we opposed the British sale of buses to Cuba. Mr. Ball replied by saying there was a great difference between sales to the USSR and sales to Cuba. Cuba is small. The USSR economy is huge. The sales we are talking about to the USSR are a tiny part of a huge market. If we refuse to sell the goods now under discussion, our action would be no more than a small mosquito bite. However, sales to Cuba might make the difference between whether the economy continued to operate or whether it broke down. Our purpose is to maintain our relations with the Soviet Union in the current period, avoiding minor irritations during a period of uncertainty in the Soviet Bloc. The sales issue is not important enough to risk hampering our policy of keeping our relations with the USSR steady.

There followed a discussion as to whether we had superior technology which the Russians wanted. Secretary Freeman argued that we did and Director McCone argued that the differences were very small. Mr. McCone said the Russians could buy fertilizer plants equal to ours in the U.K. and in Italy.

Secretary Hodges, indicating considerable irritation, said our allies were making monkeys of us. They are selling to the USSR and we are not. If we decide to sell to the Soviet Union, we should go in whole hog and seek to obtain a major market.

Mr. Buddy, noting that Secretary Dillon was not present, said he thought he should state the Secretary's views., i.e., we can probably keep our allies from granting credit to Cuba, but we cannot prevent them from selling to the USSR.

Secretary Ball suggested that we decide to approve the specific items under discussion and then look toward broad trade negotiations about the end of this year. As to petro-chemicals, he repeated his view that his is a hard case and it is another problem because it affects the life of our oil investments. He opposed issuing licenses in this area. He suggested we wait until the end of the year to decide whether we want to undertake trade negotiations with the USSR.

The President asked Governor Herter for his views. Mr. Herter said that weighing the considerations was very difficult. He felt that the Soviet reaction to a denial would be greater than any gain to us. He pointed out that foodstuffs are in a different category than other goods and recalled that in 1922, when our attitude toward the USSR was very hostile, we shipped food to the USSR. Actions having to do with the production of food are very sensitive indeed. All that we would be doing by denying the licenses would be slowing up food production in the USSR slightly.

Ambassador Stevenson said that for years he had urged an increase in non-strategic trade with the USSR. The Russians will get their machines from somewhere. There is no net gain in denying the licenses. The only result would be to heat up the cold war. Trade relations with the USSR should be reviewed after the elections. He had tried and failed to persuade the Russians to deal properly on the issue of copyrights. He suggested that we might try to license the equipment to the USSR in return for their agreement not to sell copies of the equipment outside the USSR. Acting USIA Director Wilson said that granting the licenses would produce a favorable foreign reaction and that the refusal would give the Soviets an argument against us.

Mr. McDermott said he did not understand why the Russians would be upset if we refused to make a sale of such small size. He thought that such a sale would be very difficult to explain to the American people.

The President commented on the broad implications of East-West trade. He said he was encouraged that the Foreign Relations Committee was studying this problem. He thought that we should try to get an overall position and suggested that one thing we might do is to list those things we want from the Russians in return for our sales, such as a prohibition on the sale of our machines outside the USSR. If we let the Russians think that we will sell them the items now under discussion without asking them for anything more than the sales price, the Russians will conclude that we would be prepared to sell them anything they wanted. He said we should not take any immediate action. As to how the Russians would react, he said that if we held back the sales or even refused to make them, he doubted the Moscow reaction would be strong. We should explore the problem and consider it further. If we make this sale, would it lead to other sales? One sale will determine our general policy. We are doing everything to encourage good relations and ease tensions. If he had to decide now, which he did not think he had to, on balance, he would let the Russians have the machines because there would be no real damage to us. However, we must retain our self-respect and let the Russians know that in our dealings with them it is a two-way street. We give and we get. He said no one in the room wanted to agree to large industrial sales to the USSR certainly in the next six months because of the difficulty of dealing domestically with such sales.

Bromley Smith 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 8, 4/16/64, East-West Trade, Box 1. Secret. Drafted by Bromley K. Smith.

2 See Document 149.

3 Not found.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

155. National Security Council Record of Action No. 2481 155. National Security Council Record of Action No. 24811

Washington, undated.

U.S. TRADE RELATIONS WITH THE USSR AND EAST EUROPEAN COMMUNIST COUNTRIES

a. Discussed the export of the USSR and East European Communist countries of U.S. agricultural equipment and fertilizer production processes.

b. Noted the President's request that the Secretary of Commerce consider what trade assurances or undertakings we could reasonably expect to obtain from the USSR and the European Communist countries in return for licensing advanced agricultural equipment and technology. U.S. firms interested in exports to USSR and East European Communist countries are to be consulted in preparing this study.

c. Noted the President's acceptance of the recommendation that consideration of broad trade negotiations with the USSR should be de-ferred at this time.

1 Source: Department of State, S/PC Files: Lot 70 D 199, NSC Record of Actions. Secret. The action was taken at the 527th meeting of the NSC on April 16; see Document 154. A draft record of actions proposed by Secretary Hodges is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 8, 4/16/64, East-West Trade, Box 1.

156. Letter From Secretary of Agriculture Freeman to Secretary of Commerce Hodges 156. Letter From Secretary of Agriculture Freeman to Secretary of Commerce Hodges 1

Washington, April 16, 1964.

Dear Luther:

I've just returned to the office and want to immediately tell you that we are anxious to help in any way that you see fit in the assignment that the President delegated to you at the National Security Council Meeting.2

It would appear to me that we ought to be able to further our trade and economic relations with the Soviet Union with all of the commercial and good will implications therefrom without having to sell to them the most advanced, useful and critical items which will make the maximum contribution to their lagging agriculture. We do not want to starve them out or be in a position of denying their people food and sustenance. On the other hand, realistically agriculture is their No. 1 failure and we ought not to go out of our way to make it a dramatic success. Certainly there are no humanitarian implications here for they are not starving to death. The sale of wheat to Russia was our No. 1 propaganda triumph over them.

Therefore, it would appear to me that on a host of things we ought to be relatively liberal, provided that we get a proper quid pro quo. On others where it will go to the heart of their problem and conceivably equip them to make a success of their agriculture, and conceivably a rough commercial competitor, and conceivably also give them the where-withal to engage in economic warfare, which we have every reason to believe they would, that such things need not be made readily available. This issue we will not have to meet head-on for as the President indicated we can make certain requests of them, modest but extensive, and perhaps some we think they are not likely to respond to, in turn for our making available to them what they know to be important and advanced equipment.

Anyway this whole question now has been called to the attention of the highest authority, thoroughly reviewed, and I think your insistence that this be done and our collaboration in carrying it to this level have constituted a constructive effort and a meaningful performance of our mutual responsibilities. It is always good to stand shoulder to shoulder with the great Secretary of Commerce.

Warmest personal regards.

Sincerely yours,

Orville

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Agriculture. No classification marking. An attached note from an unidentified secretary, dated February 16, 1965, indicates that Thau (presumably Theodore L. Thau, Executive Secretary of the Advisory Committee on Export Policy) had requested this letter; and although the original could not be found, Thau was given a copy.

2 See Documents 154 and 155.

157. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson 157. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 13, 1964.

SUBJECT

Export-Import Bank Guarantee on Non-Agricultural Products for Rumania and Poland

Recommendation

That you authorize the Department's representatives, if the climate of the forthcoming talks with the Rumanians and Poles so warrants, to refer to the possibility of extending Export-Import Bank guarantees on short and medium term commercial credits for the sale of these countries of non-agricultural products from the United States.2

Discussion

On February 4, 1964 in accordance with Title III of the Foreign Aid and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of 1964, you determined that it was in the national interest for the Export-Import Bank to issue guarantees in connection with the sale of United States agricultural products to the USSR, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and Rumania.3 In Secretary Rusk's memorandum of January 14, 1964, recommending the above action, he noted that at a subsequent time your approval might be sought for extending guarantees to these Soviet bloc countries to include non-agricultural as well as agricultural products.4

I believe that political circumstances in the cases of Rumania and Poland now make it advisable in terms of the national interest to consider extending guarantees on sales of non-agricultural products to these two countries. These circumstances are discussed in the enclosed memorandum.5

The Export-Import Bank has advised me that, subject to the Bank's obtaining information from Rumania and Poland that will enable the Bank to satisfy itself as to the financial capacity to repay the credits being guaranteed, the Bank is prepared to issue guarantees on a case-by-case basis in connection with sales of all types of United States products and services if it were determined to be in the national interest. The credit terms of such sales would not exceed those normally encountered in international commercial transactions and in any case would not exceed five years. I am not at this time requesting you to make a formal determination that it is the national interest for the Export-Import Bank to issue such guarantees. Rather, you are requested to approve our using the possibility of such a determination in discussions with the Rumanians and the Poles with the view that if we are satisfied with these discussions on trade, financial and political grounds, I would then recommend that a determination be made by you that the issuance of such guarantees by the Export-Import Bank would be in the national interest.

George W. Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) 15–10. Confidential. An attached copy of the memorandum indicates that it was drafted by Peter F. Warker (EUR/EE) on May 8 and concurred in by U, E, L/E, E/MDC, the Export-Import Bank, and the White House.

2 The President initialed his approval on May 21.

3 No further record of this February 4 determination has been found.

4  Document 148.

5 Undated, not printed. Attached to this memorandum is telegram 486 to Bucharest, April 7, instructing the Legation to extend an invitation to Romanian officials to visit Washington for discussions on economic and related subjects. Also attached is a May 8 memorandum from Philip H. Trezise (E) to Acting Secretary Ball, indicating that a Romanian delegation would be coming to Washington the week of May 18 and asking him to sign the memorandum. Documentation on this visit is in vol. XVII, pp. 389–397.

158. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) 158. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator)1

Washington, June 25, 1964.

It appears that the Department of Commerce has done it again. In a current export bulletin dated March 16, 1964, they have issued some sort of instruction which inhibits those who buy from American refineries and petrochemical plants, in friendly countries abroad, from selling any of their products to bloc countries without the consent of the Department of Commerce. This appears to be an excellent way of increasing the business of Japanese and German exporters of competing plants. What do we do to stop it?

McG. B. 2

P.S. When we have stopped it, we owe Pierre Salinger a report.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. No classification marking.

2 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

3 In a July 6 note to Buddy, Bator wrote that he had told Salinger about a forthcoming export bulletin that would waive “for the time being the offending requirement as regards the sale of U.S. plant and equipment abroad.” He added that he was “in touch with Commerce about how the entire system might be reformed after November.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47)

159. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to President Johnson 159. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 25, 1964.

Dear Mr. President:

Re: Agricultural Quid Pro Quo—East-West Trade

You will recall that some weeks ago at a Cabinet Meeting you asked the U.S. Secretary of Commerce to see what could be done about getting a quid pro quo on beet harvesters.2

We have been working on this with the industry people who are to furnish the beet harvesters and who are making slow progress.

The Amtorg Corporation of the Soviet Union told the beet harvester manufacturing company, the other day, that they no longer wished to buy the harvesters. However, the manufacturer's representative is going back to Moscow to see if he can get the matter back on the right track.

In the meanwhile, you should know that Agriculture has withdrawn its reservation on licensing of fertilizer plants, and that we will proceed with the appropriate licensing without the requirements of a quid pro quo, because the purchasers can obtain similar plants from our competitors.

There are a few remaining applications on industrial exports on which we will try to obtain some quid pro quo understanding.

Respectfully yours,

Luther H. Hodges 3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, White House, May–June. No classification marking. Drafted by Hodges. An attached abstract of secretarial correspondence prepared by Jack N. Behrman for Secretary Hodges on June 24 summarizes the status of an agricultural quid pro quo on East-West trade. Also attached is a note to Behrman saying that Secretary Hodges wanted him to see the Secretary's letter before it was sent and asking him to initial the note after reading. Handwritten on this note is “O.K.” followed by Behrman's initials and a June 25 date.

2 No record of a discussion of this subject at a Cabinet meeting has been found. Hodges may have been thinking of the NSC discussion on April 16 and the subsequent Record of Action; see Documents 154 and 155.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Hodges signed the original.

160. Report of Meeting 160. Report of Meeting1

Washington, August 19, 1964.

REPORT OF MEETING WITH RCA ON EXPORT OF COLOR TELEVISION APPARATUS

PARTICIPANTS

Commerce: F.D. Hockersmith, Director
Office of Export Control

Edward P. Walinsky, Director
Policy Planning Division, OEC

John R. Collins, Director
Scientific & Electronic Equipment Division, OEC

RCA: Mr. Charles Odorizzi
Group Executive Vice President
New York

Mr. Carleton D. Smith
Staff Vice President
Washington, D.C.

Mr. C.H. Colledge
Division Vice President & General Manager
Broadcasting & Communication Products Div.
Camden, N.J.

Mr. Romney Wheeler
Public Affairs Department
New York

Mr. James Toney

The meeting was arranged at the request of Mr. Carleton Smith to permit RCA an opportunity to present to the Office of Export Control its plans with respect to color television in Europe. The RCA representatives said that Europe will soon adopt color television standards which will be observed throughout the continent, including Soviet Bloc countries. The system to be used will be determined by vote of the participating countries at a meeting in March 1965. Through the use of uniform standards, color programs could readily be exchanged.

The United States has already adopted the NTSC system, as has Canada and Japan, and the U.K. is inclined in that direction. If the same system is adopted by Europe, RCA believes there will be opportunities in coming years not only to exchange program material but also to sell U.S. equipment for color television. A very rough estimate of sales potential running from $50 to $100 million was mentioned.

Although several systems are in existence, the chief competitor of NTSC is the French SECAM system. French industry, with active government support, is presently making a concerted drive to have the SECAM system adopted throughout Europe. To this end, it is presenting demonstrations in both Eastern and Western Europe.

To counteract the French drive, RCA is planning (at an estimated cost of $1 million) to equip a van with color television demonstration equipment, including cameras, television sets, monitors, studio and test equipment, and video tape recorders. This outfit will be sent first to England and from there may be reexported for demonstration purposes in various other countries. In particular, RCA has been approached by the USSR for a demonstration of color television and, since Bloc countries will participate in the vote on the system to be adopted, RCA would like to exhibit NTSC apparatus in several Eastern European countries.

RCA representatives said they were aware from earlier discussions with OEC officials that there would probably be no objection to the demonstration and sale of color television apparatus in the Bloc with the exception of the video tape recorder, and that permission would probably be granted under certain conditions to use the recorder for demonstration purposes, but not sale, in the Bloc. They said, however, that the restrictions which OEC would impose on the recorder would invalidate their entire campaign to win support of the Bloc countries. It would be necessary, they said, to permit Bloc personnel unrestricted use of the demonstration equipment so that Bloc broadcasters might assure themselves that it could be operated and maintained by their own people. It would also be necessary to convince them that they could buy U.S. equipment if they should support the adoption of the NTSC standards. The RCA representatives emphasized that the video tape recorder is a key element in the NTSC system, more so than in the French system for technical reasons, and that it would be next to useless to try to promote U.S. color television equipment sales without the recorder.

A Commerce participant pointed out that video tape recorders are considered strategic items and that they are embargoed to the Soviet Bloc not only by the United States but by all other COCOM countries, including Japan. Accordingly, any application to sell them to a Soviet Bloc country would normally be perfunctorily denied.

An RCA official responded that much has transpired in the past five years, and that it is the opinion of his company that video recorders, while admittedly complicated devices with some possible strategic applications, no longer represent very advanced technology. He pointed out that after Ampex originally developed them RCA independently designed and built its own video recorder, and that several Japanese manufacturers are also in production of models of Japanese design. He said the technology has been fully divulged in the literature, and that Russian engineers have had ample opportunity to examine the recorders in various countries in the Western world. He said RCA believes the Russians would have no great difficulty in producing video tape recorders and are, in fact, reported to be in production on them, although he had no information on their quality. He repeated the contention that the United States would be excluded from the color television market in all of Europe unless the NTSC standards are adopted.

Mr. Hockersmith stated that Commerce has never altered its position with respect to denying strategic materials to the Soviet Bloc because of commercial considerations. He suggested, however, that RCA submit an application covering the export of its equipment, including the video recorder, to the Soviet Bloc for demonstration and possible sale, pointing out the objective of getting Europe to adopt the NTSC system and the further sales which would follow success. He assured the RCA representatives that the matter would receive a very thorough review. The RCA officials agreed to act on Mr. Hockersmith's recommendation.

John R. Collins

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Balance of Payments. No classification marking. Drafted by John R. Collins on August 20. The meeting was held at 1201 E Street, N.W. A handwritten note on the first page of the source text from T. W. (not further identified) to Jack N. Behrman, August 25, reads: “I think this should be most thoroughly studied.” Attached to the source text is an August 25 handwritten note, from Behrman to Secretary Hodges, that reads: “This one you will want to read and follow.”

161. Report of the President's Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy 161. Report of the President's Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy1

Washington, undated.

INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY

[Here follow pages 1–21 [Pgs. 1–21 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, and Doc. 10].]

5. East-West Trade

United States trade policy toward trade with Communist countries has been largely a reflection of our political relations. Trade with all Communist countries is restricted to some extent. The scope and intensity of the restrictions fluctuate from time to time with the harshness of our relations with the particular country involved.

Experience has shown that we, and even the West as a whole, have little capacity to affect the viability of Communist countries by denying the trade. The economies of Russia and China are relatively little depend-ent upon outside trade and the Bloc as a whole could, if necessary, satisfy its minimum requirements at least to the extent required to prevent defection. Unless the West acts together, the force of trade restriction is marginal. Efforts to achieve this unity of action have not been particularly effective except in times of actual hostilities, and they have been a continuing source of friction within the Alliance.

It is generally asserted that prospects for American trade with Communist countries are severely limited. But our review of the situation indicates that under relatively favorable circumstances United States exports to the Soviet Union and Eastern European countries could reach as much as $500–$700 million annually by 1970.

Even if we do not accept this optimistic estimate, the Task Force concludes that in the years to come United States policy should actively encourage trade in both directions with Soviet Russia and Eastern Europe. (Of course, exports of items and technology which really make a direct and significant contribution to Communist military potential should continue to be prohibited.) This would involve some changes in our stated policies toward the Soviet Union, though not toward Eastern Europe. In practice, more realistic licensing policies and more aggressive trade promotion will both be needed.

It has been argued that trade with Russia stands on a different footing than trade with the other European Communist countries because we are more interested in shifting Soviet resources away from military uses. It is said that by denying trade we could promote such a shift, but this is unlikely. Soviet military requirements are relatively absolute and it is not in our interest to encourage belt-tightening in other sectors and consequent internal repression.

Neither of these competing hypotheses can be satisfactorily demonstrated. Thus the presumption in favor of the political and economic benefits of open trade should prevail. A corollary of this position is that the United States should stand ready to guarantee export credits covering such trade on terms that are competitive with other industrial countries so long as the terms are not concessional. At the same time we should retain the ability to modulate our Soviet trade policy in accordance with sharp political changes if that should prove desirable.

Trade with China, Cuba, North Viet-Nam and North Korea is now embargoed. The question is whether to remove some or all of these existing restrictions. That would be a political gesture of the greatest significance. It would signal abroad that we were generally reorienting our policy toward the particular country involved. It is, therefore, important that when such a move is made, we do intend to convey such a signal. On the other hand, if and when we do so intend, a revision of trade policy is an appropriate and discriminating instrument.

It is apparent from this discussion that East-West trade policy contains, and will at best continue to have, a large political component. Liberalization should be carried out in a way that permits prompt and effective adjustment to changing political realities. To this end, the Task Force recommends an East-West Trade Act giving the President power to grant most-favored-nation treatment and to negotiate trade agreements with Communist countries whenever he finds such an agreement to be in the public interest. Such legislation is needed to give the President authority to negotiate agreements of the type described. We have already been constrained by the absence of such authority in the recent past, and the East-West Trade Act should be put forward at the earliest favorable opportunity.

[Here follow the remainder of the Introduction and Summary and Chapter One, “Aid.”]

CHAPTER TWO

TRADE

[Here follow pages 1–19 [Pgs. 1–19 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9].]

IV. East-West Trade

A. Where We Are and How We Got There

Until the Stalinist era after World War II, trade with Soviet Russia and other more transitory Communist governments was carried on under the universal and non-discriminatory regime that governed all United States trade.

Restrictions on exports to the USSR and European Communist bloc were imposed with the onset of the Cold War and were tightened and intensified during the Korean War. They have gradually moderated since then, although except for agricultural products, special licenses continue to be required for all exports to most countries. For Poland, Yugoslavia and more recently Rumania, a more extended list of items is on general license. With Communist China's entry into the Korean War, the United States imposed an embargo on trade with that country which persists to the present. The embargo also covers the other Asian Communist regimes in North Korea and North Vietnam. Similarly, as the Castro government's formal alignment with Communism became clearer, increasingly tight restrictions were placed on exports to Cuba, culminating in a total embargo on all exports except for food and medicine in 1962.

Import restrictions take two forms. For all Communist nations except Poland and Yugoslavia, most-favored-nation tariff treatment is denied. Thus, Communist countries pay Smoot-Hawley tariff rates on their exports to the United States. This treatment began in the Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951,2 and at that time Yugoslavia was the only exception. Most-favored-nation treatment was extended to Poland in 1960 under a somewhat strained interpretation of the existing statutory language. The present situation is stabilized by Section 231(b) of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962,3 as amended,4 but Poland and Yugoslavia are the only countries eligible for most-favored-nation treatment under this statute. Imports from the Soviet Union of a few specified items, notably furs, are proscribed. All imports from China, North Korea, North Vietnam, and Cuba are prohibited outright.

Credit terms on sales to Communist countries have also fluctuated with our overall policy on trade with Communist countries. Opinions of the Attorney General take the position that Export-Import Bank guarantees can be given for normal commercial periods without offending either the Johnson Act5 or the Battle Act.6 But these opinions are recent, and, in any event, as a matter of practice, except for certain special items, guarantees of this kind have not been used much.

The United States has sought the cooperation of friends and allies in carrying out these policies. Except during the period of actual hostilities in the Korean War, however, this effort has not been notably successful. Trade between Western Europe and Communist countries has expanded steadily since the mid-50's. The European countries and Japan have been unwilling to observe an embargo on Communist China. They have exerted a steady pressure against credit limitations on Communist countries, a pressure which currently seems to be showing results. They have refused to cooperate in cutting off trade to Cuba, although they have been somewhat more compliant in the matter of shipping for carriage of Cuban trade. Latin American countries have, for the most part, joined in our effort to eliminate Cuban trade, but the results have been more psychological than practical.

B. General Considerations Affecting East-West Trade Policy

This sketchy history shows that United States trade policy towards Communist governments is largely a reflection of political attitudes rather than a matter of economic policy.

Experience and economic analysis has shown that we, and even the West as a whole, have little capacity to affect the viability of Communist regimes by a policy of trade denial. The economies of Russia and China, the two largest Communist countries, are relatively little dependent upon outside trade. Although other Communist countries of Eastern Europe show a larger traditional reliance on trade, the Bloc as a whole has been able to satisfy their requirements, at least to the extent required to prevent defection, under economic conditions and public attitudes to date.

On the other hand, it is generally accepted that the markets available on Communist countries for American exports are relatively limited. This premise has been challenged. Western European trade with European Communist countries excluding East Germany amounts to something over $1 billion annually. Most of this is in capital goods of the kind in which the United States enjoys a relative high comparative advantage. It is said that if we could get our “natural share” of this volume, it would mean substantial returns for American business. A re-examination of the figures suggests that under very favorable circumstances, United States trade with the European Communist countries might reach as much as $500–$700 million by 1970, though there is a question how this would be financed given present export patterns and trade practices in the Communist Bloc. If the Eastern Bloc should enter upon a process of growth like that of Western Europe in the past decade, the potential market would be very much greater.

These amounts are substantial, but the assumptions on which they are based are optimistic. The remainder of this paper proceeds on the assumption that economic gains cannot yet be shown to be substantial enough to outweigh political considerations when they point in the opposite direction.

C. Soviet Russia and the East European Bloc

Assuming no fundamental change in the political situation, our policy on trade with Soviet Russia and Eastern Europe should continue to prohibit exports of items and technology which make a direct and significant contribution to the Communist military potential. This is roughly the range covered by the Battle Act strategic list and the COCOM list. With this exception, we should actively encourage trade in both directions.

As far as the Eastern European countries other than Soviet Russia are concerned, this represents more or less our present policy. We have recognized that opportunities exist for the judicious use of trade policy to encourage tendencies toward independence and autonomy in individual countries and to turn them increasingly toward the West in their external dealings and perhaps even in their internal political systems. Considerable evidence can be adduced to support the existence of such trends in the Eastern European countries. At least in the case of Yugoslavia, the capacity to maintain a line of policy independent of Moscow over the past decade and a half is the result, in large part, of economic, military and moral support from the Western countries, particularly the United States. Poland's trade with the United States has expanded in parallel with the cautious growth of its policy independence from Moscow. Elsewhere, the United States has seemed rather slow, in practice, to seize the opportunities for the use of trade as an instrument of policy in Eastern Europe.

It may be argued that trade with Russia stands on a different footing. We are not significantly concerned with the military power of the Communist nations in Eastern Europe. In the USSR, however, we are interested in a shift of resources away from military uses. Such a shift, if it could be secured, would bear real relation to our own security. By denying trade, and particularly trade on favorable credit terms, it is argued, we could encourage such a shift. The reverse arrangement is equally plausible; Russia's military requirements tend to be relatively absolute and other sectors will be sacrificed to meet those requirements. Any necessary belt-tightening and attendant measures of civilian discipline will be imposed by the regime so far as possible. It is not in our interest to encourage a return to such internal policies in Russia.

It is probable that neither of these competing hypotheses can be satisfactorily demonstrated. Under those circumstances and absent a showing of some real political gain to be achieved by continuing the present restrictive trade policies, the normal presumption in favor of the political and economic benefits of open trade should prevail. This would mean much-expanded trade with Russia as with the rest of the Eastern Bloc. The wheat deal, in effect, symbolizes an existing readiness for this. We should retain the ability to modulate trade policy in accordance with sharp political changes, if that is desirable.

It is said that the USSR has reached the limit of its ability to finance increased imports to current payments from reserves or by short term credit—up to, say, five years. If this proves to be the case, expanded U.S. exports to the USSR will require an easing of present limits on credit. There seems to be no case for extending truly concessionary credit terms such as those given to developing countries. However, if we are willing to let trade proceed, and while Export-Import Bank guarantee authority remains available in present amounts there is no reason why we should not guarantee export credits on terms that are necessary to meet the competition of other industrial countries and that bear some relation to the useful life of the exported item.

D. Communist China, Cuba, North Vietnam and Korea In this group of countries, where an embargo is now in effect, the problem is different.

If the issue were whether to impose trade restraints now as an initial proposition, a good case could be made against such a course. Besides denying ourselves markets, a policy of trade restraints seems to have little impact on the Communist regimes in these places, cuts channels of communication by which one might hope to influence policy there, and causes endless friction with our allies. But, the question is not whether to impose trade restraints, but whether to take off an embargo already in effect. Such a move would be a foreign policy gesture of great significance. It would signal abroad that we were reorienting our general attitude toward the particular country involved. Other nations all over the world would adjust their own policies accordingly. We should recognize when we take such action that its principal short term significance is as a signal. If we wish to convey such a signal, modulation of trade policy can be an extremely useful and sensitively discriminating instrument in the process of readjusting relations.

E. Legislation

It is apparent from the foregoing discussion that any change in East-West trade policy should not take the form of a general resort in the non-discriminatory and multilateral basis on which we trade with non-Communist countries. Since East-West trade policy contains, and will at best continue to have, a large political component, any liberalization should be carried out in such a way as to permit prompt and effective adjustment to any changing political realities. This suggests that trade should be carried out under a series of bilateral, relatively short-term agreements. The bilateral character would permit us to discriminate from country to country as political circumstances warrant; the short-term aspect would permit us to review relations with a particular country to take account of political changes over time. The bilateral framework has the additional virtues of being familiar to the Communist countries and of permitting a staged impact on domestic interests. It has the disadvantage of reinforcing an existing tendency toward bilateralism in Communist trade which helps insulate Communist economics from world market forces. Other instruments, however, may be available for encouraging contrary tendencies. We recommend an East-West Trade Act designed to provide for a program of bilateral agreements with Communist countries, conditioned on specific findings of the President in each case that the particular agreement undertaken will be in the national interest. The essence of each agreement would be an undertaking by the United States to grant export licenses on products covered by the agreement up to an agreed annual maximum amount, in return for the promise of the other country to import a stipulated minimum of these products. In addition, the United States would grant most-favored-nation treatment to a stated quantity of specified products to be imported from the other party.

A further question is whether the Act should contain a provision modifying the standards now embodied in Export Control Act.7 The Act provides for the denial of a license where “the President shall determine that such export makes a significant contribution of the military or economic potential of such nation or nations which would prove detrimental of the national security and welfare of the United States.” The Administration of this provision has been rather restrictive, particularly with respect to technology associated with advanced capital goods exports. Such technology has been thought to run afoul of the language prohibiting exports which promote the “economic potential” of the Bloc countries, even where substantially similar technology is available in Western Europe. The language permits the exercise of judgment and, in the final analysis, the President could, in any particular case, make a judgment that the standards of the Act are met and the license should issue. On the other hand, the language and its legislative history make for a restrictive policy, both within the Executive Branch and Congress. It would be desirable to have broader language. The question resolves itself into a political judgment whether such language can be enacted at an acceptable cost.

[Here follows Chapter III, “Money.”]

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Economic Policy—1964. Secret. The source text comprises pp. 22–24 of the Introduction and Summary and pp. 19–26 of Chapter Two, Trade. The full report was transmitted to President Johnson under cover of a November 25 letter from Carl Kaysen, Chairman of the Task Force. Kaysen's letter, pages 1–5 of the Introduction and Summary, and Chapter Three, “Money,” are printed in vol. VIII, Document 18. For text of Chapter One, “Aid,” see Document 20.

2 P.L. 82–50, approved June 16, 1951. (65 Stat. 72)

3 P.L. 87–794, approved October 11, 1962. (76 Stat. 872)

4 Section 231(b) was added to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1963, P.L. 88–205, approved December 16, 1963. (77 Stat. 390)

5 P.L. 73–151, approved April 13, 1934. (48 Stat. 574)

6 Formally known as the Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act of 1951, P.L. 82–213, approved October 26, 1951. (65 Stat. 644)

7 Export Control Act of 1949, as amended. (50 USC App. 2021, 2024)

162. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson 162. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Ball to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 14, 1964.

SUBJECT

Recommendation for New East-West Trade Legislation

We have made some progress over the past year in our efforts to build bridges to Eastern Europe. I think we might now consider seriously how we could improve our relations with the Eastern European countries in commercial and economic matters.

We are about to begin low-key negotiations with Hungary on financial claims and on some trade matters. The talks will take place in Budapest.

The Rumanian authorities are completing their preparations for placing some rather sizeable industrial orders with U.S. firms. We are moving forward on the necessary credit and licensing arrangements.

When the Secretary talked with Gromyko the other day, he suggested that we might begin informal technical talks in Washington on trade possibilities with the USSR.2 In order for these talks to make any serious progress, it would be necessary for the Soviet Union to settle its lend-lease accounts. I would not rule out the possibility that the New Soviet leadership might be prepared to negotiate an acceptable deal, if, on our part, we could offer most-favored-nation treatment for their products.

As matters stand today your lack of authority to grant most-favored-nation treatment to individual Communist countries—even where you find it to be in the national interest—is a major obstacle to the improvement of our trade relations with the USSR and Eastern Europe.

This point was stressed by your Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy, which recommended that you request such authority from the Congress as the central feature of a new East-West Trade Act.3 It is a matter of judgment whether Congress is ready for action of this kind. Bill Fulbright told me last week that, on the basis of the hearings on East-West trade held by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in the spring,4 he would be willing to sponsor an East-West Trade Bill if we wanted him to. He felt that there would be generally favorable opinion in his Committee and in the Senate.

This is a matter that obviously needs a careful testing of the water before any final decision is made. But Dean and I thought it well to raise the question with you now and to ask your advice whether we should take some informal soundings on the Hill.

George W. Ball

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 49. Secret. Originally drafted in E and S/P and sent to Secretary Rusk along with an explanatory memorandum from Walt W. Rostow (S/P) and G. Griffith Johnson (E), drafted on December 10. Because a typed notation on another copy, attached to this explanatory memorandum, indicates that the memorandum printed here was retyped in U, Ball or his staff may have redrafted parts of it. No earlier draft has been found.

2 Reference presumably is to their talk on U.S.-Soviet trade on December 9. A memorandum of their conversation on this occasion is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XIV.

3 See Document 161 and footnote 1 thereto.

4 See Document 152.

163. Airgram From the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations to the Department of State 163. Airgram From the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations to the Department of State 1

Paris, January 6, 1965.

POLTO A–392

SUBJECT

Economic Defense Officers' Conference in Berlin, December 3 and 4, 1964

REF

A. CA-4126, October 15, 1964

B. CA-5171, November 13, 19642

Begin Confidential

Economic Defense Officers (EDOs) from most of the addressee posts, and representatives from the military commands listed, attended a conference on export control enforcement problems in Berlin on December 3 and 4, 1964 with representatives of the Departments of State, Defense and Commerce, CAS and USRO/ST-Paris. This report follows the order of the agenda listed in ref. B.

1. Report on Multilateral Developments.

The US Del to COCOM gave a brief general description of COCOM, stressing its informal nature, and describing the general philosophies of the three leading COCOM countries, the US, UK and France, who follow every discussion in COCOM with the closest interest. Noting that Germany in its outlook could almost be considered a fourth member of the COCOM hard core, he stated that the remaining 11 participating countries (PCs) usually do not take active independent parts in debates unless their direct commercial interests are involved. This description of PC outlook led to a brief resume of the recently concluded List Review, wherein the US proposed adding several strategic items to the lists in order to have more effective strategic controls, whereas the only proposals made by other PCs were for deletion or relaxation of controls over items in order to further their commercial interests. The last List Review ended with several expressions of dissatisfaction. The UK and some other PCs felt that it had lasted too long. The French, who had second thoughts about a particular item they had agreed to, announced unilaterally that in the future they would not be bound by agreements reached on individual items until after the whole package of agreements had been reviewed.

As a corollary to the List Review and the PC philosophies pertaining to it, the exceptions procedure was mentioned as a good example where PCs other than the US take positions which favor their commercial interests, and in an apparent log-rolling operation, generally refrain from critical comments on the exception requests made by other PCs. The EDOs were advised that their representations in their assigned posts could materially contribute to a more active cooperation on COCOM controls.

The next List Review will commence in November 1965. Suggestions have been made by the Chairman and some PCs to streamline the procedure by requiring prior submission of thoroughly documented proposals and by making greater use of the existing authority to raise individual items for discussion between List Reviews. In cases where only two PCs are opposed on an item, much might be resolved by bilateral discussions held in advance of the List Review.

Questions were raised by EDOs concerning the future of COCOM and the strategic lists. The US Del explained that the US offers considerable resistance against unjustified relaxation of controls, but that the list has progressively been pared down, with items of principal civilian and commercial use being progressively decontrolled, especially since 1958.

In reply to a question concerning the Rumanian request to buy a nuclear reactor in the US and the resulting effect on COCOM, it was explained that some months ago the US press had reported the US willingness to consider the Rumanian proposal and the possibility of growing COCOM differentiation among Soviet Bloc countries. These reports provoked the foreign press into predicting a considerable relaxation of all embargo controls. All this raised some doubts among other PCs, especially because it preceded any COCOM discussion of the reactor problem. Both the COCOM Chairman and the French Del appeared to expect unfavorable effects on COCOM cooperation. After a preliminary COCOM discussion and a series of bilateral discussions with the most directly affected PCs, however, the initial misunderstandings are believed essentially to have been resolved.

2. Reports on U.S. Export Control Policy Developments.

The Director of the Office of Export Control, Department of Commerce, referred to the changing attitude on the part of US businessmen during the past 18 months to two years toward increasing trade with the Communist Bloc countries in Europe in non-strategic items, i.e., items not multilaterally embargoed. He stressed that this change was not toward more trade or any trade at all with Communist China, North Korea, North Vietnam or Cuba. He referred to the Businessmen's Conference at the White House in September of 1963 and the recommendations of that group that US policies on East-West trade should be re-examined and re-evaluated.3 Following this he outlined the development of the statement of policy on East-West Trade through the Committees of the US Chamber of Commerce resulting in a statement of policy, somewhat modified, of the US Chamber in April 1964.4 He noted that the statement as finally issued was little different from the terms of the Export Control Act itself.

He referred next to the statement of the President at Lexington, Virginia relative to the “building of bridges” to Eastern European satellites and indicated that work was underway in Washington relative to this aspect of policy.5 He indicated that following the election and the Administration's desire to examine the whole problem of East-West Trade, a group had been set up in the Commerce Department to examine thoroughly the problem from all angles without being influenced by any preconceived ideas or conclusions. In this connection he referred to the recent study of the Department of State where it had been concluded that US-USSR trade might possibly reach a half-billion dollars over a 5-year period.6

He then referred to the recent visit of 92 US business executives to Moscow under the auspices of Business International, the results of which were not yet known.7

As to the future he pointed out that there still remains a great deal of opposition to trade with the Communist Bloc on the part of a substantial portion of the Congress and the voluble public. He concluded by indicating that while some relaxation might occur in the coming months on trade in non-embargoed or non-strategic goods, he personally did not look for any substantial change in the reasonably near future. Reference was also made to the report by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee giving the views of business and university authorities on this subject.

[Here follow summaries of the Cuban denial program, U.S. Export Licensing procedures, EDO questions and suggestions regarding publications, special area problems, U.S. export control investigative and enforcement problems, non-member (COCOM) country controls, administrative action program, controls on MAP and foreign excess property, and EDO comments and special problems.]

U.S. Del Comments:

This was the first EDO Conference for many of those present. These, as well as their more experienced colleagues, showed a keen interest in the proceedings and made good use of the informal question and answer sessions which followed each presentation. The meeting served not only to acquaint EDOs with policies, regulations and practices of Washington export control agencies but with the peculiar and particular problems of their EDO colleagues from other countries. Not the least of the benefits derived from this meeting was the insight obtained by the Washington visitors into the varying situations and problems encountered by the EDOs in the field. The give and take of the question and answer sessions consequently did not result in a one-way flow of information from Washington to the field but a much more valuable two-way exchange of information and experience.

It was evident from the attitude and comments of the participants that these annual EDO meetings are valuable in stimulating the interest of the EDOs in their export control activities in clarifying policies and regulations, and in contributing to the general overall effectiveness of the program both in Washington and in the field.

As in the past it is considered beneficial to have as wide an attendance as possible from all major posts in COCOM Member Countries as well as from the important non-member countries and areas where aspects of export control activity are experienced.

The US Del is firmly of the opinion that these meetings should be continued on an annual basis as in the past.

Finletter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 4. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Philip M. Lindsay and F. D. Hockersmith (ST) on January 5, and contents approved by Patten D. Allen (ST). Repeated to the NATO capitals except Luxembourg, Ottawa, and Reykjavik, and to Berlin, Algiers, Beirut, Belgrade, Bern, Bucharest, Budapest, Helsinki, Madrid, Prague, Rabat, Sofia, Stockholm, Vienna, Warsaw, Amsterdam, Antwerp, Barcelona, Bilbao, Birmingham, Bremen, Casablanca, Dusseldorf, Frankfurt, Genoa, Goteborg, Hamburg, Liverpool, Munich, Naples, Rotterdam, Stuttgart, Trieste, Zurich, EUCOM J4, USA-COMZEUR, USAFE, and PDD-Frankfurt.

2 Neither printed. (Both ibid.)

3 Reference is to the White House Conference on Export Expansion September 17–18, 1963. Highlights of the report on the conference are printed in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IX, pp. 616–618.

4 Not further identified.

5 Reference is to President Johnson's remarks at the dedication of the George C. Marshall Library on May 23, 1964. Text in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book I, pp. 708–710.

6 This study has not been found.

7 Reference is to a week-long roundtable conference in Moscow ending November 23, 1964. Reports on the conference were transmitted in telegram 1584 from Moscow, November 20, and telegram 1609 from Moscow, November 23. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, TP 3 USSR (MO))

164. Editorial Note 164. Editorial Note

Early in 1965 President Johnson decided to establish a special committee of private citizens, under the chairmanship of J. Irwin Miller, Chairman of the Board of Cummins Engine Company, to study the question of trade with the Soviet bloc nations. Regarding early discussions between Miller and Johnson administration officials over the composition of the Committee and possible topics for its study, see Document 165. For text of NSAM No. 324, March 9, which formally named the 12 private citizens who served on the Committee and outlined the parameters of its mandate, see Document 167. Foy D. Kohler, Ambassador to the Soviet Union, sent his comments on the establishment of the Committee in Document 169. Regarding the recommendations of Phillip H. Trezise, Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, and Thomas C. Mann, Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, regarding the Committee, see Document 170.

The President announced the creation of the Special Committee on Trade Relations with East European Countries and the Soviet Union on April 4. For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, page 565.

Extensive documentation on the Miller Committee, as it was called, including briefing memoranda, detailed minutes of several of its meetings, and drafts of the report, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Boxes 16–25.

The report of the Committee was submitted in the form of a letter, signed by all 12 members, to President Johnson, April 29, 1965. (Ibid., Box 25) Regarding George Meany's role in approval of the report, see Document 171. For Miller's thoughts on the early release of the report, see Document 172. The report was released by the White House on May 6 and published as Report to the President of the Special Committee on U.S. Trade Relations with East European Countries and the Soviet Union (The White House, April 29, 1965). It was subsequently reprinted in Department of State Bulletin, May 30, 1966, pages 845–855. A summary of the report was transmitted in circular telegram 2159, May 6. (Department of State, Central Files, FT EUR E US) For text of the President's May 20 letter to Miller, thanking the Committee members for their efforts, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, page 565. For a later short history by Edward Sklott of the administration's decision to form the Miller Committee and support its conclusions, see “The Decision To Send East-West Trade Legislation to Congress, 1965–1966,” Commission on the Organization of the Government for the Conduct of Foreign Policy (June 1975), especially pages 77–85.

Regarding immediate efforts by the Johnson administration to implement the Miller Committee recommendations, see Documents 173, 174, 175, and 176.

165. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 165. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 17, 1965.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting this Afternoon with Irwin Miller about the President's Committee on East-West Trade2

Your East-West Trade Committee is about ready for launching. Miller is ready to go to work. He has talked to Rusk, Connor, McNamara, Harriman, and Linder, and will be seeing Ball, Freeman, and if we can work it, Mann, tomorrow.3 We have provided him with office space in the Executive Office Building. His clearance is all set.

Miller and I have put together a list of suggestions for the other members (Tab A).4 The one serious problem is with George Meany. As you know, Meany has painted himself into a very tight corner on this issue. He will give us trouble whether he is on or off. My own vote would be for including him, unless he himself turns us down. If we don't ask him first, it will be very difficult to find someone else from labor who will risk Meany's wrath.

If you approve we propose that: 1. After your meeting with Miller, George Reedy release the attached short statement (Tab B),5 announcing Miller's appointment, and indicating that the other members will be announced when appointed. (Because of the danger of leaks, it would be unwise to wait until we have lined up the full committee.)

2. The other members be announced after everyone is signed on, hopefully by early next week.

3. The Committee be instructed to report to the President in two months. We can leave open, for now, whether or not part or all of the report would be released.

We will need to discuss with you who is to say what and when up on the Hill.

At Tab C is a tentative list of topics the Committee will look into.6 We have not tried to work out rigid terms of reference. It makes better sense to let them pick and choose once they get to work. We have a good Executive Secretary from State (Edward Fried), who knows where the bodies are buried.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 8, Box 2. No classification marking.

2 Regarding the origins and scope of work of this Committee, see Document 164.

3 Transcripts summarizing the remarks to Miller by Harriman (February 16), Secretary Rusk (February 16), Secretary Freeman (undated), Linder (February 18), Secretary McNamara (February 18), Thomas Mann (March 3), George Ball (March 3), and Secretary Dillon (March 3) are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Box 23.

4 Tab A, not printed, is a list of 11 names, 9 of whom served on the Committee.

5 Not found.

6 Letter from Buddy to Miller, February 2, not printed.

166. Letter From the Chairman of the Board of Radio Corporation of America (Sarnoff) to President Johnson 166. Letter From the Chairman of the Board of Radio Corporation of America (Sarnoff) to President Johnson 1

New York, March 5, 1965.

My Dear Mr. President:

I call your attention to an urgent problem in which the national interest is heavily involved, particularly in the area of America's balance of payments.

The French electronics industry, supported by the full resources of the DeGaulle government, is in direct competition with the American electronics industry over the adoption of World Standards for Color Television. The Electronics Industry Association, representing most American manufacturers in this field, has conducted an exhaustive technical investigation and confirmed the superiority of the American system over that proposed by the French.

The scope and dimensions of the conflict between the two systems are set forth in the attached letter from Dr. Engstrom, President of RCA, to the Secretary of Commerce.2

Of pivotal importance to American hopes of success is a clearance required from our Government. This would permit us to deal on an equal basis with France in seeking support from Russia. In this contest, the U.S.S.R. and its satellite countries might well cast the deciding votes.

Since last August, our representatives have sought this clearance in many meetings with appropriate authorities in the Departments of Commerce, Defense and State.

Each of these departments has been most cooperative, and each has advised us it has no objection to granting the necessary clearance. However, the Department of Commerce, which would be responsible for issuance of the formal authorization, has informed us that it cannot act because of objections raised by one undisclosed agency of our Government.

We have not been informed of the reason for denying clearance.

We can only surmise that it has been blocked through a misunderstanding of some security aspects in certain circuits of a color tape recorder. Yet, these circuits were developed as part of normal operations and are now in widespread commercial use.

In our frequent meetings with the Department of Defense, they have told us that these circuits are not of the type considered to be of strategic importance. Hundreds of tape recorders equipped with these circuits are already installed in nations in the Near and Far East, in Africa and South America, in Western Europe and Yugoslavia.

I turn now to you with this problem because I know you would not want a misunderstanding within government to deny American industry a major opportunity to increase its exports, to help our balance of payments and to secure world-wide acceptance of American Color Standards which are undeniably the best.

The specific action required from our Government is set forth on page 3 of Dr. Engstrom's letter.3 Time is a vital factor since a decision on European color standards may be taken this very month in Vienna. Such a decision will be irrevocable.

With warm personal regards,

Sincerely,

David Sarnoff

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, TEL 9. No classification marking. An attached short covering letter from Sarnoff to Secretary Rusk, March 5, indicates that he was sending Rusk a copy of his letter to the President. Also attached is a letter from G. Griffith Johnson to Sarnoff, March 19, which thanked him for sending a copy of his letter to the President and concluded: “I trust that you find the recent interagency decision a satisfactory resolution of the matter.” Johnson was apparently referring to a recent interdepartmental meeting during which it was agreed that if the Soviet Union was seriously interested in buying the U.S. color television system, then the U.S. Government would also be willing to include the video recorders. U.S. officials believed that COCOM would probably approve export of the recorders as part of a larger package. RCA was to be informed of the U.S. decision on March 15. (E Bureau Staff Minutes, March 15; Washington National Records Center, E/CBA/REP Files: Lot 72 A 6248)

2 Dated February 5, not printed.

3 After arguing for a U.S. policy “actively to support the adoption of the United States color system on a worldwide basis,” Engstrom enumerated several things that the U.S. Government should do to implement this policy.

167. National Security Action Memorandum No. 324 167. National Security Action Memorandum No. 3241

Washington, March 9, 1965.

TO

Secretary of State

Secretary of the Treasury

Secretary of Defense

Secretary of the Interior

Secretary of Agriculture

Secretary of Commerce

Secretary of Labor

Director of Central Intelligence

President, Export-Import Bank

SUBJECT

Special Presidential Committee on U.S. Trade Relations with Eastern European Countries and the Soviet Union

The President has appointed a Special Committee, under the Chairmanship of Mr. J. Irwin Miller, to examine U.S. trade relations with the countries of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. The Committee is to explore all aspects of the question of expanding peaceful trade in support of the President's policy of widening our relations with these countries.

In addition to Mr. Miller, the members of the Committee are: Mr. Eugene R. Black

Mr. William Blackie

Mr. George R. Brown

Mr. Charles W. Engelhard, Jr.

Mr. James B. Fisk

Mr. Nathaniel Goldfinger

Mr. Crawford Greenewalt

Mr. William A. Hewitt

Dr. Max F. Millikan

Mr. Charles G. Mortimer

Dr. Herman B. Wells

Mr. Edward R. Fried will serve as Executive Secretary to the Committee and will be on detail for this purpose.

The list of members, other than Mr. Miller, has not yet been announced and hence should be treated as privileged.

The Committee will rely on the Government for the preparation of material and briefings. The President has asked that all agencies of the Government be prepared to assist the Committee in carrying out its assignment.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAM File, NSAM 324, Box 6. Secret. An attached March 9 note from Bator to Buddy reads: “If you think it appropriate, would you sign?"

168. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carter) to Secretary of Commerce Connor 168. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence (Carter) to Secretary of Commerce Connor 1

Washington, March 10, 1965.

SUBJECT

Sale of Color-TV Equipment to the USSR

1. Reference is made to my memorandum of 2 March, subject as above, in which I stated that a study had been set in motion to determine the potential damage to U.S. intelligence collection methods that might come about as a result of making available to the USSR certain components of color-TV equipment.2 Attached herewith is the study on potential effects on U.S. intelligence and security of a proposed exception to the embargo policy on rotary-head magnetic tape recorder/reproducers.3

2. As you are aware, the critical element in the proposed RCA sale is the advanced recording technology, and its product, the sophisticated RCA commercial rotary-head magnetic tape TV signal recorders, models TR–4 and TR–22 (the former is a somewhat simplified version of the latter). On the basis of analysis of all-source information I believe that video type recording devices produced within the Bloc are considerably inferior to the devices in question.

3. The sale of these recorders to the USSR should be considered only after weighing the following: a. It is a fact that a significant number of sophisticated U. S. recorders are in foreign hands and are thus vulnerable to Soviet intelligence exploitation. There is no evidence to date that the Soviets have either the TR–22 or the TR–4 machine, or equivalent machines or significant components thereof, in their possession. We do not know whether the systems have been compromised. Even if the Soviets possess information on such equipment, information alone is a far cry from having the equipment in hand.

b. Considering the importance of precision wideband recording capability to effective [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] operations and as an analysis tool for research and development programs, it is probable that some work in specialized recording techniques is being conducted by the Soviets, in addition to known efforts to improve their existing system.

c. Technical intelligence from open sources suggests that as much as a seven-year U. S. advantage may exist in the basic commercial television recorder technology. U. S. experience indicates that the basic commercial technology can not only be directly used for strategic applications but through the expenditure of one to two years be improved for sophisticated intelligence and defense objectives.

d. The Soviets appear to regard the tape recorder and its technology as a matter of considerable importance to them. Ambassador Kohler's message (Embassy Moscow Telegram 2615 of 6 March)4 reports that Mr. Karaulov of the Soviet Union “skillfully made quite clear that the tape recorder and technology is an essential part of the package he hopes to be offered. He also expects to visit tape recorder production facilities.” (Also pertinent is another Embassy telegram of 6 March from Moscow #2624.)5

3. Rotary-head recorders, such as the TR–4 and TR–22, could: (1) Improve Soviet intercept capabilities;

(2) Improve Soviet [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] analysis and advanced radar development;

(3) Improve handling of Soviet satellite reconnaissance data;

(4) Improve Soviet handling by television of data transmission for military purposes; and

(5) Improve Soviet missile and space telemetry data recording and analysis.

4. I believe that approval of the RCA request could be exploited by the Soviets to bring about a significant improvement in their [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] collection capability. I urge, therefore, that decision by the appropriate authorities on the proposed sale of this RCA recorder equipment to the USSR be made only after full consideration of this memorandum and the attached study. Because of the fact that a number of these U. S. recorders are in foreign hands as indicated in paragraph 3a above, I cannot make a categorical statement, based on security factors alone, that the proposed sale should not be authorized.6

Marshall S. Carter
Lieutenant General, USA

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, Miscellaneous CIA Intelligence Memorandum [2 of 3], Box 5. Top Secret;[codeword not declassified]. Copies were sent to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara and McGeorge Bundy.

2 Not printed. (Ibid.)

3 "Report on Potential Effects on U.S. Intelligence and Security of a Proposed Exception to the Embargo on Rotary-Head Magnetic Tape Recorder-Reproducers,” March 5, not printed.

4 In telegram 2615, Embassy officials reported a March 6 meeting with some Soviet color television people, who said that they had accepted an RCA invitation to make an “exploratory” 2-week visit to various RCA facilities in the United States “for purpose helping ascertain what would be necessary to produce domestically under license or import if Soviets decided to have color TV.” (Department of State, Central Files, TEL 9 USSR)

5 Telegram 2624 reported evidence that the Soviet Union was prepared to accept the French SECAM color television system, but the head of the French team then visiting Moscow claimed that the French offer did not include tape recorders or technology. The telegram went on to speculate on possible Soviet motivations in these parallel negotiations with the French and the upcoming visit of the Soviet television team to the United States. (Ibid.)

6 On March 22 France and the Soviet Union announced that they had agreed to combine their technical knowledge and to work together for European adoption of the French SECAM color television system. (Telegram 5379 from Moscow, March 23; ibid.)

169. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 169. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 1

Moscow, March 11, 1965.

Unnumbered. I welcome establishment Presidential Committee on East-West trade and venture following observations on how our policy on trade with Soviet Union might contribute modestly to President's Balance of Payments program.

Dominant Soviet economic purpose in seeking expansion trade with US continues to be procurement technologically advanced equipment and know-how to accelerate industrial development. Their dominant political objective is obtain removal of US discrimination which galls them and which hamstrings attainment their economic objectives.

Our political purpose should also be measure of “normalization” of framework of trade if and as other tensions in our relations with Soviet Union ease. Such “normalization” would have salutary, mainly “atmos-pheric", political effect by removing one contentious issue and establishing another area of agreement between us. We should not harbor illusions however either as to importance trade questions in overall political relations or extent to which trade will facilitate effective contact with Soviet society. Unlike some countries in Eastern Europe Soviet foreign trade monopoly thus far shows no significant signs of changes, and Western European businessmen and technicians have been fairly effectively isolated from Soviet society even in construction projects in the provinces.

Our major economic purpose should be to maximize possible payments surplus with Soviet Union and not the overall level of two-way trade.

I believe a surplus would be the natural tendency of our trade relations with Soviets given our technological superiority over other sources of supply and apparent dearth Soviet products of interest to US and difficulty of Soviet foreign trade monopoly to operate effectively in our market. A policy of “normalization” of framework of trade would serve to foster this tendency and encourage Soviets spend hard currency earned in Western Europe in United States as they did in case of grain crisis.

Some elements such a policy are: 1. A licensing strategy, which while adhering to COCOM rules would offer Soviets level of technology above what is available in Europe, at same time reinforcing natural tendency American businessmen not give latest technology. Hornig group's observation this connection particularly pertinent.2 Seen against background continuing US and Western European economic development and prosperity and relatively decelerating growth rates USSR, such strategy would (a) not make “significant contribution” to Soviet economic potential; (b) appear be in harmony with current legislation; and (c) constitute prime factor for development export surplus our trade with USSR.

2. Examination possibilities under our legislation and international obligations for tying licensing of know-how to export of American-built plant. We disturbed by number of sizeable deals involving export American know-how in European plant motivated by availability credits, tax considerations, cheaper labor, and desire avoid publicity.

3. Strict avoidance implication in possible economic agreement or official statements that our objective is bilateral balance of trade or that USG concerned that Soviets do not have enough of interest to sell us.3 “Normalization” of trade framework would require granting MFN treatment, when political situation permits to remove basic element of discrimination despite fact no meaning reciprocity possible under Soviet system. But we see little or nothing to be gained by selective MFN approach or system of tariff quotas to shape volume or composition Soviet exports to US. After giving Soviets equal tariff opportunity in our market, sales should be clearly their responsibility although they should be warned price slashing tactics likely cause invocation legislative provisions to prevent injury either US or friendly suppliers.

4. Willingness extend maximum guaranteed 5-year credits for equipment sales, after lend-lease settled.

Soviets will probably shape their position on lend-lease settlement in light anticipated volume and length US credits. They may be expected seek assurance latter would be greater than annual L–L payments. However, to extent Soviets believe L–L settlement would involve opportunity acquire unique advanced American technology, our bargaining position with respect to credits likely improve.

New Soviet leadership shows signs husbanding scarce foreign exchange resources even more carefully than in past and Soviet procurements in West will be even more selective technologically. We cannot estimate with assurance extent to which Soviets likely run deficit with US but believe they might see their interest to develop partial triangular pattern for relatively modest amounts at expense Western Europe provided we offer them unique technology high on their planner's preference scale.

Kohler

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Meetings, Box 16. Confidential. Sent via pouch and received on March 22 at 5:27 p.m. Repeated to Paris for USRO.

2  Donald Hornig, the President's Science Adviser, headed a delegation of U.S. industrial research leaders that visited factories, laboratories, and engineering design institutes from Moscow to Novosibirsk in Siberia during a 2-week study tour in mid-November 1964.

3 Inserted by hand in the margin next to this sentence are the words, “Important? Not sure.”

170. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State of Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 170. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State of Economic Affairs (Mann) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, March 24, 1965.

SUBJECT

Briefing Memorandum Prepared by Mr. Trezise for East-West Trade Meeting

I am in agreement with the general trust of Mr. Trezise's recommendations concerning East-West trade. I think the central point we should make is that the Administration needs flexibility in dealing with particular situations as they arise and that the present laws tend to put us into a straightjacket.

While we need a general rationale for the general direction of our policy, it seems to me important that we not commit ourselves to details. Rather we should react on an ad hoc basis to opportunities which present themselves, after weighing carefully the advantages and disadvantages of a particular transaction in a particular country. I am not convinced, for example, that we need to talk in terms of “most favored nation treatment” at this time. Another example, where we ultimately come down on the export credit problem should be influenced not only by the terms that other exporting nations give, but also by estimates on what effect such credits will have on military potential, the borrowing capacity of the Soviet Bloc countries, the extent to which Soviet Bloc countries would insist on bilateral trade balances, etc. In short, I think our goal should be flexible both as regards substance and timing of all the various issues that arise under the title of “East-West trade.”

Attachment

Washington, March 23, 1965.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Trezise) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)2

SUBJECT

Your meeting with the President's Committee on East-West Trade, March 25, 9:30 a.m.3

You are scheduled to meet with the President's Committee on East-West Trade at 9:30 a.m. on Thursday, March 25.

The Committee has now had two intensive sessions with officials of the agencies most concerned: State, Commerce, Defense, Agriculture, and CIA.

I believe that most of the members now feel that our present control policy on East-West trade has little to commend it. The AFL-CIO member of the Committee probably would not share this judgment, at least publicly. The business members are divided, I suspect, as between those who would be ready to report to the President and to the public that radical changes should be made in our policies and those who are reluctant to accept the possible public relations consequences of signing a report that had come out positively for a policy of expanded East-West trade.

The more doubting members of the Committee, leaving aside Mr. Goldfinger of the AFL-CIO, still wish to be persuaded that the foreign policy case for more East-West trade is strong enough to overcome the domestic political case against the proposition. For this reason, the meetings on Thursday with you and the Secretary are likely to have a good deal to do with determining the character of the final report.

I would suggest that your presentation set out a series of broad policy considerations, somewhat as follows: 1. Our policy of trade control vis-a-vis the Soviet Union and Eastern European Communist states began at a time when it was both a political and a military imperative. The Berlin blockade and the Korean War gave us no reasonable alternative. Moreover, at a time when we commanded a large part of the world's industrial output and when the USSR was still recovering from World War II, an embargo policy made a certain amount of economic and strategic sense.

2. Like many public undertakings, however, the trade embargo policy has lived, in a modified form to be sure, well beyond its appointed time. The Soviet Union is the world's second biggest economy, with a gross output of more than $280 billion per year. Our industrial allies in Western Europe and Japan are almost completely unwilling to prohibit trade except in those goods most closely related to military capabilities. In these circumstances, it is quite naive to believe that any limits that we may put on exports to the USSR can have other than the most marginal impact on Soviet capabilities. In almost every case, our denial of an export license merely means that the Soviets will purchase a similar item, in slightly less desirable form or at slightly higher cost, from a supplier in Western Europe or Japan. We forfeit our chief commercial advantages, that is, more advanced technology or higher quality, but we do not prevent the Soviets from accomplishing substantially what they wish.

3. Moreover, since the Russians must pay for what they buy in the West, their gains from trade obviously cannot be more than a fractional part of the value of any transaction. When we measure these possible gains against the capacity of an enormous and generally modern industrial economy, we clearly are talking about very small peanuts indeed.

4. We have been in this situation for a number of years. For reasons related both to domestic politics and to the ups and downs of our relations with the USSR, we have not made a major drive for public and Congressional approval of a new policy. At the same time, we did respond promptly and effectively in 1948, under President Truman, when Yugoslavia elected itself out of the Soviet Bloc. We did the same in 1956–57 with Poland, when President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles decided that we should give a positive response to the obvious indications of Poland's move toward a more independent position in Eastern Europe. And, last summer, we made a reasonable start toward a more normal and promising relationship with Rumania by way of a modest and limited trade agreement.

5. These actions were taken in the belief that our interests would be advanced if we could help the Eastern European states to get into a more normal and civilized relationship with the Western world. We did not ask Yugoslavia to give up its ideological attachment to communism. We did not ask Poland and Rumania to defy the Red Army. We did look for (a) some easing of the internal control system, (b) a shift away from a posture of slavish adherence to the USSR, and (c) a more sensible attitude toward the US and the West generally.

6. The results of trade and related policies have been generally good. Although Yugoslavia and Poland are still under Communist rule, Yugoslavia has not only maintained its independent status but it also has undergone a fairly notable process of liberalization. If it is not now a parliamentary democracy, its regime at least has moved in a desirable political and economic direction. Poland has come some distance from total dependence on the Soviet Union and from the most rigorous and hateful forms of the police state.

7. We have long since abandoned any idea that we should attempt to liberate Eastern Europe by force of arms, or that we could successfully change Eastern European regimes by subversion. We must deal with them through a general policy of military deterrence, through the stand-ard devices and procedures of diplomacy, through our informational effort and our cultural and scientific exchanges, and through trade. At present, we are least able to use trade as the political vehicle that it could and should be.

8. By law, we are required to treat the Soviet Union and most of the other Eastern Europe Communist states as beyond the range of normal commercial intercourse. We cannot accord to any of the Eastern European countries except Poland and Yugoslavia non-discriminatory tariff treatment. We operate the Export Control Act so as to embargo a wide range of industrial commodities to many Eastern European destinations. Even when we engage in trade in so ordinary and peaceable a commodity as wheat, we find it necessary to make special and unusual justifications to the Congress. We have an outstanding lend-lease account with the USSR that we cannot negotiate because we cannot admit Soviet exports to our market on a non-discriminatory basis.

9. It is time that we put ourselves in a position to seize the political opportunities that already exist or may arise in Eastern Europe. Hungary and Czechoslovakia have given us numerous indications of being ready to improve relations with us. Serious trade talks with them would provide a means—one of the best available means—to test their intentions and to determine how far we should go in normalizing our relationships.

10. A return to more satisfactory relations between the US and Hungary and Czechoslovakia would make clear that Bulgaria and East Germany remain the last of the old-line satellites. Whether we and some of our West European allies might then be able to exploit the East German situation is obviously speculative. But it would be a new and changed and perhaps promising context in which to pursue a German policy.

11. Finally, we have the question of the Soviet Union. There is no doubt that our trade policy long has grated on Soviet sensibilities. We have continued to treat the USSR as a pariah state long after everybody else in the West had decided to call off the Cold War in the commercial field. The Soviets seem to give special weight to US industrial accomplishments. More fundamentally, however, they must see our trade relationship as a symbol of our more general relations.

12. We cannot be certain that a trade negotiation with the USSR would succeed. The lend-lease problem could be an insuperable obstacle. Or the Soviets might ask for too much—long-term credits, perhaps—in the belief that we were the anxious side. It would be useful, in any case, to explore the possibilities for widening the Soviet dialogue. If a trade arrangement came off, we would expect to have periodic discussions with the USSR in which trade issues inevitably would be mingled with other questions. We would hope for an accelerated movement of our businessmen to the USSR and of senior Soviet officials here. There are no hazards for us in this. Rather, we expect to have a modest additional civilizing influence on our great antagonist, to the benefit of our mutual prospects for national survival.

13. What capabilities do we need? Paramount is discretionary authority to grant MFN to East European states, as a part of any new trade agreement. Without this power, it is difficult to see how we can move at all.

14. We need to create greater public and Congressional awareness that our export controls serve little security purpose. The language of the Export Control Act is permissive enough. We probably should not try to amend it if we decide to seek MFN authority from the Congress, since that would require two legislative efforts on the same front. But we will need to build a legislative record that the Act is to be viewed as a trade-permissive statute, subject to the President's judgment about our national security objectives.

15. Our existing credit capabilities are not equal to those of the West Europeans, so far as East Europe is concerned. But we need not push into the area of longer term credits in order to expand trade to levels more politically useful to us. And all the objections to long term credits still hold. Above all, we ought not to participate in a race to ease the Soviet balance of payments problem. Rather, we should try to promote the need for transferring Soviet resources into export industries and for directing Soviet energies into learning more about the wide world outside.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 1. Limited Official Use. Sent through S/S. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “U saw.”

2 Limited Official Use. Sent through Mann.

3 A transcript of Ball's presentation to the Miller Committee on the morning of March 25 along with the following question-and-answer session is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Minutes of Meeting—Notes, Box 24.

171. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 171. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, April 29, 1965.

SUBJECT

Your Talk with George Meany on the Miller Report, 4/29, 12:30

George Meany and I reached agreement on the Miller Report which I hope will still be firm when you meet him at 12:30.2

The agreement is that Meany's man, Goldfinger, will sign the Report, but make an additional 300-word “comment.”3 The essence of this comment is that while he signs the report as a whole, he himself would take a somewhat harder line against the dangers of casual trade, especially in the sale of technology. I have seen it, and it seems to me an acceptable settlement.

In an April 28 memorandum to President Johnson, McGeorge Bundy reported that an “apologetic and embarrassed” Goldfinger had prepared an 8-page “statement of dissent—probably at Meany's direction,” and Buddy then tried to persuade Meany to allow “Goldfinger to sign the report without reservations. That is what he should do, on the merits. But if Meany won't agree to that, then I think we could settle for a Goldfinger signature with a short—one page—statement of reservations.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Box 25)

It is always possible that Jay Lovestone will have stirred Meany up again. Lovestone is a former Trotskyite and a wild man against all trade with Communists. If this should happen, you may want to emphasize about three points to George: (1) There is nothing soft about the Miller Report. In particular, it is very tough against credits to Communists, which George Meany has always told us is the most important point of all.

(2) The Miller Report also shares Meany's views that this is basically a problem of politics, not one of profits.

(3) You and George have a firm agreement that there would be no need for a minority report, and our current plan for a brief Goldfinger comment is a very fair compromise.

McG. B. 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 10, Box 3. No classification marking.

2 Meany met at the White House with President Johnson and others off the record on April 29 from 12:56 to 1:50 p.m. (Ibid., President's Daily Diary) No further record of their meeting has been found.

3 Goldfinger's 1-page “statement of comment” is attached to the Committee's final report, April 29. (Ibid., National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Box 25) It was included as a footnote to the published report. Regarding the published report, see Document 172.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

172. Letter From the Chairman of the President's Special Committee on Trade With East European Nations and the Soviet Union (Miller) to President Johnson 172. Letter From the Chairman of the President's Special Committee on Trade With East European Nations and the Soviet Union (Miller) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 3, 1965.

Dear Mr. President:

After our meeting with you on April 29,2 the members of your Committee discussed how we might best carry out your instructions and be of most help to you in this matter.

There was unanimous agreement that the major conclusions of our Report will gain substantial support from the leaders of American business.

We believe that a reasonable reader of our Report will conclude that it is anything but soft. Its central point is that trade with the Communists is a matter of international politics and not profit. It urges you to use trade to drive hard, realistic political bargains with European Communist countries—bargains which would clearly be in the United States interest—and it recommends that you be given the necessary authority to do this.

We believe that if you decide to release the Report, these conclusions would come to stand out in the public debate.

On the other hand, if news of our conclusions gets about only by word of mouth, through our conversations with our business colleagues and with Members of the Congress, we are afraid that the tough central theme of the Report will be lost.

Following your instructions I have discussed with Secretary McNamara the matter of release. He indicated that he favored early release. Under Secretary Mann also favors release.

Together with three members of the Committee, I met for an hour with Senators Mansfield, Fulbright and Hickenlooper. I told them about the principal conclusions and recommendations and we discussed them thoroughly. Senators Mansfield and Fulbright appeared to agree with the main conclusions and recommended early release of the Report to the public.3

This morning Secretary Connor and I visited Congressman Patman, whose Banking and Currency Committee will hold hearings on the renewal of the Export Control Act. Mr. Patman also appeared to like the recommendations, and specifically recommended that the Report be released immediately after the one-day hearing, which is to take place on Wednesday, May 5. He feels that such release would be extremely helpful in the Congressional debate which would follow.

Secretary Connor agreed with Mr. Patman on a release soon after May 5.

I have seen Senator Long and given him the substance of the Report, but have been unable to arrange to see Congressman Mills. I expect to talk with him by telephone tomorrow.

I have reported the above conversations today to Under Secretary Mann.4

We are most grateful for the time which you spent with the Committee last Thursday and are anxious to be of any further useful service in this matter.

Sincerely yours,

J. Irwin Miller 5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Box 25. No classification marking. A memorandum from Bator to the President, May 3, notes that Miller prepared this letter “at the suggestion of Under Secretary Mann” and that “None of the people on whom Miller called appeared to oppose release” of the report. He added that if the President decided on an early release of the report, Miller could provide the Business Council with a brief account of the contents at its May 7 meeting. (Ibid.) Regarding the actual release, see Document 173.

2 President Johnson met with members of the Miller Committee on April 29 from 11:30 to 11:59 a.m. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary) Buddy arranged with Jack Valenti for a pro forma morning meeting between the President and the Committee, “before Meany, but without decision.” (Memorandum from Buddy to President Johnson, April 28; Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 10, Box 3) In preparation for this meeting with the Committee, Buddy outlined the agenda in an April 29 memorandum to President Johnson. (Ibid.) Regarding the President's meeting with Meany the same afternoon, see footnote 2, Document 171.

3 In an April 30 memorandum to Bator, Edward Fried noted, among other things, that Charles Engelhard had told him that “Mansfield said that Miller and the Committee members made a very favorable impression during their meeting with the three Senators on Thursday [April 29]. Mansfield is strong on a release of the Report at the earliest possible date.” Engelhard also told Fried that “Fulbright has no reservations about releasing the Report.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Committee File, Miller Committee, Box 25)

4 In his memorandum to Bator (see footnote 3 above), Fried also outlined in some detail a strategy involving Miller spending another day talking with key U.S. Government officials, including Connor, Patman, Mills, and Mann.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

173. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 173. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 17, 1965.

SUBJECT

NSAM 333: Follow-up on the Miller Report2

The State Department supports the East-West Trade approach recommended by the Miller Committee. I believe we should now take the following actions:

1. Public and Congressional Presentation

We should sound out the Congressional leadership on specific legislative proposals. The President has already pointed to the urgent need for East-West Trade legislation. In his May 7th speech, he stated his intention “to recommend measures to the Congress to increase the flow of peaceful trade between Eastern Europe and the U.S.”3

We should take advantage of the momentum created by the Miller Report, the CED Report, the Chamber of Commerce resolution, the favorable reaction in the Business Council, and the Congressional soundings made at the request of the President in connection with the publication of the Miller Report.

We should proceed on the assumption that the administration will introduce a Bill in this session of the Congress, ask for hearings this year and work for prompt enactment at the beginning of the next session. This timetable would be in line with our two-track policy toward communist countries. The act of requesting this legislation would be evidence of our continued interest in working out constructive relations with these countries, even as we pursue the military deterrent part of our strategy. What we propose here would give the President freedom of movement without obligating him to enter into any specific negotiation, now or at any other time.

As to pubic presentation, business is solidly on the side of facilitating East-West trade. Labor appears to be split; we should seek opportunities for the President and the Secretary of State to explain our foreign policy objectives in this field to George Meany and other labor leaders such as Paul Hall. At this stage we should begin to discuss the issues raised by the Miller Committee publicly, possibly in speeches by the President, the Secretaries of State and Commerce, and other high administration officials.

2. Proposed Legislation

Our main requirement is authority to grant—or withdraw—most-favored nation tariff treatment to individual communist countries in the discretion of the President. This discretionary authority, along with a flexible licensing policy, would provide us with bargaining leverage to use trade as an effective political instrument. Without such authority, it is clear that we cannot move very far toward the approach recommended by the Miller Committee.

We prefer to seek this authority through a separate East-West Trade Act rather than through amendment of section 231 of the Trade Expansion Act. A separate East-West Trade Act would make clear how MFN could be used as part of bilateral trade agreements with communist countries and how this trade could serve our foreign policy objectives.

A separate East-West Trade Act would provide a vehicle for consideration by the Foreign Affairs as well as the Ways and Means and Finance Committees of the Congress. An East-West Trade Act could also be a means to tidy up the President's authority to authorize Ex-Im Bank credit guarantees to communist countries and to deal with subsidiary issues such as the removal of the present ban on the importation of seven kinds of furs from the Soviet Union.

We have prepared a draft East-West Trade Act designed to implement the Miller Committee recommendations. This draft has not been discussed outside the State Department, and a number of its provisions represent judgments that could go either way without disturbing the essential purpose. We believe this draft should now be discussed among the interested agencies of the Executive Branch and on the Hill. A draft of the statute and a summary and analysis of its provisions are attached.4

3. Flexibility in administration of the Export Control Act

The Miller Committee recommended that the Export Control Act be renewed with “emphasis placed on the possibilities of using trade and export licensing for constructive as well as for restrictive purposes.” Secretary Connor has already pointed to the need for flexibility in his testimony before the House Committee on Banking and Currency on the extension of the Export Control Act.5

The Act will be coming up before the Senate Banking and Currency Committee sometime this month. It would be desirable for Secretary Rusk to testify on the foreign policy objectives that underlie the administration of export controls. He could do so by way of comment on the policy implications of the Miller Report. Prior consultation with Senator Fulbright would be in order.

4. A Tentative Action Program

Armed with the proper tools, we should be in a position to use trade negotiations: —to encourage the movement toward national independence and internal liberalization in Rumania. We should do what we can to sustain the present momentum for change in that country and to support its policy of moving closer to the West.

—to further economic decentralization in Czechoslovakia. The Czechs are now debating how far they should go in liberalizing their economy and exposing it to international competition. The promise of closer economic relations with the United States could encourage them in this direction. We could also use such negotiations to break the long stalemate in our relations caused by our inability to reach a satisfactory settlement of financial and property claims.

What we do in these countries could stimulate pressures for change in Poland, Hungary and Bulgaria and create new opportunities there.

—The Poles, who are more heavily involved with the West than any Bloc country, have moved very little lately. In some respects they have retrogressed.

—The Hungarians may now have as much internal freedom as any other people in the Bloc. But the regime has been cautious in developing new relations with the West.

—The Bulgarians continue to be strongly oriented to Moscow. Nevertheless, they are showing some interest in extending their economic relations with the West.

Our economic relations with the USSR , even more than is the case with East European countries, are closely tied to the general international situation. We should be prepared, however, to use trade negotiations to increase Soviet interest in broader relations with the United States. Such negotiations could also provide a framework for settling lend-lease claims.

The development of trade relations with the USSR would be an important and logical step in the progression that started with cultural and scientific exchange programs and has been expanded through agreements for cooperation in specific technical projects, the growth of tourism, and the Test Ban Agreement. It is in our long term interest to utilize all possible avenues of entry into the closed Soviet society and to enlarge the kind of relations that could prove useful when tensions mount. Trade could be a highly effective device to such ends.

Thomas C. Mann

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAM File, NSAM 333, Box 7–8. Confidential. Copies were sent to the Secretary of Commerce and the Deputy Secretary of Defense.

2  NSAM No. 333, May 13, directed the Secretaries of State, Commerce, and Defense to appoint senior representatives to a committee that would recommend to the President “what actions the government should take in our trade relations with the USSR and Eastern Europe in the light of the recommendations of the Miller Report.” (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316)

3 The quotation is from President Johnson's remarks broadcast on the 20th anniversary of V–E Day; text in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book I, pp. 506–509.

4 Not attached, but a copy, dated June 4, is in the Johnson Library, Papers of Anthony M. Soloman, East-West Trade Legislation #2, Box 4.

5 Reference is to Secretary Connor's testimony on May 13 before the Committee's Subcommittee on International Trade.

174. Memorandum From Secretary of Commerce Connor to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 174. Memorandum From Secretary of Commerce Connor to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 21, 1965.

SUBJECT

NSAM 333: Follow-up on the Miller Report

We have reviewed, from the overall standpoint, State's proposed East-West Trade Bill, as well as Tom Mann's memorandum to you of June 17 and his accompanying summary and analysis of the bill.2

We agree that the Miller Committee's report is fundamentally sound and offers a practical blueprint for achieving the President's goal of increasing the flow of peaceful trade between Eastern Europe and our country.

On this basis we have no difficulty with State's draft bill, in principle, since it is designed to carry out several of the Miller Committee's important recommendations. I refer particularly to the proposals that the President be given authority to grant MFN treatment to imports from selected East European Communist countries, and that ways and means be found for developing Congressional public understanding and acceptance of the President's program.

As I see it, there are two sensitive problems which this bill and Tom Mann's memorandum raise at the threshold. They concern the highly important matters of timing and advance preparation.

The decision as to when this bill ought to be presented to Congress will, I presume, need to be attuned to the status of the hostilities in Viet Nam, along with reports on related activities and attitudes of the USSR and other East European Communist countries. Furthermore, since progress and fate of the bill in Congress could hinge on reports from Viet Nam or Eastern Europe which are not now foreseeable, there must be a delicate assessment of the risk that a delay or other setback could have on long-term implementation of this policy.

It is evident that passage of the Export Control Act extension must be accomplished before an East-West Trade Bill is discussed with Congress.

The other problem—that of advance preparation—brings up what I believe you will agree is one of the Miller Committee's most significant recommendations. This is No. 14, which reads as follows: "If trade with Communist countries is to be used for these objectives, the U. S. public, the Congress and the executive branch must have a thorough understanding of the problem, the opportunities that trade affords, and U. S. national objectives in this field. The U. S. Government should take every opportunity to make explicit what it intends to do and what it seeks to accomplish. It should act to remove any stigma from trade with Communist countries where such trade is determined to be in the national interest. The foreign policy advantages of such trade to the United States are not widely enough appreciated. With greater public awareness of both facts and objectives, the United States will be in a stronger position to use this trade as it must be used—for national purposes and to support national policy.”

I have noted State's suggestion of the potential usefulness of the bill as a vehicle for developing Congressional and public understanding and acceptance. I believe its key provisions are too important, however, not to precede introduction of the bill by a substantial, thoroughgoing and carefully planned educational program. Indeed, I would like to see this recommendation of the Miller Committee developed, carried out, and its results tested before the bill is submitted to Congress.

If anything were needed to underscore the importance of this Committee recommendation regarding advance preparation, it is, I believe, the unfortunate events that led to Firestone's withdrawal from negotiations with Rumania for the synthetic rubber plant.3

We note Mr. Mann's comments that “business is solidly on the side of facilitating East-West trade.” While this is true among certain of the larger international corporations in this country, there are wide differences of opinion throughout the business community as a whole. We cannot assume that the entire business community will understand and support the objectives of this proposed legislation.

I have here limited my comments to what I consider basic matters. In addition, my people have already noticed a number of points of law and policy, which, I am sure you would want them to take up with State and the other interested agencies after the President has decided whether and when to go forward with a bill.

John T. Connor 4

1 Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316. Confidential. Copies were sent to Mann and Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance.

2  Document 173 and footnote 4 thereto.

3 On April 16, Firestone announced that it was withdrawing from these negotiations.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Connor signed the original.

175. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 175. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to President Johnson 1

Washington, July 1, 1965, 8:20 p.m.

SUBJECT

Follow-up on the Miller Report on East-West Trade

At Tab A is Tom Mann's recommendations for the State Department that we should now follow-up strongly on the East-West trade approach recommended by Irwin Miller and his Committee.2 At Tab B is a memorandum in which Jack Connor takes a somewhat different position.3 Both memoranda are important, although the passages on the Export Control Act are out of date now that it has been passed.4

State, Commerce, and Defense agree that the Miller approach to bridge building is sound. That it is in our interest to strike trade bargains with individual Bloc countries using trade as a carrot, and trading like good Yankees (or Texans).

It is also agreed that the important new tool that we need is authority to offer most favored nation treatment. Except for Poland and Yugoslavia, Eastern European countries now pay Smoot-Hawley Tariff rates.

It was agreed that the best way to get this bargaining authority is to have a new, separate East-West Trade Act which would spell out the means of using such authority in bilateral bargaining.

The difference between Commerce and the rest of us is on timing and on the relation of this issue to Vietnam. The matter of timing is minor—Jack Connor would like to have further “public education” before we begin Congressional consultation and develop a plan for a bill for the Hill. Others think the best way to get this education is to make a proposal and follow it up on the Hill.

The Vietnamese issue is more important and presents a basic policy issue. Rusk, Mann, and especially Tommy Thomson all think that it is precisely because of Vietnam that we should be keeping a clear signal of our interest in improved peaceful relations with the Soviet Union and the European Bloc countries. Connor's question is whether we can get this point across with the Congress and the public at a time when we are having a tough contest in Vietnam.

It is a fair question.

On foreign policy grounds, I believe very strongly indeed that we should make this signal on peaceful trade both to the Russians and to the world. I think it is useful to make it even if the legislative road proves to be slow and tough. But I also think the final judgment on this peculiarly and necessarily Presidential.

On the Congressional front, I am sure that Fulbright would love to receive a bill and begin hearings and manage the timing of the whole exercise, in close consultation with us. Mansfield would be equally favorable. On the basis of preliminary consultation with Irwin Miller, I think Dirksen and Hickenlooper will be reasonable. The matter should not go beyond Senate hearings in this session in any case.

Tom Mann's immediate proposal is that you should discuss this matter briefly with the Leadership on Tuesday5 and then authorize him to begin intensive Congressional consultations aimed at the early introduction of an East-West trade bill. In spite of Jack Connor's reservations, I think this is the preferred course, but you may wish to hear further argument.

McG.B.

Have O'Brien put this on the agenda for the next Leadership Meeting6

Get Connor and Mann in for a talk with me

Speak to me

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 49. No classification marking.

2 Not attached but probably Document 173.

3 Not attached but probably Document 174.

4 P.L. 89–63, approved on June 30, 1965. (79 Stat. 209)

5 The President was at the LBJ Ranch in Texas most of Tuesday, July 6, but had a breakfast meeting with the legislative leaders at the White House the following morning beginning at 8:50 a.m. (Johnson Library, President's Daily Diary) No further record of this meeting has been found.

6 None of the options is checked.

176. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Holders of NSAM Nos. 324 and 333 176. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to Holders of NSAM Nos. 324 and 333 1

Washington, July 27, 1965.

SUBJECT

Miller Report Follow-up

1. The President wants to get the follow-up process going, and would like Under Secretary Mann to take the lead on the Hill.

2. The Administration is in favor of the Miller Committee recommendations, and, in particular, is in favor of an East-West Trade Act along the lines suggested in the Mann memorandum of June 17.2

3. However, the President does not wish to add to the current legislative load, especially of the Senate, and hence will not plan to send up a bill this session.

4. If anyone in the Congress were to introduce a bill of the sort suggested in the Mann memorandum, the Administration would support it.

5. A possible sequence, to be explored with Senator Mansfield and others, would involve hearings on the Miller Report this session, and a bill early in the next.

6. The Miller Report should be given wide circulation both in the Senate and the House.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAM File, NSAM 324, Box 6. No classification marking.

2  Document 173.

177. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 177. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 7, 1966.

I am attaching a memorandum prepared in the Department which strongly recommends your support for an East-West Trade Relations Bill.2 Tom Mann has some reservation about the extent to which you should commit yourself to this bill as a high priority matter in the light of the present international political situation.3

My own personal view is that (a) we should continue to be in the posture of favoring an improvement in our relations between ourselves and Eastern Europe, but (b) we should not press a bill to a vote if there is any chance that it would be defeated. This obviously depends upon a very careful nose count in Committees and in the two Houses before pressing for action.

My own recommendation would be that you continue to support the idea of building bridges with Eastern Europe, including a further development of East-West trade, in your State of the Union message. This would be an important part of a comprehensive attitude toward peace as a major objective. I would recommend, however, that you stop short of throwing your full personal prestige behind the immediate enactment of legislation but rather let the rest of us work with the Committees to see what can be done despite the general atmosphere created by Viet-Nam.

This may appear to be a somewhat cautious approach. My caution, however, is not due to my attitude toward East-West trade but because of the extremely negative effect on our international relations of a vote in t he Congress which would reject the kind of East-West trade legislation which we would like to have. If my own political judgment is too timid, I would be prepared to take a bolder line.

Dean Rusk 4

1 Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 217. Confidential. Drafted by Rusk.

2 The attached memorandum from Stoessel (EUR) and Solomon (E) to Secretary Rusk, December 16, 1965, is not printed. Enclosed with it, also not printed, is an undated memorandum from Secretary Rusk to the President.

3 In a December 17, 1965, memorandum to Secretary Rusk, also attached to the source text, Mann agreed that “the President should have discretionary authority to negotiate bilateral trade agreements with the Eastern European countries.” He also warned, however, against the possibility of strong Congressional opposition to an East-West trade bill and did “not regard a one or two year postponement of a legislative fight on this issue as being more than a pause in our ‘bridge-building' program.” He concluded that the attached undated memorandum from Secretary Rusk to the President (see footnote 2 above) seemed “to put the President somewhat on the spot. Perhaps it would be better if you were to discuss this matter orally with the President.” (Ibid.) Probably in response to Mann's advice, the memorandum printed here appears to be a revised version of the attached undated draft.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Rusk signed the original.

178. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson 178. Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 25, 1966.

Dear Mr. President:

As required by Section 103(b) of the Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act of 1951 (Battle Act),2 I am writing to advise you of certain shipments to the Sino-Soviet bloc of Control Act embargo items by countries receiving United States assistance and recommending to you that assistance to these countries be continued.

This report covers shipments regarding which information was received prior to June 1, 1965, and which have not been referred to in any previous Presidential Determinations under Section 103(b) of the Act. These shipments were as follows:

Belgium

Belgium exported to East Germany $11,000 worth of mono-crystalline silicon to use in the manufacture of power diodes to equip locomotives.

France

France exported to the USSR electronic tubes valued at $12,732 for use in television and telecommunication laboratories, and $32,400 worth of tubes for use as spares on television relay systems. France supplied Rumania $5,023 worth of molybdenum wire for use in remetallizing equipment, and Poland was supplied with electronic tubes worth $7,200 for use as spares on radio links already in operation. France shipped to Hungary $1,546 worth of teflon discs for use in the manufacture of pump couplings.

The Federal Republic of Germany

Germany exported to Bulgaria $338,653 worth of railway communications cable, all for use in electrification of the Bulgarian railway network. Germany also supplied Bulgaria with $205 worth of sodium azide for laboratory use at the State University of Sofia. Communist China was shipped a radio link system valued at $178,572 for radio and television broadcasting in Shanghai, $507 worth of boron carbide for rectifying operations on carbide-tipped tools, and $337 worth of boron carbide for grinding and lapping. German shipments to Czechoslovakia consisted of $225 worth of potassium fluoroborate for use as a melting agent in the smelting of aluminum, $213 worth of sodium nitride for analytical work at technical institutes, $2,703 worth of boron carbide and boron carbide paste for grinding and lapping, service chests valued at $22,500 for electronic computers supplied earlier, and magnetic tape analogue storage equipment valued at $2,794 for use with a digital computer. East Germany was shipped bolometers valued at $364 for use with a radiation receiver in a spectrometer at the Friedrich Schiller University in Jena. Hungary was shipped $263 worth of electronic tubes for use in therapeutic diathermy equipment in a hospital, $429 worth of fluoroboric acid for galvanizing purposes, and $307 worth of boron trichloride for use in organic synthesis at Budapest University. German shipments to Poland consisted of switchover sets valued at $2,709 for a radio relay system supplied earlier, and $1,900 worth of boron carbide paste for grinding purposes.

Italy

Italy exported to Albania $43 worth of uranyl acetate for use in chemical and biological studies in hospitals, and China was shipped $300 worth of lithium hydride for laboratory research. Italy exported to Hungary $670 worth of sodium boron hydride for laboratory research and $321 worth of lithium carbonate for use in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals. Poland was supplied with $8,100 worth of boron carbide for a metallurgical plant at Katowice.

Japan

Japan exported to Communist China $2,949 worth of molybdenum tube and bar for research and for use as electrodes in glass melting furnaces, $473 worth of niobium wire for use in research at the Metals Institute in Shanghai, and $1,058 worth of tantalum wire for medical purposes at Peking University and the China Medical College. The USSR was supplied by Japan with $1,090,036 worth of titanium tubes for use in the construction of an acetaldehyde plant. Czechoslovakia was supplied with forged steel inserting rolls valued at $8,820 for use in rolling steel strip.

The Netherlands

The Netherlands exported to Poland $3,779 worth of molybdenum foil for use in the production of high pressure gaseous discharge lamps, and $6,850 worth of molybdenum strip for use as lead-in conductors for quartz lamps. The Netherlands also shipped Poland tungsten strips valued at $6,500 for heating elements in small-part annealing furnaces, $2,800 worth of lithium ores for the production of ceramics, glazes and glass, $1,100 worth of electronic tubes for use in civilian radio and television transmitters, and $15,550 worth of tubes for installation in radio relay stations at Danzig, Warsaw, Katowice, Wroslaw and Krakow.

Portugal

Portugal shipped to the Soviet bloc from Mozambique tantalum ore valued at approximately $190,000.3

The United Kingdom

The United Kingdom exported to Bulgaria $26,824 worth of telephone cable for underground installation between Sofia and Dimitrovgrad, Yugoslavia. Communist China was shipped boron trichloride valued at $205 for general experimental use in colleges and institutes throughout the country, and silicon rectifier diodes valued at $305 for use in brushless alternator excitation research. The United Kingdom exported to Czechoslovakia a klystron and its amplifier circuit valued at $6,230 for use in the television transmitter in Prague. United Kingdom shipments to Hungary consisted of a matrix stack valued at $4,200 for use in a data logger in a Budapest thermal power plant, and coaxial cable worth $203 for installation at the Budapest reserve television station. Poland was shipped VHF signal generators valued at $2,234 for use in designing and testing radio-television component units, a magnetic film handler worth $14,300 for use in a digital computer supplied earlier to the Electrotechnical Institute in Warsaw, $3,903 worth of quartz crystals for use in carrier telephone and telegraph equipment, and thoriated tungsten wire valued at $4,679 for use in manufacturing lighting and radio tubes. Shipments to Rumania from the United Kingdom consisted of stellite rod valued at $24,324 for use in hard facing engine valves, $664 worth of cobalt powder for use as a binding agent for metal carbide powders, and titanium wire and strip valued at $6,222 for use on machinery in a factory manufacturing building materials. The United Kingdom shipped to the USSR video recording tape worth $14,420 for use on video recording equipment in the Moscow television center and airborne navigation equipment valued at $440,000 for installation on aircraft flying on scheduled airline routes between Moscow and Western European capitals.

Conclusions and Recommendations

All of the shipments listed above, except that by Portugal, were presented for consideration in the international security trade control body (COCOM) before export was authorized by the country making the shipment and were considered to be for specified civilian uses. All of the countries mentioned in this letter as having permitted exports of embargoed items have cooperated for over fourteen years in controlling the export of strategic commodities to the Soviet bloc. They have also made, and are continuing to make, important contributions to free world security programs, including the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

United States assistance to these nations is almost entirely in the form of cash sales of military equipment as authorized by Section 507(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act,4 the only other assistance being a military assistance program for Portugal, a small residual military assistance program for Japan, deliveries from small undelivered balances of prior year military assistance programs for Belgium, France, Italy, and the Netherlands, and long-term Export-Import Bank loans recently extended to Japan and Portugal. In the case of cash sales of military equipment, assistance provided by the United States is limited to concessional prices on some transactions; the United States also receives assistance through such sales, not only in the form of increased security but also because they ease our balance of payments problems.

In the light of these considerations, and having taken into account each of the statutory criteria set forth in the first proviso of Section 103(b) of the Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act of 1951, I recommend that the United States, in its own security interest, continue to provide aid to these countries.

The recommendations in this letter were developed by Assistant Secretary of State Anthony M. Solomon, in performance of the functions of the Administrator for the Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act, and are concurred in by the other interested agencies.5

Respectfully submitted,

Thomas C. Mann

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, C.F., F.O. 3–2, Jan-Mar 1966. No classification marking. This letter and a second letter and two proposed memoranda for the President's signature, cited in footnotes 3 and 5 below, were sent under cover of a January 25 letter from Mann to the President.

2 P.L. 82–213, approved on October 26, 1951. (65 Stat. 644)

3 An attached letter from Mann to President Johnson, January 25, expanded on the circumstances of the Portugal tantalum ore shipment; not printed.

4 P.L. 87–195, approved on September 4, 1961. (75 Stat. 424)

5 Attached to the source text is an unsigned White House determination, in the form of an undated memorandum to Secretary Rusk and Mann, directing them to inform the six Congressional committees of this determination. Mann and Solomon approved the recommendation and Robert B. Wright, Director of the Office of East-West Trade, Department of State; Alvin Friedman, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs; Alexander B. Trowbridge, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Domestic and International Business; and Robert S. Smith, Acting Assistant Administrator for Program, Agency for International Development, concurred. Also attached to the source text is a signed Presidential Determination, in the form of a February 10 memorandum from President Johnson to Secretary Rusk and Mann.

179. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 179. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, February 18, 1966.

SUBJECT

Proposed Message on East-West Trade Relations Legislation

In response to your memorandum of January 18, I enclose a proposed Message in support of the East-West Trade Relations Legislation.2 Under Secretary Ball has read and approved this memorandum.

The President should know that Chairman Mills, and Senators Mansfield, Long and Fulbright, with whom the proposal for East-West Trade legislation has been discussed, all support the idea of such legislation, but believe it will meet very serious difficulties in the Congress, particularly because of Soviet military support to North Vietnam. A brief summary of their views is attached.3

These expressions reflect concern that the bill will be regarded by the Congress as providing concessions to the Soviet Union and Eastern European Communist nations. The enclosed draft Message emphasizes that this is not its purpose—rather it is to give the President additional power to negotiate with these nations for concessions the United States wants. The draft also stresses the potential value of the proposed legislation to us as one more measure to help persuade these nations that their best interests lie in developing peaceful relations. The Under Secretary believes it is important that the President discuss the Bill and the Message with the appropriate Members before sending it up in order to reassure them as to its scope and purpose.

The President should also know that Secretary Wirtz and Mr. George Weaver have talked with Mr. Meany of the AFL-CIO about the bill. They have explained it to him and we have made two changes to satisfy concerns he had.

I understand it now seems likely that he will not oppose the bill and that he may even be willing to provide some degree of support for it.

John P. Walsh 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade, East-West, Vol. I [1 of 2]. No classification marking.

2 Neither found.

3 Not found.

4  Walsh signed for Read above Read's typed signature.

180. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to Representative Craig Hosmer 180. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to Representative Craig Hosmer 1

Washington, March 4, 1966.

Dear Congressman Hosmer:

Your letter of February 172 refers to the recent decision of COCOM relating to the export of nuclear power reactors to Soviet bloc countries and raises certain relevant questions pertaining to Battle Act administration.

You are quite correct in your understanding that the effect of the transfer from Category A to Category B of Title I is to make it possible for the President to exercise discretion under Section 103(b) in determining whether or not to continue aid in the case of a power reactor sale by an aid-recipient country to a Communist bloc country, whereas termination of aid is mandatory with respect to Category A. Your questions relate to whether the determination to transfer the items in question from Category A to Category B of Title I contravenes the general policy underlying the Battle Act and whether the President may properly invoke the exception to the Battle Act's termination-of-aid clause in Section 103(b) in the case of a power reactor sale by an aid-recipient nation to a Communist bloc country. It is our view that the Title I listing determination taken, including its implications for the President's authority under Section 103(b) to continue aid, is in accordance with the provisions of the Battle Act. Moreover, similar decisions have been made in the past and have been reported to the Congress. I believe the following explanation will be helpful to you in understanding the reasons for our conclusion.

In the administration of the Battle Act, and in working out the international control lists under the Act, the key judgment which Congress entrusted to the Battle Act Administrator was whether particular items should be embargoed for purposes of the Act.

Section 103(a) of the Battle Act (22 U.S.C. 1611b) provides, in pertinent part, as follows (underlining added):3 "The Administrator is hereby authorized and directed to determine within thirty days after enactment of this Act … and notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, which items are, for the purpose of this Act, arms ammunition, and implements of war, atomic energy materials, petroleum … and those items of primary strategic significance used in the production of arms, ammunition, and implements of war which should be embargoed to effectuate the purposes of this Act: Provided, That such determinations shall be continuously adjusted to current conditions on the basis of investigation and consultation … .”

Section 103(a) of the Battle Act uses two phrases which make clear that the categories of items listed in that section are inherently qualified. They must be (1) items which “for the purpose of this [Battle] Act” are arms, ammunition, and implements of war and the like, and (2) items “which should be embargoed to effectuate the purposes of this [Battle] Act".4

The purposes of the Battle Act are perhaps most succinctly expressed in its long statutory title, i.e., “An Act to provide for the control by the United States and cooperating foreign nations of exports to any nation or combination of nations threatening the security of the United States, including the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and all countries under its domination, and for other purposes.” The key words are “control” and “cooperating foreign nations". These statutory words show that the Congress had in mind not absolute, unilateral embargoes but an international cooperative program of control. In this cooperative control program, as the Congress was aware, the United States necessarily would have a variety of objectives and means to pursue these objectives.

H.R. 4550 (82d Cong., 1st Sess. 1951) was the bill which, with some amendments not relevant here, became the Battle Act. In the House Foreign Affairs Committee report on H.R. 4550, the complex nature of our objectives in controlling exports to Russia was discussed, and the report made the following comment: "In order to carry on strategic operations of this nature it is essential that the executive branch be given a considerable degree of discretion and it is clear that legislation prohibiting broad categories of exports might prevent the attainment of these objectives.” (H. Rep. 703, 82d Cong., 1st Sess. July 16, 1951, p. 12)

We have reviewed Senate Report No. 698 on the same bill, which was referred to in your letter, and find nothing inconsistent with either this statutory statement of purpose or this recognition of executive discretion. Section 101 of the Battle Act, which elaborates the statement of purpose, states that the objective of controls, so far as the USSR and its satellites is concerned, is to impede the ability of such countries “to conduct military operations".

We have therefore concluded that the Act was not intended to require the embargo of items which would not contribute to the military capability of Sino-Soviet bloc countries, even though they might contribute to the industrial strength of a country. This conclusion is consistent with the views of previous Administrators of the Act and is supported by practice. The periodic Battle Act Reports to the Congress provide evidence of the selective listing of items under the Act, of periodic changes in accordance with Section 103(a), and of the movement of items from Category A to Category B of Title I.

The Battle Act's embargo provisions went into effect on January 24, 1952, and the published reports thereafter included information on the embargo lists, how they were established, and how they are maintained. There are two lists under Title I of the Battle Act. The Title I, Category B list originally included 263 item listings, of which one was petroleum products and equipment for producing them. By the time of the second Battle Act Report, sixteen new item listings had been added and fifteen original listings broadened. The specific item listings in Category B were classified for security reasons, but the report could identify the added listings in general terms. ("Problems of Economic Defense", 2d Report to Congress on the Battle Act, January 1953, pp. 7 and 8)

By the time of the fourth Battle Act Report, the decision had been made not to pursue an extension of the control lists to many other items but to recognize the need for simplifying the lists and removing or downgrading items which were no longer considered so important. ("East-West Trade Trends", 4th Report to Congress, May 1954, pp. 46 to 48) The results of this reappraisal were announced in a press release on August 25, 1954; there was a reduction in the embargo item listings from 297 to 217, and many of the 217 items were redefined so as to split off less important sizes and types of goods covered by the item. ("The Revision of Strategic Trade Controls", 5th Report to Congress, November 1954, pp. 39–42)

The same process, of course, was carried out for Category A items. Thus, in the 1958 Battle Act Report, revisions in the Category A list were announced in the following terms: "Some new items … embodying recent technological and scientific advances, and whose strategic significance had increased since the 1954 revision, were added. Other items were deleted because of a corresponding decrease in their strategic importance.” ("The 1958 Revision of East-West Trade Controls", 12th Report to Congress, April 20, 1959, pp. 4–5)

In the unclassified Category A list printed in this report, it was noted, for example, that some changes resulted in the deletion of items from the atomic energy material listing under Category A and the incorporation of those items in the classified Category B list (page 12). These changes were of the same type as those about which you have inquired.

This legislative history and reported practice make clear that there is no statutory distinction between Category A and Category B of Title I in terms of the determination of whether an item should be embargoed for the purposes of the Act. In determining whether or not an item shall be considered an “atomic energy material” for the purpose of the Act, the Administrator considered that the application of IAEA safeguards would give reasonable assurance that the materials would be devoted to peaceful uses only and that the shipment would therefore lack the strategic element to which the Battle Act restrictions were addressed. It follows, therefore, that the Administrator acted in accordance with the listing authority of the Act in removing those materials from Category A to Category B, because they still remain covered under Title I. Whether or not the President decides to continue aid to a country selling such a Category B item to a Communist bloc nation will depend upon the circumstances of the particular case.

For the reasons I have set forth in detail above, I consider that the modification in Title I treatment of civil research and power reactors, major components thereof, and fuel and moderators therefor is in accordance with the purposes of the Battle Act and appropriately furthers the United States policy of discouraging nuclear weapons proliferation and encouraging peaceful uses of atomic energy.

May I add that if you have any remaining questions on this matter, please let me know. We and the Atomic Energy Commission people would be glad to meet with you or other members and staff of the Joint Committee in order to be certain that there is full understanding of our actions under the Battle Act and in COCOM concerning nuclear power reactors subject to IAEA safeguards. We have done this previously, as you know, both through informal discussion and in letters to the Chairman, and we would like to be sure that no area of misunderstanding remains.

Sincerely yours,

Anthony M. Solomon 5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. No classification marking. Drafted by Wright (E/EWT) and Knute Malmborg (L/E) on March 1 and cleared in draft by Joseph A. Greenwald (E/ITED), Nelson F. Sievering, Jr. (SCI), Mark J. Garrison (EUR/EE), and Alexander Schnee (H). An attached February 21 note from an E Staff Assistant to Wright requested an appropriate reply to Hosmer's letter for Solomon's signature. A handwritten notation at the top of the source text reads: “Because of urgent nature of the response, the original was handcarried to addressee on 3/4/66.”

2 Attached but not printed.

3 Printed here as italics.

4 Brackets in the source text.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

181. Editorial Note 181. Editorial Note

On May 11, 1966, Secretary of State Rusk sent to Congress the draft of a proposed East-West Trade Relations Act of 1966, which would authorize the President to negotiate commercial agreements with the Soviet Union and Eastern European nations. Accompanying this bill were identical May 11 letters from the Secretary to John W. McCormack, Speaker of the House, and Hubert H. Humphrey, President of the Senate. The Department of State May 11 announcement of the proposed trade legislation, the text of Secretary Rusk's identical letters to McCormack and Humphrey, and the draft legislation are printed in Department of State Bulletin, May 30, 1966, pages 838–844.

The Secretary's action followed several conversations among Joseph Califano, Francis Bator, Secretary Rusk, and Under Secretary Ball in which they discussed whether it was wise to send the draft legislation to Congress (the President apparently wanted to reconsider an earlier decision not to send it) and, if so, whether the President should send it. (Memoranda of telephone conversations between Ball and Bator, April 26, 4:15 p.m., and Ball and Secretary Rusk, April 26, 4:30 p.m.; Johnson Library, Ball Papers, East-West Trade [1/23/64–7/12/66], Box 3)

Finally, in his remarks at a ceremony commemorating Poland's national and Christian millennium on May 3, President Johnson instructed Secretary Rusk to send the draft legislation to the Congress. Further, he recalled that he had promised in his State of the Union message on January 12 to request the proposed authority, and he added: “After years of careful study, the time has now come, I think, for us to act, and act we should and act we must.” Texts of his January 12 and May 3 remarks are in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1966, Book I, pages 3–12 and 475–478.

182. Airgram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 182. Airgram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 1

Rome, November 23, 1966.

A–424

SUBJECT

EXCON Strategic Trade Controls

REF

State 783872

Summary

The administration of strategic trade controls affecting the USSR and Eastern European countries has not been a source of major difficulties between the United States and Italy during the past few years, although there was one potentially serious difference involving shipments of large diameter pipe manufactured from US-origin equipment by the Italian firm of Italsider to the Soviet Union. With regard to US-controlled subsidiaries, potential legal and political difficulties in the strategic trade control area have not been realized, and the position of these firms has not caused major difficulties for US/Italian relations or, so far as we can judge, for the subsidiaries themselves. The overall tranquility that has characterized our relations in this area stems in large part both from efforts of the two Governments to keep those issues that have arisen in perspective and under control and from the broad convergence of US and Italian policies. The recent US re-emphasis on the principle that non-strategic trade is one means of building bridges to Eastern Europe has reinforced the general tendency of US and Italian policies to concur as regards that area, although American licensing policies remain more restrictive than Italian. On the other hand, there is a wider gap between US and Italian trade policies towards other Communist areas of the world, viz. the Communist Far East and Cuba, and it is this gap which bears most watching in possibly holding some potential for future difficulties.

Relations with Italian Officials

Working relations between the Embassy and Italian officials regarding strategic trade controls have been generally close and cordial. The Foreign Ministry has been kept informed of US actions in Italy, and has been cooperative with us. Incidents which might trouble this tranquil relationship have been rare; the most serious such case occurred about five years ago.

The Case of Italsider

This case, which is of course well known to the Washington agencies, involved the use of US-origin Verson presses by the Italian firm of Italsider (earlier named ILVA) to manufacture large diameter pipe for the Soviet Union. Since the export of the Verson presses to Italy had been authorized by the US Department of Commerce based on assurances by the Italian firm that the presses would be used to manufacture pipe for sale “in Italy and friendly countries,” the US Government believed that Italsider had violated the terms under which the presses had been exported. The case arose in late 1961, well before multilateral agreement had been secured in NATO to embargo the export of this type of pipe to what was then described as the Sino-Soviet bloc. Partly because the US policy on pipe was still unilateral at that stage, partly because Italsider was government-controlled, and partly (and perhaps most importantly) because of the prospect that a cancellation of the Soviet order by Italsider might (as the Italians argued) have caused unemployment in an economically depressed area, the problem had serious implications for US/Italian relations. However, since discussions on this subject between the two Governments were held strictly confidential, and since an acceptable compromise solution was reached, the dangers inherent in the situation were averted. One positive by-product was Italian support for the US pipe embargo proposal in NATO, and another was the introduction by the Italian Government of procedures to insure against pipe exports to countries controlled by the COCOM list. Except for a relatively minor slip-up, these procedures proved effective.

US-Controlled Subsidiaries

For the most part, US-controlled subsidiaries appear to be operating in Italy without feeling too keenly the restrictions imposed by the Foreign Assets Control Regulations or the Transactions Control Regulations. While the Embassy receives occasional inquiries concerning these regulations, the typical experience here has suggested a willingness on the part of the questioners to abide by these regulations.

Judging by the numerous contacts that have taken place in recent months, especially in Washington, General Electric appears to us to have been concerned to avoid difficulties with US regulations in connection with export operations of the Electronics Division of Olivetti (seventy-five per cent of which is owned by GE)

One case of an inquiry which, as far as we can determine, remains open, involves the desire of Societa Generale Semiconduttori (SGS) to export silicon planar semiconductors to Eastern European countries. SGS is one-third owned by Fairchild Camera and Instruments Corporation, and the SGS representative here was advised to have Fairchild contact the Commerce and Treasury Departments in Washington (see Embassy's A–216, August 21, 1966).3

One recent case that might have given rise to political and legal difficulties involved the Italian company of Eaton-Livia S.p.A. of Turin, seventy per cent of whose equity shares are held by the Eaton Manufacturing Company of Cleveland, Ohio. Eaton-Livia contracted with the Berliet Company of Lyon, France for the shipment to Berliet of poppet valves which were to be incorporated in trucks destined for Communist China. The order was apparently accepted routinely and in good faith, and the parent company acted in good faith with regard to applicable US regulations. It was feared that should an FAC license have been denied, Eaton-Livia's minority shareholder, an Italian, could have taken legal measures to secure the fulfillment of the contract with Berliet, and that an issue so joined could have exacerbated US/Italian relations regarding the applicability of American regulations abroad. In fact, however, the FAC license was granted, and the difficulty averted. Subsequently, the Embassy understands that Eaton remained in touch with the Treasury Department regarding the problem of obtaining assurances from Berliet that Eaton-Livia components would not be used in engines and trucks destined for Communist China.

In general, it appears that the status of US-controlled subsidiaries has not caused major problems in the context of strategic trade controls partly because of the judiciousness with which these controls have been administered (as in the case of Eaton-Livia cited above) and partly because the nature of US/Italian relationships has not been such as to naturally lend itself to nationalistic exploitation here of the position of US-controlled subsidiaries. It is of course true, here as elsewhere, that the issue retains a potential capacity for such exploitation, and this potentiality would increase if American assumption of control over elements of Italian industry were to become increasingly conspicuous. In the strategic trade control context, this problem would not necessarily become acute with regard to exports to the USSR and Eastern European countries, since the US could presumably make any objections to a proposed export in COCOM, as well as by denial of a Treasury Transactions Control license, and the multilateral forum might well be allowed to carry the political onus, thus shielding from strain the issue of extraterritorial application of US regulations to foreign subsidiaries. It is of course true that the same cannot be said of possible shipments of non-COCOM list items to Communist China, North Korea, and North Vietnam, and serious problems affecting subsidiaries could arise involving exports to those destinations.

Conclusions

In general, the administration of strategic trade controls towards the USSR and Eastern European countries has not been a source of major difficulties between the United States and Italy during the past few years. Most minor problems that have arisen have been handled with the full cooperation and understanding of the Foreign Ministry and other GOI officials. A major difficulty, of course, involved the Italsider shipments, but this problem was resolved through confidential inter-Governmental discussions, and the realization of its more dangerous potentialities was averted.

The overall tranquility that has existed in this area stems in part from the broad concurrence of policy objectives between the US and Italy, the cordiality of our relations within the Western Alliance, the willingness of Italy to accept the basic fact of American leadership on most East-West issues, and the efforts of both Governments to keep those problems that have arisen in perspective and under control.

The recent American re-emphasis of the principle that trade with Eastern Europe in non-strategically rated goods is one of the means by which bridges can be built has been particularly well received here, and has served to reinforce the broad general agreement on policy between the US and Italy, although US licensing policies remain more restrictive than Italian. Italian Governmental policy has favored trade with Eastern Europe (consistent with its COCOM and NATO obligations). Furthermore there exists in Italy a large and articulate body of opinion which favors the idea of working towards a detente with Eastern Europe and of using trading opportunities to serve this end as well as more narrowly commercial goals. It is also true that national pride was gratified by the fact that Fiat got a large Soviet automotive contract. In this context, US policy statements and the reduction in the Department of Commerce Positive List have been appreciatively received here.

It is of course true that American and Italian policies towards other parts of the world, such as the Communist Far East and Cuba, are much further apart. The Italian Institute for Foreign Commerce (which is affiliated with the Ministry for Foreign Commerce) maintains a trade mission in Peking, and Peking has one in Rome. This encouragement of trade of course contrasts sharply with the US embargo towards Communist China, North Korea, and North Vietnam. There is a similar contrast in policies affecting trade with Cuba. One can speculate that issues relating to these other areas of the world could prove to be weak points disturbing the overall cordiality of US/Italian relations as regards strategic trade controls.

The Department will appreciate that this report would have been more comprehensive, as well as more prompt, had the Economic Defense Officer, Mr. Frontis Wiggins, not been unavailable because of illness. However, he concurs in the broad conclusions of this message.

Reinhardt

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by Melvin H. Levine (ECON) on November 21, cleared by Alan W. Ford (POL) in draft and Theodore J. Hadraba (COMSEC), and contents approved by R.V. Korp (ECON). Repeated to Geneva and Paris for USRO and OECD.

2 Telegram 78387 to 18 posts, November 3, requested the posts in all 14 COCOM countries to provide information on problems with their governments arising from COCOM and U.S. restrictions on exports of strategic materials to the Soviet Union and Eastern European countries. (Ibid.)

3 Dated August 31 (not 21). (Ibid., STR 7–1 IT)

183. Airgram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 183. Airgram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 1

Paris, December 7, 1966.

A–898

SUBJECT

Strategic Trade Controls

REF

Dept Circular 783872

The comments in this airgram are based on the Embassy's experience in dealing bilaterally with the French Government on various trade controls. As far as COCOM controls are concerned, our comments deal with our experience in the administration of the Comprehensive Export Schedule rather than with relations with the French in COCOM itself. In evaluating the effect on US-French relations of the application of various trade controls, it is necessary to consider their cumulative effect; no one kind of controls can be identified as the chief irritant nor any one problem pin-pointed with certainty as the determining factor in any given French Government action.

Though the Department's inquiry referred only to trade with the USSR and Eastern Europe, it is not easy to distinguish in their effect on US-French relations between US controls on trade to these destinations and such controls as the US maintains on trade with Communist China, Cuba, and South Africa. The French recognize that US controls are intended to support US objectives vis-a-vis all these countries of destination and the French decreasingly share these objectives.

Problems arise when US controls on trade more restrictive than those of France affect French businesses. Each major trade problem risks becoming a political problem which, even if smoothed over, no doubt influences French Government thinking on US investment in France, on the establishment of competitive French industry, and the search for alternative foreign sources of supply, all of which are intended to make France more independent of the US. To the extent that we are able to make our controls stick, the loss to French business resulting from our differing national policies highlights these differences and leads France to be even more critical of US policies. Where we cannot effectively enforce our restrictions, there may be come lingering resentment over the attempt—reduced perhaps by the advantage to French business of the absence of US competition.

Though there are certain common aspects to all of the problems that we have with France in the exercise of our trade controls, discussion of these problems may be described as follows:

(A) Country-of-Origin Problem:

The French readily acknowledge the US right to control direct exports from the US, but in those instances where US controls are more restrictive, the strict US rule on the retention of national identity after fabrication causes difficulties with respect to the incorporation of US components in items manufactured in France. We are not aware of any major problems of this kind with respect to the USSR and Eastern Europe. There has been some mention of our delay in permitting a US component to be used on a French computer exhibit in Moscow. The most recent US components problem (see B below) concerns the use of US-made parts in French helicopters and jet aircraft for South Africa.

(B) US Controls to Non-Communist Areas:

As noted above, a problem has arisen with respect to the shipment to South Africa of French-made products with US components. The imposition on France of the US interpretation of the UN boycott is not welcome. Furthermore, the use of trade as a political weapon is not accepted by the French and no doubt causes some uncertainty as to how far the US can be relied upon as a continuing source of supply. In the jet aircraft case, we have heard that the French company concerned is exploring the possibility of substituting non-US parts for at least a portion of their production. If this occurs, France is likely to use the alternative sources not only for the South African market but for other areas as well. (See USUN 1468 October 12, 1966, State 54140 September 26, 1966, Paris 3334 September 9, 1966.)3

(C) French Subsidiaries of U.S. Firms:

As we read the U.S. Treasury's Transactions Control regulations, French subsidiaries of US firms are subject to these regulations in their exports of products on the US positive list to the USSR and Eastern Europe. While we are unaware of any recent problems in this category the restriction remains. Nevertheless, the kind of problem that has arisen with respect to the exports of French subsidiaries of US firms to Communist China could arise with respect to their exports of certain strategic goods to USSR and the other Communist bloc countries of Eastern Europe, and we feel the nature of this problem, as it has revealed itself in connection with exports to Communist China, merits consideration here.

The aspect of our controls which the French find most objectionable is their extension to the exports from France of French subsidiaries of US firms. Although they do not like, as a practical matter, being dependent on a supplier who attaches conditions to the supply of his product (as in the case of US equipment for French aircraft being exported to South Africa, China, or Eastern Europe), they do not object to this type of conduct between sovereign states on grounds of principal. That is to say, if they cannot find an alternate supplier they have the choice of doing without the product or accepting the conditions. However, in the case of controls applied to French subsidiaries of US firms, they consider them an infringement of French sovereignty.4 They have difficulty making a legal case (at least for wholly owned subsidiaries of US firms), since French law imposes no legal obligations on French firms, whether French or foreign owned, to export at all, much less to the USSR or China. The legal basis for the action against Frehauf was, of course, the minority French interest, adversely affected by the effort of the company to get out of a contract by which it was already bound. The absence of such French legislation makes it difficult for the French authorities to assert an obligation on French subsidiaries of US firms to disregard US controls, but it does not weaken the French position vis-a-vis the US that such subsidiaries should, as a basic principle of international conduct, not be bound by US legislation, but should conform to the policies and conduct which the French authorities consider in the French public interest. This view has been repeatedly stated by French officials.

Conceivably, legislation could be enacted by France which would make it difficult for French subsidiaries to refuse orders from China, the USSR or other specified country because of legislation in the country where the parent firm has its headquarters. And of course, it would be no problem at all for the French Government in its contacts with the state trading Communist countries to encourage interest in the goods produced by these subsidiaries. However, to date the French have shown no signs of going beyond general statements.

While we do not believe that the French Government at present desires to assert its sovereignty in this area, and believe they will allow things to continue more or less as they are now, this does not exclude the possibility of a cause celebre which would oblige the Government to take further steps.

Bohlen

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by Arthur P. Allen (FIN) and Selma G. Freedman and William A. Hayne (CTP), cleared by Richard Long (POL), and contents approved by Stanley M. Cleveland (MINECON).

2 See footnote 2, Document 182.

3  USUN 1468 was not found. Telegrams 54140 and 3334 are in Department of State, Central Files, AV 12–2 S AFR.

4 Handwritten in the margin next to this sentence is “point already made.”

184. Airgram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 184. Airgram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 1

London, December, 9, 1966.

A–1363

SUBJECT

Problems Resulting from US and International Strategic Trade Controls

REF

State Circular Telegram 783872

EXCON—NATUS. As the Department is well aware, the difference between the UK and the US in the matter of export controls is one of degree. While the British Government is generally in agreement on the need for strategic trade controls, and is a participant in COCOM, they have consistently taken a liberal, and frankly commercial, view towards the question of what should be considered strategic. Historically oriented towards foreign commerce, and as a practical matter highly dependent upon it, with the foreign sector accounting for a heavy percentage of their GNP, they are much less inclined than we to sacrifice export earnings for the sake of what we may consider the greater good. Whether for this practical reason or for more philosophical reasons, the British generally favor less controls than we. When the United States, either in COCOM or through its Positive List, pushes for more stringent controls, the British are generally inclined to regard this as an unnecessary overreaction on our part. There are times, however, when they read commercial considerations into our motives, as when we proposed to COCOM a definition of “strategic computer” which would have allowed sale of the IBM 1401 and 1410, but just cut out the principal British computers (see A–1899 of February 12, 1966).3 In the case of COCOM, the multilateral committee provides a mechanism which insures that international controls reflect UK thinking. In the case of our Positive List, however, there is no such mechanism. To the extent that UK products incorporate US-origin components which are on the Positive List, to that extent the UK is brought indirectly but effectively under the jurisdiction of US export control regulations with which it does not agree. One result of this is that such US components are being designed out of as many products as possible, or are being obtained elsewhere. If this were possible in all cases then there would be little adverse effect on our relations with the UK; only our trade balance would suffer. But since the US is the only source of certain components, or the only place where sufficient quantities can be obtained, this means is not always practical. The extraterritorial jurisdiction thus exercised by the US in the British export market is keenly felt and strongly resented at all levels. The British take the position that if an item is not restricted by COCOM, then its licensing for export is a matter for British discretion, notwithstanding the origin of its components.

The British tendency to view our insistence on stringent controls as an overreaction is not ameliorated by the history of such US-backed measures as the embargo on large diameter pipe. Now that this embargo has been lifted there is no evidence that during its lifetime it had any significant effect (other than a strategically insignificant delay) on completion of the so-called Friendship pipeline. Rather it forced the Soviets to develop their own pipe manufacturing industry to the point that they may now become exporters of pipe. Our embargo forced our adversaries to do what was probably in their best economic interests. In the process, the market for western production of pipe was reduced, and in all probability some of the effects of this reduction will be permanent. It is possible to argue, as we have argued, that our embargo forced the USSR to employ scarce resources in overcoming the effects of the embargo. This is undoubtedly true. However, the British would probably agree with the French reply to this argument; an embargo on virtually any essential import commodity will force the Soviet bloc to divert resources to make up the shortage—but this is not the function of COCOM, which concerns itself only with control of strategic items, nor is it compatible with the policy of the UK (nor presumably with that of the US).

We pay a high price for our program of Strategic Trade Controls in the time and effort of the large numbers of personnel employed in its administration, in the loss to US trade resulting from its limitation of markets, in the detrimental effect on our negotiating position in several international bodies which must inevitably result from our lone insist-ence on extreme firmness in COCOM, and in the public image of obstinacy, uncooperativeness and interventionism which invariably results from press treatment of our policies. In our present efforts to control the sales of computers to Communist China we are paying yet another price. Like the boy who cried “wolf", we have accustomed our allies to expect alarms and warnings over the relatively trivial as well as the urgent. Now, when we have again sounded the alarm over a matter of clear urgency, our allies find it difficult to heed our warning. We assume this report will be part of an effort to estimate the price of having controls. Have we any empirically determined evidence by which we may meas-ure the benefits of the program against its cost to the US in the terms outlined above? Our experience with the embargo on large diameter pipe would suggest that even the absolute benefits may be slight.

Another aspect of this problem which has caused a great deal of difficulty in US/UK relations is the extraterritorial jurisdiction that is exercised over foreign firms and individuals in the enforcement of strategic trade controls. The question of ordering British flag carriers to return goods to the US in violation of their shipping contract is a very touchy subject which has been covered in previous communications concerning the Woodham-Glovet case. The FAC's power to freeze the US funds of British subjects without resort to due process is another potentially explosive issue.While we may be totally within our legal rights in exercising these powers, we cannot expect a normally chauvinistic press, public, or even Parliament to accept this with equanimity. Exercise of these powers is likely to have adverse effects on our relations no matter how justified we may be in their use. This does not mean we must forego use of these powers entirely. We need only ensure that they are used only in those instances where there would clearly be a net gain to our national interest. This may sound elementary, but the fact is that a predetermination of where net national interest lies has not always been made prior to taking these actions. To the best of our knowledge the FAC does not participate in any interdepartmental clearance procedure except on a post facto basis (see London's 1513,4 and State 409125 ).

For our national interests to be a net loser, an enforcement action need not be so dramatic as freezing foreign assets or giving orders to foreign flag carriers. Virtually any insistence on carrying our prerogatives to their limits may suffice. While the British do not agree with our Cuba embargo, for instance, they will not normally object to our blacklisting UK firms who divert US goods to Cuba. But related party actions can be something else entirely. The Sway Engineering affair is a good case in point (see Department's A–240 of November 16, 19666 and previous). While Sway clearly acted for the denied party, Rad-Reps, there was no question of diversion to a prohibited destination. The violation consisted solely in assisting a denied firm to sell US goods to an acceptable end-user. To treat such a situation in the same manner as an actual diversion is to invite unnecessary difficulties.

Conclusions:

In these early years of what may be the world's first true era of multilateral relations, when countries have voluntarily surrendered more national sovereignty than ever before to the formation of economic communities, customs unions and other international organizations, it may be that we should expect countries to guard even more vigorously the sovereignty they retain. And when a single country dominates the political and economic scene as does the United States among the free-world countries, then any action of the United States which results in a real or imagined infringement of national sovereignty is likely to be felt more acutely and to arouse indignation in a wider segment of the public than would otherwise be the case. This “colossus of the north” syndrome is one we have long had to live with in our relations with Latin America and certain other areas. But we are not yet accustomed to meeting this in a country we have for so long regarded more or less as a co-equal ally. It would be foolish to disregard this attitude simply because it is emotionally, rather than logically, based.

Clearly, some aspects of our system of Strategic Trade Controls cost us a great deal more in disturbed bilateral relations alone than is gained through any eventual benefits. In order to enable us intelligently to embrace only the productive and turn away from the counter-productive, we must strive for a clearer and more realistic picture of the overall costs of maintaining an export control program on the one hand, and the actual benefits which we may realistically hope to gain from it on the other. Withholding computers from Communist China may be well worth limited disruption of our relations with the UK. Withholding tractor parts from Cuba may not be. To accomplish the former, in fact, may cost a good deal less than the latter. More importantly, our success in achieving the former may be prejudiced by our insistence upon the latter.

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by John J. St. John (E/GEN) on December 8, cleared in draft by Willis C. Armstrong (E/MIN), and contents approved by Arthur A. Hartman (E/GEN). Repeated to Ankara, Athens, Bonn, Brussels, Copenhagen, The Hague, Lisbon, Luxembourg, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris, Rome, Tokyo, Bern, Stockholm, Vienna, and the Mission in Geneva.

2 See footnote 2, Document 182.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, STR 14–2)

4 Dated August 24. (Ibid., STR 7–1 UK)

5 Dated September 2. (Ibid.)

6 Not printed. (Ibid.)

185. Memorandum of Conversation 185. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, January 20, 1967.

SUBJECT

Hearings on East-West Trade

PARTICIPANTS

Congressman Hale Boggs (D., La.)

Ambassador MacArthur, Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations (H)

Mr. Schnee, Legislative Officer (H)

Mr. Greenwald, Deputy Assistant Secretary (E/ITP)

Ambassador MacArthur explained that he wanted to talk informally about the possibility of Mr. Boggs' Subcommittee on Trade of the Joint Economic Committee holding hearings on East-West trade. He said that, at a meeting just before Christmas in Little Rock with Under Secretary Katzenbach, Chairman Mills of the Ways and Means Committee had agreed to hold hearings on East-West trade legislation.2 However, the Ways and Means Committee had first to take up the debt ceiling, Social Security, and taxes and would not be able to get around to East-West trade hearings until June, at the earliest. Therefore, Chairman Mills had suggested the possibility of hearings by the Joint Economic Committee. Ambassador MacArthur stressed that these hearings could not, of course, substitute for Ways and Means Committee hearings, but would be helpful in getting before the Congress and the public the positive arguments for an expansion of trade with Eastern Europe.

Mr. Boggs recalled that the trade agreements legislation expired on June 30 and that the Ways and Means Committee would have to hold trade hearings in any event. He wondered why East-West trade could not be covered in these hearings. Ambassador MacArthur pointed out that hearings on general trade legislation would have to await the outcome of the Kennedy Round. Also, it was preferable to keep East-West trade separate from the regular trade agreements program.

Mr. Boggs said it would be difficult to sell East-West trade legislation as long as we were fighting in Viet Nam. He reported that Congressman Laird had told him informally that he was in favor of East-West trade but would not support legislation as long as the Eastern European countries were supplying North Viet Nam. In response to Mr. Boggs' question as to how we rebutted this position, Mr. Greenwald said the President and Secretary of State had given the answer: while we strongly resist aggression in Southeast Asia, it is in our national interest at the same time to seek areas of peaceful cooperation with the Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe. Also, there was a great deal of change going on in Eastern Europe and increased trade would promote these liberalizing trends. Ambassador MacArthur cited Yugoslavia as an example of the direction we hoped other Eastern European countries would move in. Mr. Boggs agreed that Yugoslavia was a very good example of the benefit of such trade.

Ambassador MacArthur said that Tony Solomon had talked to Congressman Reuss, who favored East-West trade hearings and would provide Mr. Boggs with all the assistance he could. Mr. Boggs agreed that his heavy duties as Democratic Whip would make it difficult for him to preside over hearings continuously.

At the end of the discussion, Mr. Boggs said he believed that hearings should be held by his Subcommittee. The Joint Economic Committee had not yet been organized, but he would talk to Mr. Reuss about the hearings as soon as possible. He thought it might be possible to hold them in March. Mr. Boggs asked Ambassador MacArthur to check with him again on Tuesday, January 24 for a final answer.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 1 US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Joseph A. Greenwald on January 20. The meeting was held in Boggs' office.

2 No formal record of this meeting has been found.

186. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (MacArthur) to Senator Walter F. Mondale 186. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations (MacArthur) to Senator Walter F. Mondale 1

Washington, February 8, 1967.

Dear Senator Mondale:

I have received your inquiry of January 31, 1967 concerning Mr. James Bormann's interest in the possible extension of nondiscriminatory tariff treatment to the USSR and other Eastern European countries.2

Under section 231 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, the President was expressly directed by the Congress not to extend nondiscriminatory tariff treatment to “any country or area dominated or controlled by Communism.” This provision was amended by section 402 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1963 to allow the continuation of nondiscriminatory tariff treatment for Yugoslavia and Poland. The Administration's East-West trade legislation, which was sent to the Congress by the Secretary of State on May 11, 1966 at the President's direction, would authorize the President to conclude commercial agreements with the USSR and the other Eastern European countries.3 In a commercial agreement concluded under the proposed legislation, the United States could grant nondiscriminatory tariff treatment to the USSR or one of the other Eastern European countries in exchange for equivalent benefits granted by the other party to the agreement. I am enclosing a copy of the Department of State press release which contains the texts of the proposed legislation and the Secretary of State's letters to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House transmitting the legislation to the Congress.3

Shortly after the introduction of the legislation in the House and Senate in May last year, Chairman Mills of the House Ways and Means Committee, which must initiate hearings on the legislation, announced that his Committee's schedule for the remainder of the session was too crowded to hold hearings on the East-West trade legislation. In his speech of October 7, 1966, the President stated that the Administration intended to continue its efforts to obtain passage of the proposed legislation.4 The President reaffirmed this position in his State of the Union message of January 10, 1967.5 The executive branch is now consulting in the Congress on the most appropriate means for moving ahead with this legislation. We cannot say at this time what the legislative timetable will be, nor would we wish to speculate now on ultimate Congressional action.

The President's program to expand peaceful trade with Eastern Europe has stimulated considerable public discussion of this issue. A number of organizations have adopted public positions generally favorable to the proposed expansion of such trade. I am enclosing copies of several of these public statements which may be of interest to Mr. Bormann.6 Naturally, these statements do not represent an exhaustive survey. In addition, I am enclosing copies of recent speeches on East-West relations by Under Secretary of State Katzenbach, Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs Kohler, and then-Assistant Secretary of Commerce Trowbridge.7

I hope that you will find this information helpful. If I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to write.

Sincerely yours,

Douglas MacArthur II 8

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, TP 7–1. No classification marking. Drafted by Thomas M.T. Niles (EUR/SOV) on February 6 and cleared by Malcolm Toon and James L. Colbert (EUR/SOV) and Jack M. Fleischer (E/IS). A January 8, 1967, date stamped on the dateline is incorrect.

2 Not found.

3 See Document 181.

3 See Document 181.

4 For text of the President's remarks to a National Conference of Editorial Writers in New York, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1966, Book II, pp. 1125–1130.

5 Text ibid., 1967, Book I, pp. 2–14.

6 Not found.

7 Probably references to Katzenbach's speech before the National Association of Manufacturers Annual Congress of American Industry in New York on December 9, 1966, and Kohler's address before the Florida Department of the American Legion in Orlando on December 11, 1966. For texts, see Department of State Bulletin, January 2, 1967, pp. 2–5 and 6–11, respectively. Trowbridge's speech has not been further identified.

8 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature and an indication that an H staff member signed for MacArthur.

187. Letter From the Secretary of the Treasury's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Albright) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy (Greenwald) 187. Letter From the Secretary of the Treasury's Assistant for National Security Affairs (Albright) to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy (Greenwald)1

Washington, March 14, 1967.

Dear Mr. Greenwald:

This is in reply to your letter of February 15, 1967 in which you suggest that Treasury now issue a general license to U.S. subsidiaries in COCOM participating countries and to their U.S. officers and directors.2 You further indicate the desirability of an early favorable Treasury decision so that State's reply to an inquiry from the United Kingdom can take into account such decision.

While the Treasury Department has no objection in principle to the issuance of such a general license, you will recall that Secretary Fowler's letter of December 22, 1966 emphasized the desirability of interagency work looking toward achievement of an agreed U.S. position on the reduction of the items of limited strategic or economic significance which would be controlled with respect to the USSR and Eastern Europe. Our intention was to proceed with Treasury actions only within the framework of a broader policy approach. In the absence of this broader framework, we believe that the limited step of issuing a general license at this time, with its necessary publication, could easily be misconstrued by the public and the Congress beyond its real substance. We should have very much in mind the effects of individual actions or broader new policies on the legislative program now before the Congress relating to East-West trade and other “Bridge-Building” matters.

Further, Secretary Rusk's letter of December 4, 19663 and your letter to me of February 15, 1967 indicate that the general license could be useful in advancing U.S. objectives in negotiations with other countries. If this is so, there is some advantage in including this license decision as a part of an over-all package for negotiation with the COCOM governments in which we will be seeking certain understandings from them.

For these reasons we would prefer not to issue the general license at this time. We would be prepared, however, to issue the general license at such time as the legislative sensitivity has declined and a more comprehensive U.S. negotiating position toward our allies has been delineated and the decisions have been made to more ahead.

I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr. McQuade at the Department of Commerce and Mr. Barber at the Department of Defense.4

Sincerely yours,

Raymond J. Albright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential.

2 Not found. However, a memorandum from Robert B. Wright (E/ITP/EWT) to Greenwald, February 21, indicates that Greenwald's February 15 letter was written out of concern for the Department of Defense's decision not to take a position on Treasury Transaction Control cases. But because the Department of State doubted whether in practice Treasury would approve cases without the positive assent of Defense, the result of Defense's “no position” might be bureaucratic inertia and growing impatience among applicants. (Ibid.)

3 Not found.

4 Next to this paragraph is a line drawn to the bottom of the letter where the following comment was written in an unidentified hand: “I think we have to meet with Albright, Barber and McQuade plus someone from W[hite] H[ouse]—Bator? or his office. Let's talk about an agenda & paper.”

188. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy (Greenwald) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) 188. Action Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Trade Policy (Greenwald) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon)1

Washington, July 10, 1967.

SUBJECT

Treasury Transaction Controls General License

You requested on June 16 that we raise this matter with you again in a few weeks. The following developments since then appear to be relevant: 1) Louis Harris attributes the recent upsurge in the President's popularity to hopes for easing tensions emanating from the Kosygin talks and the President's handling of the Middle East crisis.2 This suggests that action such as the proposed transaction control general license, if it is noticed at all, might encourage rather than discourage Congressional support for other East-West measures on the Hill.

2) The justification for the recently approved general license for quotation data for bids on exports to Eastern Europe and the USSR is similar to the justification for the proposed transaction control general license: administrative simplification involving little if any substantive change in controls. As of July 7, neither Commerce nor E/IS had noted any public reaction to the July 3 publication of the quotation data general license.3

It is recommended that you authorize me to ask Treasury to issue the transactions control general license attached to the EWT June 13 memorandum.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by William A. Root (E/EWT) on July 10. The date is handwritten on the source text. A notation on the source text indicates that Solomon saw the memorandum.

2 The source text indicates that a Louis Harris article in the July 2 Washington Post was attached, but it was not found.

3 Not found.

4  Solomon initialed his approval of the recommendation. The attached text of the proposed addition to the Transaction Control Regulations is not printed. The June 13 memorandum from Wright to Solomon, also attached, proposed to initiate a procedure under which “Treasury would simply notify applicants, on receipt of their application, that a Treasury license is not necessary if they obtain a license from the host country of the subsidiary. This would not involve publication of a general license but it would perhaps be less equitable to the public than a general license. L (Murray Belman) sees difficulties in this informal approach. Therefore, we believe a general license which includes an explanation that only a duplicate control is being discontinued would be the preferable solution. Such wording in the license itself would reduce the possibility of misunderstanding.”

189. Current Economic Developments 189. Current Economic Developments1

Washington, September 26, 1967.

Issue No. 789

US PROPOSAL IN COCOM FOR HANDLING TECHNOLOGY CASES WAS WELL RECEIVED

The US proposal for resolution of the problem involving the supply of computer production technology to Czechoslovakia was favorably received in COCOM on September 19. We expect the proposal will probably be formally accepted when COCOM meets again October 6—after the normal 18-day period for review of our proposal and of the amended French submission to COCOM on the Fund exception case. Meanwhile, the US objection remains binding on the French and UK cases for supplying the computer technology for Czechoslovakia. (See page 5, August 15, 1967 issue.)2

We are pleased with the reaction in COCOM to our proposal and believe that we obtained the foreign relations advantages we hoped for by our handling of the Czech computer cases.

Background

The UK and France applied to COCOM for exceptions involving competing interest in the manufacture of computer central processing units and magnetic tape handlers in Czechoslovakia. (Both the British and French proposals were amended to exclude tape handling technology, the most strategic aspect of the transactions.) The British computers are believed to be independent of US subsidiaries, licensing arrangements, parts, and technology. The French firm, Bull/GE, has an American majority interest. GE has applied for a Commerce license for re-export of the US-origin parts and technology. GE also has applied for a Treasury license for the export of COCOM embargoed parts by its subsidiary in France.

These cases are the first in recent COCOM history proposing the export of technology for producing embargoed commodities. Implicit in the cases is an obligation to approve continuing export of embargoed parts, components, and peripheral equipment for carrying out the resulting manufacturing operations.

The US formally objected in COCOM to these cases. In the US view, the proposed transactions would significantly advance the capabilities of the country receiving the technology to produce the specific computers and magnetic tape handlers. The transactions also would materially augment the capabilities of Eastern European produced computers—both civil and military—and permit the avoidance of the present restriction in the administrative exceptions note regarding the number of memory units. We recognized that the transactions were commercially attractive but concluded that the strategic risks inherent in such exports compelled us to interpose a formal objection in these cases.

In reaching a decision to object in COCOM to the transactions, the US agencies concerned agreed not to try to stop the transactions by use of the unilateral Commerce or Treasury controls. We informed the UK and French Governments bilaterally of this aspect of our position. The French said that their principal interest was to help out a company (Bull/GE) which has a substantial American majority interest and is in financial difficulty. They went on to reiterate the disadvantages for the French of membership in COCOM because of the limits imposed on French freedom to export to Eastern Europe. The British reiterated their desire to abide by COCOM rules but pointed out the problems that could arise from a negative US decision.

US COCOM Proposal

The reactions to the US objection prompted the USG to review the Czech computer problem. We concluded that reversal of the US position on the significance of the cases in question was not warranted. We wished, however, to handle the matter so as to minimize the impact with the French and in COCOM and to attempt to use the cases to improve the handling of technology cases generally.

To this end, the US on September 19 proposed in COCOM that member countries should adopt the practice of submitting to COCOM for prior consultation technology cases applicable to design, production, and use of all embargoed items whether or not subject to administrative exception. The understanding would be that the countries will not attempt to exercise a veto in the cases, however. In making the proposal, our delegate explained that it is important to control technology related to administratively excepted items on COCOM embargo list because technology for their production is often also useful for production of embargoed items not subject to administrative exception and should, therefore, be protected. At the same time, the US recognizes the difficulty of determining which technology warrants control and submission to COCOM. The nature of this problem, therefore, argues for some agreed system of exchanging views on technology transactions.

At the COCOM meeting, France concurred in the US proposal, and the other participating countries reserved, although several commended the US for its initiative. The French stressed at the meeting that their $22 million deal included only $2–1/2 million for which a license needs COCOM approval. Off the record, they underscored the unemployment implication and probable closure of the Bull/GE Belfort plant if the deal is not approved. The British, apparently anxious for commercial reasons to keep the French from proceeding, stressed that no licenses should be signed in the Czech cases until completion of formal COCOM consideration of the US proposal and the revised French case.

The Chairman ruled that as long as the present procedures are in effect, the US objection is binding in both cases. COCOM will meet again October 6 after the normal 18-day period for study of the US proposal and the revised French case.

Aftermath of COCOM Meeting

The French obviously were pleased with the US proposal and apparently understand its purport in general as well as its significance for the GE/Bull case. In sum, we believe that our responsive attitude in this matter benefited US-French relations, improved the atmosphere and effectiveness of COCOM, and paved the way for tightened multilateral control over trade with Communist China.

China Differential

The bilateral discussions associated with the US proposal in COCOM have suggested that it may be feasible to amend the US proposal to provide a tighter procedure for technology exceptions cases for Communist China. It may also be feasible to establish a differential control under which exceptional exports to China would be more tightly controlled than those to Eastern Europe and under which some additional advanced equipment might be brought under embargo to China. The issue will be how much we have to reduce the East European embargo to counterbalance the coverage for China.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Confidential. The source text comprises pages 1–2 of the issue.

2 “US Objects in COCOM to Computer Technology for East Europeans,” Issue No. 786, August 15, 1967, pp. 5–7. (Ibid.)

190. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 190. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, October 27, 1967.

SUBJECT

COCOM Technology Procedure

REFERENCE

Secretary Trowbridge's October 23 Letter2

The proposed reply at Tab A to the Commerce letter at Tab B reiterates the points we made to Paul Nitze and Paul Warnke in your office October 19.3 We still think we are on the right track and that withdrawal of our proposal at this point would be counter-productive.

Commerce might be receptive to a compromise whereby we withdrew both our technology procedure proposal and our objection to the Czech computer technology case. Defense would probably not agree to that solution. We might eventually wish to revert to such a compromise but we believe it would be premature now. At this point it appears that Commerce is primarily interested in building a record evidencing their support of effective COCOM controls (unlike we non-patriotic types!).

Recommendation

It is recommended that you sign the letter at Tab A.

Tab A

Washington, November 1, 1967.

Letter From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to Secretary of Commerce Trowbridge 4

Dear Mr. Secretary:

Your letter of October 23 suggested withdrawal of the technology proposal the United States recently submitted to COCOM. You state that the initial COCOM discussions of this proposal indicate that other COCOM participating governments believe that the existing exceptions procedure and the rule of unanimity apply to technology and that the proposed new procedure would result in less control of technology. I do not share your interpretation of these discussions. Indeed I believe that the COCOM record (as described in the enclosure to this letter),5 while inconclusive on some points, demonstrates that the United States proposal would strengthen controls.

Administrative Principle 5, the existing COCOM agreement on technology, was carefully drafted and is still interpreted to reflect the lack of legal bases in member countries upon which to enforce controls. In the discussions on the United States proposal, a COCOM record is being established that technology is at least as important as hardware. This has already led to increased recognition of the need to control technology. If we were to withdraw our proposal, we would not only lose this momentum but also move backwards as a result of the reaction of the French and others which would follow.

The United States proposal is also serving as the vehicle for breaking opposition in COCOM to the principle of a China differential. Since our China trade control objectives can be furthered by such a differential, this incidental benefit may be of even more significance than the technology procedure itself.

We are not ruling out any future change in the United States position which might strengthen existing COCOM controls on technology. However, we are encouraged by developments to date and believe that withdrawal of our proposal would be counter-productive.

Sincerely yours,

Nicholas de B. Katzenbach 6

Tab B

Washington, October 23, 1967.

Letter From Secretary of Commerce Trowbridge to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)7

Dear Mr. Katzenbach:

I have been reviewing the developments here and in COCOM regarding the proposal submitted by the United States Government for a prior consultation procedure on technology exceptions cases.

As you know, on July 24, 1967, the EDAC Chairman wrote to EDAC members, stating that prior consultation in COCOM for technology cases without the veto would strengthen technology controls, and would constitute a greater degree of control over technology than has existed or is likely to exist in the future.8 Commerce's EDAC member replied on July 27, stating “I find that I am unable to agree with your basic premise that COCOM controls on technology are virtually nonexist-ent.”8

When we met on September 15 to discuss this proposed approach to COCOM on the control of technology for computers and other embargo items, I, and I believe the others, were clearly given to understand that this proposal for a consultative procedure would strengthen COCOM controls over technology because no such controls exist at present.9 On this basis we all agreed to the new procedure.

Now I find that the initial COCOM discussion of the U.S. procedural proposal has caused a number of the more important COCOM participating governments to place on record their views that this new procedure would not strengthen, but would actually weaken, the COCOM controls over technology. In their opinion, the existing prior exceptions clearance procedure and the rule of unanimity apply not only to commodities on the embargo lists but also to the technology relating to them.

In the COCOM discussion the representatives of those governments expressed their views that this proposed procedure would constitute a departure from the rule of unanimity for technology exceptions cases, that it would result in less control of technology than of commodities, that it would weaken COCOM controls of technology relating to international munitions and atomic energy embargo items unless the U.S. proposals are amended, and that adoption of this new procedure for technology would require automatic approval of exports of related components and production equipment. All of this clearly indicates that adoption of the U.S. procedural proposal on technology would have serious adverse effects on existing COCOM controls.

The foregoing developments, which are illustrated by the enclosure to this letter,10 prompt me to urge you and your Department to reconsider the proposal on technology and to withdraw it from COCOM. Our government could explain its withdrawal action on grounds that the COCOM discussion has clarified the existing COCOM technology controls, has revealed the views of the other participating governments regarding them, and has indicated that no change in the existing controls is necessary.

Sincerely yours,

A.B. Trowbridge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 14–1. Confidential. Drafted by William A. Root (E/ITP/EWT) on October 27 and cleared by Stephen H. Rogers (EUR).

2 Tab B below.

3 No formal record of this meeting has been found.

4 Confidential. Drafted by Root on October 26 and cleared by Rogers (EUR).

5 Entitled “Statements relevant to whether or not the U.S. technology procedure proposal would strengthen COCOM controls,” not printed.

6 Printed from a copy that indicates Katzenbach signed the original.

7 Confidential.

8 Not found.

8 Not found.

9 Not further identified.

10 Entitled “Statements in COCOM on U.S. Proposal for Consultative Procedure for Exports of Technology,” not printed.

191. Letter From the Minister for Economic Affairs in the Embassy in France (Brand) to the Director, Office of European Community and Atlantic Political Economic Affairs (Katz) 191. Letter From the Minister for Economic Affairs in the Embassy in France (Brand) to the Director, Office of European Community and Atlantic Political Economic Affairs (Katz)1

Paris, January 19, 1968.

Dear Abe:

The somewhat excessive delay in coming up with the promised letter on the French attitude toward COCOM has been due partly to the press of recent events but more to the fact that when we sat down to think about it, we had no new information on which to base an assessment.

The visit earlier this week of Senator Mondale looking into East-West trade matters has helped in this respect. The Senator politely but bluntly asked Brunet (Foreign Office), Chapelle (DREE), Varnoux (the French COCOM representative) and a couple of others: (A) why does France stay in COCOM; (B) do COCOM restrictions hamper French trade with the East; and (C) having seen the mistakes of the 30's in strengthening a likely enemy, do not the French see security reasons for restricting at least some strategic goods?

The French answers were consistent, given without hesitation, and added up to the following: (A) France sees value in COCOM for competitive commercial reasons; were it not for COCOM, the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe would buy advanced technical goods from sources other than France, particularly the United States; (B) COCOM does not really hamper the development of French trade with the East; furthermore, the US Delegation is reasonable in COCOM; (C) the GOF does not see strategic reason for barring the shipment of any product to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.

On the latter point, Brunet argued that the USSR has shown it possesses the technical knowledge and resources to produce any item it needs. (No one advanced the obvious argument that the GOF no longer considers the USSR as an enemy.)

We found a modicum of comfort in equally direct GOF statements that France does not equate Communist China with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. France “would not oppose a China differential” reached through the relaxation of existing controls toward Eastern Europe and the USSR.

So there we are. Brunet and Chapelle responded frankly and fully to the Senator's questions and it might not be a favor to them to report their statements fully by airgram or cable. We also got some interesting observations relating to their recent negotiations in Moscow with the Petite and Grande Commissions (which we will report in further airgrams on French-Soviet East-West trade).

With best regards.

Sincerely,

Bob

See you Sunday.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Limited Official Use; Official-Informal.

2 The postscript is handwritten. Sunday was January 21.

192. Editorial Note 192. Editorial Note

In May 1966, the Johnson administration sent to Congress its proposed East-West Trade Relations Act of 1966, which was designed to encourage peaceful non-strategic trade with Communist countries. Regarding this initiative, see Document 181. The House of Representatives heard testimony from officials from the executive departments on October 18. See Recent Developments in East-West Relations: Hearing Before the Subcommittee on Europe of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1966). Congressional leaders subsequently discussed with administration principals in late 1966 and 1967 the scheduling of hearings on the subject (see Document 185), but none was held in 1967. A Department of Commerce paper, “Brief Analysis and Outlook on East-West Trade and Related Administration Proposals in the 90th Congress,” March 31, 1967, summarized the many bills on East-West trade matters pending in Congress in the early months of 1967. It is attached to an April 1 letter from Lawrence C. McQuaide, Acting Assistant Secretary of Commerce, to Anthony M. Solomon. (Johnson Library, Solomon Papers, East-West Trade Legislation, Box 3) Congress passed no legislation on East-West trade in 1967.

In early 1968, however, the Subcommittee on Europe of the House Foreign Affairs Committee held hearings on East-West trade. For texts of the statements by Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Charles E. Bohlen and Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Anthony M. Solomon before this subcommittee on February 20, 1968, see Department of State Bulletin, March 25, 1968, pages 421–427.

Additional hearings on East-West trade were held by the Subcommittee on International Finance of the Senate Banking and Currency Committee in June and July 1968. See East-West Trade: Hearings Before the Subcommittee on International Finance of the Committee on Banking and Currency, United States Senate, Ninetieth Congress, Second Session (Washington: Government Printing Office, 1968), Parts 1 and 2.

Despite these hearings Congress took no action to authorize legislation in this area in 1968.

193. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 193. Airgram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, March 29, 1968.

CEDTO A-621

SUBJECT

COCOM Reaction to Swedish Liberalization of Strategic Trade with the Soviet Bloc

REF

A. State 1323742

B. CEDTO A–5933

C. Stockholm 9454

D. Stockholm 10685

E. Stockholm 10736

EXCON. 1. In COCOM on March 26 the Chairman raised again the matter of the recent Swedish liberalization of strategic exports to the Soviet Bloc in order to point out that COCOM could not directly approach the Swedish Government and that the individual member governments consequently have certain responsibilities in this matter. There was a general feeling that, in view of the understandings which have existed in this area up to now between Sweden and the member governments, Sweden should have consulted with some or all of the COCOM members before taking this action.

2. The discussion was somewhat inhibited by the lack of precise and detailed knowledge of the Swedish action. US Del reminded the Committee that he had requested further information from his authorities, and other dels agreed to try to obtain more facts on the action and the reasons for it.

3. During the course of the discussion, the Chairman stated his belief that the Swedish question, involving policy questions of relations with third states, should be dealt with in the full Committee rather than the Subcommittee on Export Controls. The Netherlands and French Dels both stated they believed the matter important enough to be dealt with by the full Committee in the first instance. These are the only replies so far given to the query put forward by the US Del at the previous meeting.

Trezise

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Confidential. Drafted by Roger C. Dixon (USOECD/STC) on March 28 and contents approved by Dixon. Repeated to Stockholm.

2 Telegram 132374 to Paris, March 19, advised that more time was needed to evaluate the Swedish decontrol action and, before proposing a date for the next meeting of the COCOM Subcommittee on Export Controls, wanted the U.S. Delegation to ask the other delegations on March 19 whether the subcommittee was the best place to discuss the Swedish action and, if so, when. (Ibid.)

3  CEDTO A-593 from Paris, March 21, reported discussion at the COCOM meeting on March 19 about the scheduling of the next meeting of the COCOM Subcommittee on Export Controls and the U.S. concerns over Sweden's new policies on strategic trade. Most delegations favored a subcommittee meeting in the spring of 1969, and the U.S. Delegation agreed to provide more details on the Swedish matter to the COCOM Chairman. (Ibid.)

4 Telegram 945 from Stockholm, March 6, reported the relaxation of the new Swedish export licensing controls over shipments to Communist countries. (Ibid., STR 12–3 SWE)

5 Telegram 1068 from Stockholm, March 25, summarized a Swedish newspaper article about the new Swedish export regulations. (Ibid.)

6 Telegram 1073 from Stockholm, March 26, summarized further newspaper stories about the new Swedish export regulations. (Ibid.)

194. Current Economic Developments 194. Current Economic Developments1

Washington, April 23, 1968.

Issue No. 804

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

US THINKING ON COCOM LIST REVIEW

Before submitting formal proposals to the Coordinating Committee on Export Controls (COCOM) in connection with this year's List Review, the US is exploring on a bilateral basis with the British, French, German, Dutch and Japanese delegations and the Chairman possible changes in the List as well as in procedures for conducting the Review.

The US believes that the USSR and the Warsaw Pact countries of Eastern Europe continue to constitute a potential threat to the security of COCOM participating countries and that continuation of COCOM controls on exports to this area is therefore justified. However, the growing self sufficiency of some of these countries may permit relaxation on some items. On the other hand, the significance of imports as a factor contributing to Communist China's advanced weapons programs warrants giving priority attention to strengthening COCOM controls. In view of Sino-Soviet differences, the risk of transshipment from the USSR and Eastern Europe to East Asia is less than it was a few years ago.

If other participating countries agree with this rationale, COCOM might wish to provide for more liberal treatment for certain items to Eastern Europe and the USSR than to East Asia. For instance, notes could be added to some items which would have the effect either of permitting, as administrative exceptions, shipments to the USSR and Eastern Europe, but not to East Asia and Albania, or of applying special exception procedures for shipments to the USSR and Eastern Europe.

The outcome of a List Review using this approach should be that changes in the List should be distributed among the following three categories and should not be concentrated in any one of these categories: a) increases in coverage for East Asia and Albania and a few increases for Eastern Europe and the USSR; b) decreases in coverage for Eastern Europe and the USSR and in a few instances decreases also for East Asia; and c) changes involving both increases and decreases or clarification for all destinations.

Since our review is only partially complete, we are not submitting firm proposals at this time. We have identified some changes which we want to discuss bilaterally, most of which would strengthen controls because of developments in East Asia. We hope to have other suggestions, including some for relaxation, ready by the time bilateral meetings actually take place in May and June. Our objective is to exchange information bilaterally which will simplify the List Review negotiations in COCOM, scheduled to begin October 1.

[Here follow articles on unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments. Confidential. The source text comprises page 11 of the issue.

195. Editorial Note 195. Editorial Note

The Soviet military invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 prompted immediate U.S. reappraisal of its policies toward the Soviet Union and Eastern European nations. In addition to postponement of a second Aeroflot inaugural flight, review of exchange programs, and cancellation of some cultural events, the Johnson administration reassessed its policy on East-West trade. An early summary of this review reads as follows:

“US Policy on East-West Trade

“In the long range, it appears that the rationale behind the US East-West trade policy remains valid. Current short-term questions arising out of the recent events in Eastern Europe are receiving special consideration.

“Among other measures, we have under consideration an attempt to shore up COCOM, to make another effort to get NATO restraint on long-term credit to communist countries, and to take a number of actions of economic benefit to the Romanians, provided we can do so without putting them at risk. We are also considering denying new economic benefits to the invading countries by discouraging important new business (e.g., construction contracts in the USSR and to a lesser extent in the other invading countries), by turning down major pending cases for US export licenses, suspending new arrangements for verification and payment of annuities in the USSR and perhaps in Hungary at least until it is possible to go ahead with them in Czechoslovakia. We are also considering proposing in NATO temporary suspension of any new long-term credit to communist countries other than Romania and Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia; a common NATO policy of limiting such credits to Berne Union terms; no subsidization of interest payments except on an ad hoc basis with NATO approval; no general liberalization in COCOM controls this year (but perhaps a broader use of the exceptions procedures as a quid pro quo for European agreement to differential treatment of Communist China) and a slowdown on new East-West European bilateral trade negotiations. Many of the foregoing are not new proposals.

“The possibilities under consideration for Romania include requiring export licenses on fewer items, reconsideration of our COCOM position on certain pending cases, continuing to encourage Romania's entry into Intelsat and GATT, and approval of establishment of US sales offices for Romanian foreign trade enterprises.” (“US Reassessing Policies in View of Invasion of Czechoslovakia,” Current Economic Developments, Issue No. 814, September 10, 1968, page 3; Washington National Records Center, RG 59, E/CBA/REP Files: FRC 72 A 6248, Current Economic Developments)

Additional documentation on the impact of the invasion on U.S. relations with the Soviet Union and Eastern European nations is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volumes XIV and XVII.

196. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State 196. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, December 21, 1968.

MEMORANDUM ON THE EXPORT OF COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY TO EASTERN EUROPE AND THE SOVIET UNION BY OUR ALLIES

Problem

The basic problem raised by Secretary Clifford is that our allies place great importance on increasing their exports to Eastern Europe and less emphasis than we do on purely strategic considerations. We do have a framework of rules agreed upon with them, called COCOM, which has been reasonably effective in denying strategic goods to Communist countries on many other items but has not been as effective on computers as we would wish. This problem is now becoming greater with the efforts of France and Britain particularly to build plants in Communist countries which necessarily involve transferring some production technology to those countries.

This is a continuing problem and we do not propose to fix policy for the next administration. But we have the immediate problem of deciding how to react to: 1. The French decision to sell a computer system to Romania;

2. The British desire to try to cut the French out of the Romanian deal at the eleventh hour;

3. The British desire to sell a very large computer plant to the Soviet Union, which they have delayed temporarily because of the Czechoslovak invasion;

4. The British visit to Washington January 3 for talks which may be our last chance to reach agreement on these points.

These are the key factors: 1. We do not take issue with Secretary Clifford's evaluation of the strategic significance of computer production technology although there is a considerable body of opinion that believes this is not as critical as it may first appear because the Soviets can, if they wish, mobilize sufficient resources for their top priority military needs and because the United States would continue to stay way ahead of the Soviets in this dynamically changing computer field.

2. The Europeans attach the highest priority not only to export and balance of payments considerations, but also to building strong computer industries, and both General de Gaulle and Prime Minister Wilson have shown tremendous sensitivity to United States dominance here.

3. They insist that these computers and the production capability to make these computers are needed for business and civilian economic uses in Eastern Europe, and they have not been impressed by our many and detailed arguments, including those of Defense with its counterparts in the British Government, that the military significance should be overriding.

Possible Actions

Secretary Clifford has outlined one alternative to threaten the denial of US technology and equipment to Western Europe to dissuade France and the UK from the transfer of computer technology to Communist countries. We are convinced this will not work. All the key countries would have to agree and it is clear that at a minimum the British, the French, and the Japanese would not agree. Secondly, the consequences of cutting off technology and computer equipment to these friendly countries would create a political and public reaction of very large dimensions, plus damage to our NATO alliances. It would hasten the development of an independent computer industry in Western Europe that would feel free to trade without any constraints with the Communist countries of Eastern Europe. American computer firms might have to terminate supplier and/or technical relationships with European firms including their own subsidiaries.

While there are many examples of the counter-productivity of pressure tactics on General de Gaulle, one of the most instructive is in the field of computers itself. The decision by the French to establish a French national computer company followed the decision by the United States to deny advanced computers to France under NSAM 2942 and the Limited Test Ban Treaty, and was unquestionably influenced thereby. That independent French company is the one that has now signed a contract with Romania.

A preferable alternative course would be as follows: 1. Try to negotiate agreement among all our allies on replacing the present COCOM rule that permits each country to determine for itself which computers to embargo, with an agreed upon definition of performance criteria. We believe that there is a reasonable chance of getting agreement on the proposed Dutch criteria which are only slightly more liberal then the guidelines the United States uses in determining which computer exports to license. Success in this would mean that unanimous agreement would be required for the approval of any application to export more sophisticated equipment.

2. On technology, both the practical situation and our broad policy views regarding Romania require us and our NATO allies to be more liberal with Romania than with the Soviet Union and the other invading countries of Eastern Europe. Romania would still be required to give assurances on peaceful uses and against re-export which could be monitored. This would permit some kind of a British or French contract (Amb. Shriver feels the French decision is not reversible) with Romania but we would hope to negotiate a reduction in the scope of the technology to be passed to Romania.

3. We would hope to tighten and reduce the technology currently envisioned by our allies for transfer to the Soviet Union and the invading countries by negotiating agreement in COCOM for the embargo of key computer production equipment. Naturally, some compromise on all sides would be required to reach agreement.

We cannot guarantee that this strategy will result in final agreement but pursuing it has two advantages: 1. It is preferable both to the present situation and to Secretary Clifford's proposed course of action;

2. It leaves the options open to the new administration since we can only begin discussions in January and they will be able to judge for themselves how much compromise they wish to accept in order to reach agreement—without agreement all options, including Secretary Clifford's, are open to them.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, STR 13–1. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Attached to it is a December 22 memorandum from John P. Walsh to Bromley Smith which indicates that Secretary Rusk authorized him to send the memorandum to Smith. Walsh added that if Secretary Clifford's memorandum referred to in the source text was sent to the participants in the meeting on this question, then the Department of State suggested that this memorandum also be given to them. Secretary Clifford's memorandum has not been found.

2  NSAM No. 294, “U.S. Nuclear and Strategic Delivery System Assistance to France,” April 20, 1964. (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316)

Commodities and Strategic MaterialsCommodities and Strategic Materials

197. Paper Prepared in the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations

Washington, January 16, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use. The U.S. amendments to the text were given to British representatives in Washington on January 10 and also to Canadian, Australian, and Argentine representatives on January 13. These amendments, along with a U.S. explanatory note, were transmitted in telegram 4288 to London, January 16. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS UK)

198. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to President Johnson

Washington, January 28, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use. A handwritten note at the top of the source text reads: “Hold for response to P[rime] M[inister] letter.” For this response, see Document 200.

199. Editorial Note

200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 4, 1964, 3:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by Joseph A. Greenwald (E/OT) on February 4; cleared by William M. Roth (STR), Jack M. Fleischer (E), and Frank M. Tucker (EUR); and approved by Greenwald. Repeated to Canberra, Ottawa, and Buenos Aires.

201. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)

Washington, February 21, 1964.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar, New Legislation. Confidential. Drafted by Henry Brodie (E/OR). The memorandum was also addressed to the Assistant Secretaries of State for African Affairs, Inter-American Affairs, European Affairs, Far Eastern Affairs, and Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs. The source text bears a handwritten note from Harriman to Under Secretary Ball that reads: “What do we do about this? This is your pigeon, isn't it?”

202. Memorandum From President Johnson to the Director of the White House Office of Emergency Planning (McDermott)

Washington, February 24, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 318. No classification marking. The source text is Attachment B to Document 370.

203. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 17, 1964.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar, New Legislation. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jerome J. Jacobson (E) and cleared by Dutton (H) in substance.

204. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, March 17, 1964, 1840Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Unclassified. Repeated to Bonn, Luxembourg for USEC, Brussels for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, The Hague, London, Ottawa, Canberra, Buenos Aires, and Tokyo.

205. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, March 17, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo. Passed to the White House for Herter at 3 a.m. on March 18.

206. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 18, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL US. Confidential. Drafted by Hirschfeld on March 18 and approved in S on March 23. The source text is labeled “Part II of II.”

207. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, March 19, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer and approved in U on March 26.

208. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, March 19, 1964, 7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

209. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Johnson to President Johnson

Washington, March 20, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL US. No classification marking. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer (E/OR) on March 20 and cleared by Trezise (E) and Joseph A. Greenwald (E/OT). Attached to the source text is a March 20 transmittal memorandum from Benjamin H. Read (S/S) to Buddy.

210. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, March 20, 1964, 1325Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Unclassified; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

211. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, March 20, 1964, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo and passed to the White House on March 21.

212. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 21, 1964.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar, New Legislation. Limited Official Use. Drafted by G. Hilliker (S/S) on March 21 and cleared by Jacobson (E).

213. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, April 1, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Claus W. Ruser (E/OR/FTD) and approved in E on June 12.

214. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, April 9, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter on April 10.

215. Editorial Note

216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the European Communities

Washington, May 3, 1964, 10:42 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4 GATT. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Hugh W. Wolff (E/OR/FTD) and Stanley Nehmer (E/OR); cleared by Julius L. Katz (E/OT), Deane R. Hinton (EUR/RPE), Robert Anderson (U), and David Rowe (S/S); and approved by Philip H. Trezise (E). Repeated to Geneva.

217. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 5, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Unclassified. Drafted by Hugh W. Wolff (E/OR/FTD), cleared by Robert Anderson (U) and Nehmer, approved in U on May 12.

218. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 13, 1964, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Thelma E. Vettel (FE/EA) on May 21 and approved in U on May 22. The source text is labeled “Part II of III.”

219. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, May 22, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–IT. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Hugh W. Wolff and approved in E on June 2.

220. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Agriculture (Murphy) to the President's Deputy Special Counsel (Feldman)

Washington, May 27, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. No classification marking.

221. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 3, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use.

222. Note From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 10, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Secret. An attached note from Bator to Buddy, dated June 8, notes that a meeting had been scheduled for Thursday, June 11, at 2:30 p.m. to resolve the dispute between the Departments of State and Agriculture over whether the Commodity Credit Corporation should be authorized to export domestic extra-long staple cotton at a subsidized price.

223. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, June 11, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. No classification marking. Prepared by Francis M. Bator. An attached note from Bator to McGeorge Bundy, dated June 11, reads: “Mac: I have checked this with Murphy and Johnson's man, Nehmer. They are content.” A further handwritten note by Buddy reads: “Good work. Told D. Walker, 6/12/64.” Bator's typed notes, June 11, which he apparently drafted in preparation for this meeting, are ibid.

224. Memorandum From the Department of State to Members of the President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee

Washington, June 13, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles, Cabinet Committee on Textiles. Limited Official Use. According to a covering memorandum from Nehmer to Read, also dated June 13, copies of the memorandum were distributed to Secretary of Commerce Hodges, Secretary of Labor Wirtz, Under Secretary of Agriculture Murphy, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Wallace, and the President's Deputy Special Counsel Feldman.

225. Memorandum From the Department of Commerce and the Department of State to President Johnson

Washington, June 17, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles, Wool Advisory Committee. Limited Official Use. Drafted by James S. Love (Commerce), assisted by Stanley Nehmer. (Memorandum from Love to Hodges, June 17; ibid.) Love referred it to Myer Feldman, the President's Deputy Special Counsel, the same day, along with a letter indicating that he was still awaiting Department of State clearance. (Letter from Love to Feldman, June 17; ibid.)

226. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to President Johnson

Washington, June 18, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use. Attached to another copy of this memorandum is a June 18 note from Bator to Secretary Hodges, indicating that he wanted Hodges' “decision about how to proceed,” and that Herter and Ball “would like to meet with you before the issue goes up to the President.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles—Wool Advisory Committee) Attached to another copy is a handwritten note, June 19, indicating that the original was signed by Ball and handcarried to the White House by E. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4)

227. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Arab Republic

Washington, June 22, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON 17 US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by J.A. Harary (E/OR/FTD) and Stanley Nehmer on June 22; cleared by Solomon (ARA), Jean H. Mulliken (ECP), Robert W. Stookey (AF), Enoch S. Duncan (NE), Francis Bator, Under Secretary Murphy (USDA), Charles L. Schultze (Bureau of the Budget), Gardner Ackley (Council of Economic Advisers), and William M. Roth (STR); and approved for transmission by G. Griffith Johnson. Also sent to Khartoum and Lima.

228. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, June 28, 1964.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, July 1964, United States. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jacobson on June 25 and cleared by Arthur Wexler (H). A note on the source text reads: “S[ecretary] saw;” another reads: “Superseded by memo of June 29 prepared for lunch w/President.” This memorandum has not been found.

229. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Acting Secretary of State Ball

Washington, July 7, 1964.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, July 1964, United States. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jerome Jacobson. A note on the source text reads: “U saw.”

230. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, July 10, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL US–JAPAN. Confidential. Drafted by Richard W. Petree and approved in U on July 29.

231. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State

Rome, July 20, 1964, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, for USEC, London, Tokyo, and Geneva.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State

Rome, July 21, 1964, midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, Geneva, London, and Tokyo.

233. Report of the Wool Textile Mission

Washington, July 28, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles, President's Advisory Committee. Limited Official Use. No drafting information appears on the source text. At the top of the source text is a handwritten note indicating a letter of transmittal was sent to the White House on July 31. This letter has not been found.

234. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, August 4, 1964, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, London, Rome, and Geneva.

235. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 22, 1964.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, 1964 Aug/Sept, United States. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jacobson on September 22.

236. Editorial Note

237. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 29, 1964.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, 1964 Aug/Sept, United States. No classification marking. Drafted by Jerome Jacobson on September 29 and cleared by Robert E. Lee (H). A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Secretary saw.”

238. Minutes of Meeting of the Trade Executive Committee

Washington, October 7, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Kennedy Round (GATT) May 4, 1964 [2 of 2], Box 11. Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Executive Secretary Kenneth Auchincloss.

239. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 16, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Volume II [2 of 2], Box 47. No classification marking. An attached handwritten note from Bator to Buddy reads: “You need not read all this. 1st paragraph enough. Dictated just before leaving.”

240. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon) to President Johnson

Washington, October 26, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. No classification marking.

241. Memorandum From Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi of the Foodstuffs Division, Office of International Resources to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Jacobson)

Washington, October 27, 1964.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, 1964 Oct-Nov, United States. No classification marking. Cleared by Fred H. Sanderson, Chief of the Foodstuffs Division.

242. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to President Johnson

Washington, November 6, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Kennedy Round (GATT), May 4, 1964 [2 of 2], Box 11. Secret. Copies were sent to Herter and Feldman. The letter is an attachment to a November 9 memorandum from Buddy to the President. Another attachment is a November 6 memorandum from Feldman to the President.

243. Memorandum From the Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Roth) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator)

Washington, November 13, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Kennedy Round (GATT) May 4, 1964 [2 of 2], Box 11. Secret.

244. Memorandum From Charles E. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 27, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. No classification marking.

245. Letter From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon)

Washington, November 30, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles, President's Advisory Committee. No classification marking.

246. National Security Action Memorandum No. 321

Washington, December 1, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Confidential. A November 30 memorandum from Buddy to the President reads: “This is the directive relating to a review of the strategic stockpile objectives that you discussed with Kermit Gordon the other day. I add my endorsement to that which you have already received from Kermit Gordon, and also recommend that you sign the directive.” (Ibid.)

247. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, January 13, 1965, 7:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by L. Schertz (USDA/FAS); cleared by I.R. Hedges (STR), Stanley Nehmer (OR), Sidney Weintraub (OT/GCP), and Frank M. Tucker (EUR/BNA); and approved by Fred H. Sanderson. Repeated to Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Geneva for GATT.

248. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, January 26, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Confidential.

249. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts

Washington, January 29, 1965, 6:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT US. Unclassified. Drafted by Raymond A. Ioanes and W. N. Starkey (USDA) on January 29, cleared by Jerome Jacobson (E), and approved by Fred H. Sanderson (OR/FD). Sent to Bonn, Brussels, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Hamburg, London, Geneva for GATT, Manila, New Delhi, Ottawa, Paris, Rome, and Tokyo.

250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan

Washington, February 2, 1965, 8:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN, Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer (E/OR) on January 29; cleared by Robert W. Barnett (FE), James S. Love (Commerce), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), Thomson and Feldman (White House), Harald B. Malmgren (STR), John J. deMartino (S/S), and Francis Bator; and approved by G. Griffith Johnson.

251. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, February 11, 1965, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Confidential.

252. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, February 17, 1965, noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use; Priority; Limdis; Noforn. Repeated to Geneva for GATT and passed to the White House.

253. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan

Washington, February 18, 1965, 3:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Confidential. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer on February 17; cleared by Thelma E. Vettel (FE), James S. Love (Commerce), Edgar I. Eaton (Labor), Harald B. Malmgren (STR), George R. Jacobs (OR), Thomson and Bator (White House); and approved by G. Griffith Johnson.

254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, February 24, 1965, 7:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Fred H. Sanderson (E/OR/FD) and L. Schertz (USDA/FAS), cleared by Carl W. Schmidt (E/OT/GCP) and I.R. Hedges (STR), and approved by Stanley Nehmer (E/OR). Repeated to Brussels for BUSEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Geneva for GATT.

255. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, March 2, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar Conference 1965. No classification marking. Drafted by J. A. Silberstein on March 2.

256. Letter From the British Minister of Agriculture (Peart) to the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter)

London, March 3, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. No classification marking. The source text is an attachment to airgram A–2211 from London, March 6. The text of the letter was also transmitted in telegram 4219 from London, March 3. (Ibid.)

257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 5, 1965, 7:31 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by G. A. Friedman (E/OR/FD) and L. Schertz (USDA/FAS) on March 5; cleared by I. R. Hedges (STR), Fred H. Sanderson (OR/FD), A. R. De Felice (USDA), Frank M. Tucker (EUR/BNA), and Carl W. Schmidt (OT/GCP); and approved by Stanley Nehmer (OR). Repeated to Ottawa, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Brussels for BUSEC, and Geneva for GATT.

258. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)

Washington, March 12, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 78 D 52, Cocoa—Resumption of Negotiations. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Paul E. Callanan (E/OR) and cleared by George R. Jacobs (OR) and Jerome Jacobson (E). A handwritten note on the source text indicates that Mann saw the memorandum. Three attached charts ("Cocoa Beans: 1963 Imports by Major Consuming Countries,” “Cocoa Producer Alliance: Value of Exports of Cocoa Beans and Products by Member Countries, 1958–63,” and “Importance of Cocoa to Developing Countries") are not printed.

259. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan

Washington, March 17, 1965, 4:08 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer; cleared by Robert W. Barnett (FE), Francis Bator, James S. Love (Commerce), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), Harald B. Malmgren (STR), Chadwick Johnson and Wendell W. Woodbury (EA/J); and approved by G. Griffith Johnson.

260. Editorial Note

261. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, April 2, 1965, 5:39 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges (STR), cleared by R. A. Ioanes (FAS) and Fred H. Sanderson, and approved by Hedges. Repeated to Canberra, Ottawa, Buenos Aires, and Geneva for GATT.

262. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, April 6, 1965, 1131Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Buenos Aires, Canberra, Brussels for USEC, and Geneva and passed to the White House.

263. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, April 6, 1965, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Confidential.

264. Editorial Note

265. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to Certain Posts

Washington, April 14, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–SUGAR 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Fred H. Sanderson and Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi on April 12; cleared by Stanley Nehmer (OR), William Kling (AFI), Howard R. Brandon (EUR/BNA), Jean H. Mulliken (ARA), Thomas O. Enders (EUR/RPE), Harry B. Glazer (EUR/BNA), Thomas O. Murphy (USDA), Arthur C. Bauman (NEA/SOA), Francis G. Jarvis (FE/SPA), and William W. Thomas (FE/EA); and approved by Jerome Jacobson (E). Sent to 38 posts.

266. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva

Washington, April 21, 1965, 2:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Confidential; Limdis. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges (STR) on April 20 and approved by William M. Roth (STR). Also sent to Brussels for USEC.

267. Note From the Government of the United States to the Government of the United Kingdom

London, April 26, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS UK. Limited Official Use. The source text is enclosure 1 to airgram A-2684 from London, April 28, which was repeated to Brussels, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, Paris, and Geneva.

268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva

Washington, May 14, 1965, 4:46 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Buenos Aires, Brussels for USEC, Canberra, The Hague, London, Ottawa, Paris, Rome, and Tokyo. Drafted by Sharon E. Erdkamp (EUR/BNA) and Irwin R. Hedges (STR) on May 14; cleared by Erdkamp, R. A. Ioanes (USDA/FAS), Joseph A. Greenwald (E/OT), and Fred H. Sanderson; and approved by William M. Roth.

269. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, May 21, 1965, 6:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 US–UK. Unclassified; Priority. Drafted by G. H. Lloyd (FAS); cleared by A. R. DeFelice, C. R. Donovan, and D. M. Rubel (USDA), Fred H. Sanderson, and Irwin R. Hedges; and approved by James P. Burke (OPR/RM). Repeated to Ottawa, Canberra, Buenos Aires, Brussels for USEC, and Geneva for GATT.

270. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva

Washington, June 4, 1965, 6:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Buenos Aires, Brussels for the Embassy and USEC, Canberra, The Hague, London, Ottawa, Paris, Rome for the Embassy and USOECD, and Tokyo. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges (STR) on June 4; cleared by Carl W. Schmidt (OT/GCP), Barbara F. Thomson (EUR/RPE), and Gerald A. Friedman (OR/FD) (all in draft); and approved by William M. Roth.

271. Memorandum of Conversation

Tokyo, June 7, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer.

272. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, June 8, 1965, 1127Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Repeated to London, Rome, and Geneva.

273. Memorandum of Conversation

Tokyo, June 8, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, June 16, 1965, 0857Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Geneva.

275. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, June 16, 1965, 9:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by G. A. Friedman (E/OR/FD) on June 15; cleared by William N. Roth, John A. Schnittker (USDA), Jerome Jacobson (E), Jack B. Button (E/OR/FD), Robert W. Barnett (FE), Francis G. Jarvis (FE/SPA), and Don T. Christensen (S/S); and approved by Secretary Rusk. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, Tokyo, and Geneva for GATT.

276. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, June 25, 1965, 1739Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bern, Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Copenhagen, The Hague, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris for USOECD, Rome, Stockholm, Tokyo, Vienna, and Wellington and passed to the White House.

277. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)

Washington, June 29, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 78 D 52, Cocoa Meeting, New York June 21–25, 1965. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jack B. Button (E/ICD/TRP) and Paul E. Callanan (E/ICD/TRP) on June 28, and cleared by Stanley Nehmer and Edward R. Fried.

278. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, July 17, 1965, 1200Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, The Hague, London, Luxembourg, Ottawa, Paris for USOECD, and Rome.

279. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Connor to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)

Washington, July 23, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 3. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Answered August 12, 1965.” This reply has not been found.

280. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Westerfield) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon)

Washington, July 26, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, Solomon Papers, “Commodity Trade,” Box 1. Confidential. Drafted by William Kling (AF/AFI) on July 26. The source text bears a handwritten note reading: “Tony: These are some preliminary reactions. We certainly look forward to constructive approaches to this major problem. Sam.”

281. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State

Tokyo, July 27, 1965, 0547Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Geneva.

282. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)

Washington, July 27, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, Solomon Papers, Coffee, Box 1. Confidential. Drafted by Jack B. Button (E/ICD/TRP) and cleared by William Kling (AF/AFI), Joseph A. Silberstein (ARA/ECP), George R. Jacobs (OR/ICD), and Edward R. Fried (E/OR). The date is the drafting date.

283. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan

Washington, August 2, 1965, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by C.W. Ruser (E/OR/ICD/FTD) on August 2; cleared by Tendler (Commerce), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), Harald B. Malmgren (STR), all in substance, Wendell W. Woodbury (EA), and Paul K. Stahnke (EA/J), both in draft, and Philip M. Davenport (FTD); and approved by George R. Jacobs (ICD). Repeated to Geneva for GATT.

284. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)

Washington, September 13, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, INCO–Sugar, UN Sugar Conference, Sept. 1965. No classification marking. Drafted by Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi and Jack B. Button on September 13 and cleared by Edward R. Fried (OR), George R. Jacobs (ICD), and Jean H. Mulliken (ARA).

285. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, September 13, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Sugar Legislation, Vol. 2, Box 45. Confidential.

286. Memorandum for the Record

Washington, September 21, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Bator Memos [2 of 2], Box 1. No classification marking. Drafted on September 24 by Edward K. Hamilton. An attached note from Francis Bator to the President's Special Counsel, Harry C. McPherson, Jr., dated September 24, reads: “Harry: Attached is Ed Hamilton's good summary of Tuesday's wool meeting. Somebody will eventually have to get it across to the industry that the President's commitment is conditional—that they cannot expect him to do all sorts of costly things trying to help them unless help is clearly needed. I suspect that the joint fact-finding operation will bog down, forcing another Cabinet Committee confrontation. If by then the Congress is out of town, the time will be ripe for bringing Connor into line and plotting an Administration strategy which will provide the President with room for maneuver.” Also attached is a note from Bator to McGeorge Bundy, dated September 27, transmitting the minutes of the meeting.

287. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva

Washington, October 8, 1965, 7:01 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Thomas O. Enders (EUR/RPE) and Fred H. Sanderson on October 8; cleared by Irwin R. Hedges (STR), Carl Schmidt (OT), Worthington (USDA), and James L. Colbert (EUR/SOV); and approved by George R. Jacobs (ICD). Repeated to Moscow and Ottawa.

288. Information Memorandum From Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi of the Tropical Products Division, Office of International Commodities to the Director of the Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs (Jacobs)

Washington, October 22, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar Conference 1965. No classification marking.

289. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, October 22, 1965, 1142Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels, for USEC, Cairo, Hong Kong, Karachi, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, New Delhi, Ottawa, Rome, Stockholm, The Hague, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter.

290. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, October 22, 1965, 1142Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Cairo, Hong Kong, Karachi, London, Luxembourg for USEC, New Delhi, Ottawa, Paris for USOECD, Rome, Stockholm, The Hague, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter at 3:10 p.m.

291. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State

Karachi, October 30, 1965.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Confidential. There is no time of transmission on the source text; the telegram was received at 6:48 a.m. Also sent to Geneva.

292. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 3, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Aluminum Problem, Box 1. Confidential.

293. Editorial Note

294. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India

Washington, November 6, 1965, 12:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Confidential. Drafted by Harald B. Malmgren and Charles T. York (E/OR/ICD/FTD) on November 4; cleared by Henry Hopp (FTD), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), and Arthur C. Bauman (SOA/E), and in substance by Thomas W. Wolfe (Treasury), Tendler (Commerce), and Hornbeck (Agriculture); and approved by George R. Jacobs (ICD). Repeated to Geneva for GATT.

295. Editorial Note

296. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Ackley) to President Johnson

Washington, November 8, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, Oversize Attachments 12/65, Box 161. No classification marking.

297. Editorial Note

298. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Shultze) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 11, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Materials, Box 6. Secret. The source text, which is marked “draft,” was an attachment to a November 11 memorandum from Shultze to Califano that recommended that a meeting be called of agencies involved in the stockpile study, in order to issue a new NSAM establishing new stockpile objectives. (Johnson Library, Confidential File, Oversize Attachments, 12/65, Box 161)

299. Report of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives

Washington, November 11, 1965.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 217. Secret. The source text, which is marked “Draft,” is attached to a December 6 memorandum from McGeorge Bundy to members of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives and the Executive Stockpile Committee that announced a meeting of these groups on December 9. A draft NSAM, November 10, on these revisions in strategic stockpile objectives is also attached.

300. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Ackley) to Attorney General Katzenbach

Washington, November 13, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, Oversize Attachments 12/65, Box 161. No classification marking.

301. Memorandum From Attorney General Katzenbach to the Director of the Office of Emergency Planning (Ellington)

Washington, November 15, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, Oversize Attachments 12/65, Box 161. No classification marking.

302. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, November 20, 1965, 1425Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, Hong Kong, Karachi, London, New Delhi, Ottawa, Stockholm, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter.

303. Memorandum From Charles E. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, November 30, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Confidential.

304. Memorandum of Meeting

Washington, December 1, 1965, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Confidential. Drafted by Charles E. Johnson on December 2. The meeting was held in Buddy's office.

305. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the President's Special Assistant (Califano)

Washington, December 6, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by E.E. Getzin (E/OR/ICD/ISM) on December 6. On the source text is the handwritten notation, “Sent.”

306. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, December 8, 1965, 1817Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Kingston, London, Madrid, New Delhi, Paris for USOECD, Rawalpindi, Rome, and Tokyo.

307. Record of Action

Washington, December 9, 1965, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 217. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text and there is no indication that Bundy, Chairman of the Special Committee, or Ellington, Chairman of the Executive Stockpile Committee, approved the Record of Action. An attached list of participants includes the following officials: Henry Rowen (Bureau of the Budget); John T. Connor (Commerce); Gardner Ackley (Council of Economic Advisers); Cyrus Vance (Defense); Lawson B. Knott (General Services Administration); Stewart L. Udall and William E. Florey (Interior); Seymore Wolfbein (Labor); Buford Ellington (Office of Emergency Planning); Thomas C. Mann and Edmund Getzin (State); McGeorge Bundy, Joseph Califano, Donald Hornig, Charles E. Johnson, and Henry Wilson (White House).

308. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson

Washington, December 9, 1965.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Secret.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, December 10, 1965, 1715Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Buenos Aires, Canberra, Geneva, and Ottawa and passed to the White House.

310. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)

Washington, December 15, 1965.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 79 D 354, Coffee Memoranda, 1966–67. No classification marking. Drafted by Jack B. Button (E/OR/ICD/TRP) and cleared by Edward R. Fried (OR) and George R. Jacobs (ICD). The date is the drafting date. This memorandum, although initialed by Solomon, was apparently not sent, because the introductory address lines have been crossed out and the following handwritten note added: “Mr. Solomon briefed Mr. Mann orally on this. He expanded the briefing book item for the Secretary a bit to cover his commitment to inform him of the outcome of the meeting.”

311. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, December 22, 1965, 1624Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Confidential. Repeated to Karachi and New Delhi, and passed to the White House.

312. Editorial Note

313. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) and the President's Special Counsel (McPherson) to President Johnson

Washington, February 2, 1966, 3 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Bator Memos [2 of 2], Box 1. Sensitive. Drafted by Bator.

314. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the European Communities

Washington, February 8, 1966, 9:29 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COFFEE 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Paul E. Callanan (E/OR/ICD/TRP) on February 7; cleared by Bashkin (Commerce), Barbara F. Thomson (EUR/RPE), and George R. Jacobs (E/OR/ICD); and approved by Edward Fried.

315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 11, 1966, 1:17 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges (STR) on March 10; cleared by Schnittker (Agriculture), Julius L. Katz (E/OT), and Fred H. Sanderson (E/OR/ICD/TEP), all in draft; and approved by Herter. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Geneva for GATT.

316. Editorial Note

317. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva

Washington, May 11, 1966, 8:32 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by George R. Jacobs (E/OR/ICD); cleared by Harald B. Malmgren (STR), Stanley Nehmer (Commerce), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), and Thomas W. Wolfe (Treasury); and approved by Henry Hopp (FTD).

318. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson

Washington, May 21, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Confidential. Drafted by Edward R. Fried and Paul E. Callanan (E/OR) on May 20 and cleared by Bashkin (Commerce), Joseph A. Silberstein (ARA), Joseph Palmer (AF), and Solomon (E).

319. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, June 8, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. There is no time of transmission on the source text; the telegram was received at 7:37 a.m. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Hong Kong, London, Luxembourg for USEC, New Delhi, Paris for USOECD, Rawalpindi, Rome, and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

320. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, June 23, 1966, 0325Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Abidjan, Accra, Addis Ababa, Geneva, Lagos, Lome, London, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, and Paris for USOECD.

321. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, June 23, 1966, 0355Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Abidjan, Accra, Addis Ababa, Geneva, Lagos, Lome, London, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, and Paris for USOECD.

322. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)

Washington, June 25, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use. Drafted by George R. Jacobs (E/OR/ICD) on June 24 and cleared by Assistant Secretary Solomon.

323. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Connor to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze)

Washington, June 30, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Secretaries Rusk, Freeman, Fowler, and Wirtz, and to Herter.

324. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, July 29, 1966, 1820Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bern, Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Copenhagen, The Hague, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris for USOECD, Rome, Stockholm, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter.

325. Editorial Note

326. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts

Washington, September 14, 1966, 4:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COFFEE 3. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jack B. Button (E/OR/ICD/TRP) on September 12; cleared by Paul E. Callanan (E/OR/ICD/TRP), William Kling (AF/AFI), and Joseph A. Silverstein (ARA/ECP); and approved by Fried (E/OR). Sent to Bogota, London, and Rio de Janeiro and pouched to 23 other posts.

327. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, September 30, 1966, 1905Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON 4 GATT. Confidential. Repeated to 26 posts.

328. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, October 5, 1966, 12:58–1:05 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential Files, CM (Tin—Watches). Confidential. Drafted by Robert W. Barnett (FE). On the source text the time of the meeting is 12:30, which is incorrect. The actual time of the meeting is taken from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.) An attached undated note from Barnett to Rostow, noted that GSA suspension of sales had to be for an indefinite period pending completion of the review discussed by the President and the Deputy Prime Minister. Barnett's note concluded: “Suspension for the rest of this quarter would be in effect locking the barn, etc.”

329. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the President's Special Assistant (Califano)

Washington, October 5, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, CM (Tin—Watches). Confidential. In an attached October 5 note to Califano, Katzenbach emphasized that while he recognized the importance of selling from the stockpile, “it still does not make sense to me to push so hard for an additional $35 million, or less, that we cost Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, $150 million of their earnings.” Katzenbach's note concluded: “I know the President's concern with stockpiles. I really feel quite strongly about this one.”

330. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia

Washington, October 19, 1966, 9:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT GATT. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges on October 19; cleared by Julius L. Katz (E/OT) and Fred H. Sanderson, Raymond A. Ioanes, and Schnittker (Agriculture), and Roth; and approved by Fried (E/OR). Repeated to Buenos Aires, Ottawa, and Geneva.

331. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State

Canberra, October 21, 1966, 0705Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT GATT. Confidential; Flash. Passed to the White House and USIA.

332. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State

Canberra, October 21, 1966, 0810Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT GATT. Confidential; Flash. Passed to the White House and USIA.

333. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia

Washington, October 21, 1966, 1:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT GATT. Confidential; Flash; Limdis. Repeated to Ottawa, Buenos Aires, and Geneva for GATT. Drafted by Ioanes and Schnittker (Agriculture), Hedges, and Fried; cleared by Eugene Rostow, Solomon, John P. Walsh (S/S), and Bator; and approved by Katzenbach.

334. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson

Washington, November 3, 1966, 3:10 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Bator Memos, Box 1–2. No classification marking. In an attached note to President Johnson, November 4, Bator wrote that he would “try to avoid bothering” the President “with minor nuisance problems during the next few weeks.” (The President had announced late on November 3 that he was going to Texas for a few weeks to rest up for upcoming surgery.) Bator added, however, that because he thought “there is chance that the textile people will try to get you to say something in Texas about import controls,” he was sending him the attached summary, which he had prepared before the President's announcement of his Texas trip and operation, “of the arguments for turning them down.”

335. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State

Canberra, November 7, 1966, 0225Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Confidential.

336. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson

Washington, November 21, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON 4 GATT. No classification marking. Drafted by J. David Stoner (L/E). Attached to the source text are two memoranda. The first is a November 16 memorandum from Stoner to the Executive Secretariat requesting that Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Eugene Rostow approve a memorandum granting Circular 175 authority for the negotiation and signature of an agreement extending the LTA before forwarding to the Secretary his memorandum to President Johnson. (The Circular 175 memorandum has not been found.) The second, from Solomon through Rostow to Secretary Rusk, November 18, notes among other things that Rostow had granted this Circular 175 authority in part on the assumption that prior Presidential determinations authorizing such negotiations continued to apply.

337. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Palmer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon)

Washington, November 26, 1966.

Source: Johnson Library, Solomon Papers, Cocoa. Confidential.

338. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, November 30, 1966, 3:49 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by D. Novotny (Agriculture/FAS) and Irwin R. Hedges; cleared by Julius L. Katz, James T. Johnson (EUR/RPE), and Raymond A. Ioanes; and approved by Fred H. Sanderson.

339. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts

Washington, December 8, 1966, 11:24 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Unclassified. Drafted by Mary E. McDonnell (E/OT/STA) on December 7; cleared by Garber (FTC), Edward Dahl (E/CBA/REP), and William W. Shoaf (Commerce/BDS) (in substance); and approved by John F. Shaw (E/OT/STA). Sent to Bern, Bonn, Brussels, Dublin, The Hague, Hong Kong, Lisbon, London, Madrid, Ottawa, Paris, Rome, Seoul, Taipei, Tokyo, Vienna and repeated to Geneva for GATT.

340. Note Verbale From the European Economic Community to the U.S. Mission to the European Communities

Brussels, December 13, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL. Unclassified. The source text is the enclosure to ECBUS A–341 from Brussels, December 23, which was also sent to Bonn, The Hague, London, Luxembourg, Paris, Rome, and Geneva. The airgram indicates that the text is a Mission translation of the Note Verbale. The date is taken from information provided in the airgram.

341. Letter From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg)

Washington, December 22, 1966.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. No classification marking.

342. Editorial Note

343. Editorial Note

344. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Installations and Logistics (Ignatius) to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, June 27, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Records of the Office of Secretary of Defense: FRC 72 A 2468, 400.23. Confidential. Stamped notations on the source text indicate that Secretary McNamara saw this memorandum on June 29.

345. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson

Washington, June 30, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. Confidential. An attached June 30 memorandum from Solomon to Katzenbach indicates that Solomon prepared the attached memorandum in accordance with the decision made at Katzenbach's staff meeting on June 23 and asks Katzenbach to sign it.

346. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts

Washington, July 7, 1967, 10:01 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Morton Abramowitz (E/ORF/TRP) on July 7; cleared by William Kling (AF/AFI), Liane Atlas (IO/OES), and Bashkin (Commerce); and approved by Fried. Sent to Accra, Abidjan, Lagos, Lome, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, USUN, Geneva, Bern, Bonn, London, Paris, and The Hague.

347. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts

Washington, July 7, 1967, 10:04 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Fried and Abramowitz; cleared by Kling, Liane Atlas, and Bashkin (Commerce); and approved by Assistant Secretary Solomon. Sent to Bern, Bonn, London, Paris, The Hague, and Geneva and repeated to USUN.

348. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, August 26, 1967, 1618Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Accra, Abidjan, Bonn, The Hague, Lagos, London for Jacobs, Paris, Rio de Janeiro, Rome, Yaounde, and USUN.

349. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva

Washington, August 29, 1967, 0010Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by Julius L. Katz on August 28, cleared by Assistant Secretary Solomon and Samuel Z. Westerfield, Jr. (AF), and approved by Katz.

350. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara

Washington, September 1, 1967.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468, 400.23. No classification marking.

351. Intelligence Note From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denny) to Secretary of State Rusk

Washington, September 6, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. Confidential; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem.

352. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, October 4, 1967, 0956Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Abidjan, Accra, Bonn, The Hague, Lagos, London, Paris for USOECD, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, and USUN.

353. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, October 5, 1967, 0915Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Unclassified; Immediate.

354. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson

Washington, November 3, 1967.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Fried Files, Chron September 1, 1967–November 30, 1967 [1 of 2], Box 2. No classification marking. Drafted by Fried.

355. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State

Brussels, November 6, 1967, 1807Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY EEC. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

356. Editorial Note

357. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State

Brussels, November 29, 1967, 1715Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY 17 EEC. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

358. Aide-Memoire From the Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington, November 30, 1967.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. No classification marking. Drafted by Mary E. McDonnell and Martin Y. Hirabayashi (E/OT/STA) on November 29, and cleared by Joseph K. Newman (EUR/BMI).

359. Information Memorandum From the Acting Director, Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs (Katz) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon)

Washington, December 6, 1967.

Source: Department of State, EB/FTD Files: Lot 73 D 183, Ellender (Hayden) Bill 1967. Limited Official Use. Drafted by George H. Alexander (E/ORF/ICD/FTD) and cleared by Judith M. Denton (ARA/LA/EP), Jack R. Johnstone (NEA/UAR), Albert Post (AF/AFN), and Harry M. Phelan, Jr. (E/FTD). Katz changed this memorandum from “action” to “info” by hand on the source text.

360. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State

Brussels, December 7, 1967, 1746Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY EEC. Confidential; Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

361. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, December 19, 1967, 1605Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Abidjan, Accra, Bonn, The Hague, Lagos, London, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, and USUN.

362. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State

Brussels, January 27, 1968, 1400Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY 17 EEC. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

363. Memorandum of Conversation

Washington, February 7, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY 17 EEC. Confidential. Drafted by John E. Ray on February 26.

364. Editorial Note

365. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Goldstein) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)

Washington, March 30, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, CM (King Crab-Nickel). Confidential. A copy was sent to Solomon.

366. Editorial Note

367. Position Paper Prepared for the Delegation to the London and Paris Rubber Meetings

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, EB/ICD Files: Lot 81 D 344, ISRG Assembly, London 1968. Limited Official Use. The source text is Tab A to a memorandum from Julius L. Katz (E/ICD) to Assistant Secretary Solomon, dated May 17.

368. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, June 27, 1968, 1930Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Limited Official Use; Priority.

369. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, July 1, 1968, 1444Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Rio de Janeiro, Accra, Lagos, Yaounde, and Abidjan.

370. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State

Paris, October 7, 1968, 1815Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Rome, Geneva, and Brussels.

371. Memorandum From the Director of the White House Office of Emergency Planning (Daniel) to the National Security Council

Washington, October 18, 1968.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316. Secret. An attached covering memorandum from Bromley Smith to the National Security Council, October 28, indicated that this memorandum would serve as the basis of NSC discussion on October 31 of the proposed recommendation.

372. Editorial Note

373. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State

Rome, October 29, 1968, 1640Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Luxembourg, London, Paris, The Hague, Tokyo, and Geneva.

374. Summary Notes of the 592d Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, October 31, 1968, 12:07–12:35 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Volume 5 Tab 74, Stockpile Criteria, Box 2. Secret/Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith. An attached list of attendees includes: Under Secretary of State Nicholas DeB. Katzenbach, Assistant Secretary of State Anthony M. Solomon, Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford, Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul H. Nitze, Treasury Secretary Henry H. Fowler, JCS Chairman General Earle G. Wheeler, OEP Director Price Daniel, USIA Director Leonard H. Marks, Walt Rostow, and Bromley Smith.

375. Memorandum From President Johnson to the Director of the White House Office of Emergency Preparedness (Daniel)

Washington, October 31, 1968.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 5 Tab 74, 10/31/68, Stockpile Criteria. Secret.

376. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Italy

Washington, November 8, 1968, 1:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Confidential; Noforn. Drafted on November 7 by C.K. Johnson (EUR/AIS); cleared by Wells Stabler (EUR/AIS) and H. Quinn (S/S-O), and by Barraclough for substance; and approved by Alfred Puhan (EUR). Repeated to Geneva and Brussels for USEC.

377. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, November 12, 1968, 1621Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels, The Hague, Luxembourg, Paris for USOECD, and Rome.

378. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State

Brussels, November 13, 1968, 1742Z.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, Luxembourg, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

379. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Policy, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Palmer) to the Deputy Coordinator for the Alliance for Progress, Agency for International Development (Fowler)

Washington, December 19, 1968.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by J. Krizay (ARA/ECP). The source text bears a handwritten note from Fowler that reads: “Agree—I've cleared memo to PPC.”

197. Paper Prepared in the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations 197. Paper Prepared in the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations1

Washington, January 16, 1964.

TEC D-2/64

U.K. NOTE ON ITS GRAINS PROPOSAL AS REDRAFTED BY U.S.

Sir:

The United Kingdom Government have informed the United States Government that they intend to make certain changes in their production and trade policies relating to cereals. In framing their proposals the United Kingdom Government had in mind not only their responsibility for maintaining conditions under which a stable and efficient agricultural industry in the United Kingdom can develop its prosperity but also their responsibility as one of the major importers of cereals in the world towards their overseas cereals suppliers.

2. The United Kingdom Government have also taken into account that they, and other countries who are major importers and exporters of cereals, are at present taking part in discussions in the Cereals Group convened under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, with the aim of establishing an international agreement for cereals. It was not their desire or intention to put forward proposals which might in any way hamper that work but rather to introduce arrangements so designed as to further the main objectives which both the United Kingdom and United States Government desire to achieve in these discussions dealing with the longer-term situation.

3. These are that the world market for cereals should be improved through the establishment of a better equilibrium between world supplies and commercial demand, and that within this improved framework there should be a significant development and expansion of world trade in cereals; the provision of acceptable conditions of access into the traditional world markets for cereals and the creation of greater stability in the levels of international prices for the main cereals, cereal products and by-products. These objectives would be sought in such ways as would take into account the interests of both importing and exporting countries.

4. Pending the conclusion of any long-term international cereals agreement, the United Kingdom Government have declared their intention of introducing adaptations into their existing cereals policy designed to promote greater stability in the United Kingdom cereals market, and to maintain a fair and reasonable balance between home production and imports as defined by the proportionate shares of domestic consumption supplied in a recent representative period from domestic cereal production and from cereals imports into the United Kingdom. Accordingly, both domestic cereals growers and overseas cereals suppliers would share in the growth in domestic consumption of cereals. It will, of course, be necessary to review from time to time the balance aimed at between domestic cereals production and total cereals imports into the United Kingdom in the light of unusual weather conditions.

5. The measures which the United Kingdom Government intend to introduce for securing these objectives are first to restrain financial assistance to domestic cereals production so that it is not encouraged to increase above a level consistent with the above objectives, and second, to operate in cooperation with their principal overseas suppliers a system of minimum import prices for the main cereals, cereal products and by-products.

6. As regards the first, the United Kingdom Government has determined initial standard quantities of “x” million tons of wheat and of “y” million tons of barley (these being the quantities which the United Kingdom Government have decided, in the national interest, it is desirable to produce in the United Kingdom).The guaranteed prices and the mechanisms by which these will be applied to wheat and to barley are those which are set out in the White Paper on the Annual Review of the Economic Conditions of the Agricultural Industry for 1964–65. Domestic consumption of grain for 1964–65 is expected to be — million tons. Making allowance for production of grains other than wheat and barley of — million tons total net imports of grain are estimated at — million tons.2 Similar data will be supplied each year during the review procedures.

7. As regards the second, namely the minimum import price system, the range of the commodities to be covered initially together with the levels of the minimum import prices to apply to these commodities have been determined by the United Kingdom Government after consultation with the United States Government, as per annex, and subsequent changes will also be the subject of consultation. In addition, the United Kingdom Government will not make any significant change in the general level of minimum import prices except after consultation and agreement with the United States Government and other cooperating governments.

8. The United Kingdom Government will take any necessary action to maintain the general level of the prescribed minimum import prices by such levies on imports as may be necessary for this purpose. Subject, however, to your formal confirmation of the United States Government's willingness to cooperate in these arrangements, the United Kingdom Government will exempt from levies all imports of cereals, cereal products and by-products and other related products which are exported and consigned from the United States of America to the United Kingdom except in the following circumstances: (i) When the general level of United States offering prices for any commodity specified by the United Kingdom Government at any time an offer to the United Kingdom market is (after taking into account any customs duty chargeable) below the appropriate prescribed minimum import price for that product, the United Kingdom may, after notifying the United States Government, apply a levy to that commodity for so long as such conditions make it necessary. Any such levy will be determined on a country basis by reference to the difference between the appropriate minimum import price and the offering prices for the commodity concerned exported and consigned from the United States of America to the United Kingdom; and

(ii) In the event of it being necessary to prescribe for any commodity specified by the United Kingdom Government a levy determined on each individual parcel by reference to the difference between the price paid for that parcel and the minimum import price, the United Kingdom may apply such a levy to any parcels of the commodity concerned exported and consigned from the United States of America to the United Kingdom.

(Consideration to be given to some arrangements for forward contracts and in-transit shipments.)

In the circumstances described in (i) and (ii) above, such levies may be applied by the United Kingdom Government notwithstanding the commitments of the United Kingdom Government under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

The United Kingdom Government will in consultation with the Governments of the United States and other countries cooperating in the minimum import price system review in advance of the Annual Review each year the extent to which the objectives set out in this letter are being achieved, and in advance of the beginning of each crop year commencing July 1st, the effect of the operation of minimum import prices. The United Kingdom Government will take prompt and effective corrective action if the proportionate share of imports in domestic consumption of wheat, wheat flour, and coarse grains in a recent representative period declines, or if the operation of the minimum import price system results in a significant distortion in the normal trade patterns in such products with the United Kingdom as between supplying countries.

10. The United Kingdom Government believe that the introduction of these measures would further the prospects of attaining the longer-term objectives of an International Cereals Agreement. Any arrangements contained in this exchange of letters are without prejudice to, and indeed are intended to facilitate, the negotiation of such an international agreement embodying commitments such as access assurances for overseas suppliers and domestic price and production policies by all participating countries, whether exporting or importing.

11. In the light of all these considerations, the United Kingdom Government invite the cooperation of the Government of the United States in securing the observance of minimum import prices prescribed for cereals, cereal products and by-products or other related products subject to the terms and conditions set out in this letter.

12. This letter and your formal confirmation shall constitute an Agreement between the Governments of the United Kingdom and the United States of America and shall enter into force forthwith. It shall apply as soon as the United Kingdom Government has specified, and prescribed a minimum import price for, any commodity to which it extends. It may be terminated with effect from the 30th June in any year by either Government giving two months' notice in writing to that effect. It is understood that, in deciding whether or not to give notice of termination of the agreement, the United States Government would regard as a determining factor whether the share of imports in domestic consumption has been maintained and whether normal trade patterns are not significantly distorted by the system.

Sir:

I acknowledge receipt of your letter of today's date relating to the United Kingdom Government's intention to make certain changes in its cereals production and trade policies.

As the United Kingdom Government is aware, the United States does not view the establishment of minimum import prices as of any benefit to it, and would consider the imposition of levies in support of minimum import prices as an impairment of its GATT rights.

The United States is nevertheless prepared, in the light of the objectives and undertakings of the United Kingdom Government contained in your letter, to cooperate to the extent possible in the operation and observance of the minimum import price system to be introduced by the United Kingdom Government. It is understood that all rights under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade are fully maintained, and that the Government of the United States reserves the right to invoke its contractual rights relating to negotiated concessions on grains and deriving from the general obligations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use. The U.S. amendments to the text were given to British representatives in Washington on January 10 and also to Canadian, Australian, and Argentine representatives on January 13. These amendments, along with a U.S. explanatory note, were transmitted in telegram 4288 to London, January 16. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS UK)

2 A — indicates blank spaces on the source text.

198. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to President Johnson 198. Memorandum From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to President Johnson 1

Washington, January 28, 1964.

SUBJECT

U.K. Cereals Negotiations

I have previously reported to your Office that the U.K. Government desires to obtain the cooperation of major grain exporting countries in a U.K. plan to establish minimum import prices for cereals as a part of the changes in her domestic cereals program aimed at limiting price supports to specified quantities of production and hence limiting the exchequer outlays for domestic cereal price supports.2 The U.S. and the other exporters have taken the position that in exchange for cooperating in this endeavor we should be provided firm access assurances to the U.K. market based on exports to the U.K. market in a recent representative period, plus a share in the growth of the U.K. market in future years.

A multilateral meeting was held in London last week between the U.K., the U.S. and other major grain exporters. This meeting resulted in a significant narrowing of the differences between the position of the U.K. and the grain exporters.3 At the conclusion of the meeting the U.K. Government handed the exporters the U.K.'s draft of a letter of understanding, a copy of which is attached.4 Representatives of the other delegations, Australia, Canada and Argentina, indicated privately to the U.S. Delegation that they were prepared to recommend to their respective Governments that the U.K. note be accepted.

We believe there are still important modifications which should be made in the note before it is accepted. Our proposed changes have been forwarded to London today for delivery to the U.K. Government. A copy of the cable is attached.5 Briefly, the issues which still divide us are as follows: 1) The U.K. Government has stated that an objective of the changes in its cereals policy is to maintain a fair and reasonable balance between home production and imports. We want this balance defined specifically on the basis on which the U.S. market was supplied from domestic production and cereals imports in a recent representative period, plus a clear recognition that overseas suppliers are to share in any growth.

The U.K. Government is reluctant to be too specific on these points for fear of antagonizing producers and rendering more difficult the task of obtaining parliamentary approval of the changes.

We think the final changes we have proposed meet minimum U.S. needs and represent something the U.K. Government can accept.

2) We want firm assurances that remedial action will be undertaken if the objectives stated above are not realized. Again, in order that there may be no future misunderstanding we propose that the base period be specified as the average of cereals imports during the three years ending June 30, 1964, combined with wording that clearly recognizes the right of overseas suppliers to share in growth. To date the U.K. Government has only been willing to give a commitment to undertake corrective action if imports fall below the base period and only if the decline is related to the implementation of the changes in their cereals policy.

Our proposed new wording in the attached cable is intended to strengthen this commitment to take corrective action. Again we believe we have suggested changes which the U.K. should find it politically possible to accept.

We are convinced that if the agreement can be modified along the lines of our proposals it would represent an arrangement mutually beneficial to the U.S. and to the U.K. It would provide overseas cereals suppliers with meaningful access assurances to the U.K. market and would establish a useful precedent which should be valuable in the forthcoming negotiations with the EEC in the Kennedy Round. If we hold firmly we think the U.K. Government will agree to our latest proposals.

Christian A. Herter

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use. A handwritten note at the top of the source text reads: “Hold for response to P[rime] M[inister] letter.” For this response, see Document 200.

2 Presumably a reference to a January 22 memorandum from Herter to Buddy. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47)

3 Reported in telegram 3470 from London, January 24. (Department of State, Central Files, FT 3 GATT)

4 Not found.

5 Not found.

199. Editorial Note 199. Editorial Note

The Protocol for the Prolongation of the International Sugar Agreement of 1958 was completed in London on August 1, 1963. The United States signed it on September 27. The Senate gave its advice and consent to ratification on January 30, 1964, and the Protocol entered into force for the United States on February 27. According to the Protocol, the International Sugar Agreement would remain in effect until December 31, 1965, unless a new agreement had been negotiated before that date. For text, see 15 UST 2512; TIAS 5744. Documentation on the ratification of the Protocol is in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–SUGAR 4.

200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 200. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, February 4, 1964, 3:46 p.m.

In a brief telephone conversation with Buddy on February 4 at 12:02 p.m., President Johnson reported that Herter (with whom he had talked by phone just before calling Buddy) said there was a draft reply to the British Prime Minister. Buddy replied affirmatively and said he had a copy. Buddy added that Herter sent it to the President for political cover, but this was a rare instance where State, Agriculture, and STR were all in agreement. Buddy opined it was straightforward, that the President did not need to read it, and offered to approve it on the President's behalf. President Johnson concurred. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a Telephone Conversation, Tape 6402.04, PNO 4)

4809. Ambassador should deliver soonest following message from President to PM re UK grains proposal:

"Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

“Thank you for your letter of January 28, 1964,2 concerning the desire of your Government to obtain the cooperation of your major overseas cereals suppliers in the establishment of minimum import prices. As you are aware, we on our side have been particularly concerned about the implications that such an arrangement would have for the Kennedy Round negotiations and, particularly, the work of the GATT Cereals Group. Both sides are in agreement that the arrangement should in no way interfere with these efforts but indeed should be designed to enhance the possibilities for the successful negotiation of a world cereals arrangement. In this connection, we attach particular importance to the access assurance provided overseas suppliers and to the commitments regarding remedial action in the event imports are not maintained.

“I therefore welcome the following clear-cut statements on these points which appear in your letter: 'We are also willing to commit ourselves to the objective of maintaining a fair and reasonable balance between home production and imports and that imports, as well as home production, will enjoy a share in the growth of the market. We are furthermore ready to keep the arrangements under review to see that the stated objectives are being achieved. And we will commit ourselves to taking corrective action should it prove in the event that the recent level of cereal imports is not being maintained …’”

“As you indicate, it was not possible to reach complete agreement at the meetings in London on a draft note of the understanding. The suggestions contained in your letter have been very helpful, however, in facilitating agreement. I now understand that after further exchanges between the representatives of our two Governments3 agreement has been reached on certain changes in the text of your Government's note which was given to the United States delegation at the conclusion of the meeting in London on January 25, 1964. Accordingly, on the basis of these changes, which are being transmitted separately to the appropriate officials of your Government,4 the United States Government hereby gives its agreement in principle to the understanding which you have proposed.

“Final signature of the understanding will not, of course, take place until after the results of your annual agricultural review are available for our consideration, and until the annexes dealing with the schedule of minimum import prices and flour arrangements have been approved. I would not anticipate the results of the annual review would present an obstacle to our formal adherence to an agreement as long as they are consistent with the final proposals put forth by your people at the meeting in London.

“I am looking forward very much to the pleasure of your visit in February.

“Sincerely yours,”

We are not giving any publicity to Home-Johnson exchange and assume HMG also keeping messages confidential. Request UK to consult with us prior to any public statement.

For time being, response to any press inquiries should be no comment.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by Joseph A. Greenwald (E/OT) on February 4; cleared by William M. Roth (STR), Jack M. Fleischer (E), and Frank M. Tucker (EUR); and approved by Greenwald. Repeated to Canberra, Ottawa, and Buenos Aires.

2 In this long letter to President Johnson, part of which is quoted in this telegram, Prime Minister Home concluded that a cereals agreement between the United Kingdom and the United States and other overseas suppliers “must be conditional on our being able to introduce changes in our own cereals guarantee arrangements of the same order as was suggested by our [negotiating] officials, that is to say, standard quantity arrangements centering on 9.75 million tons,” and he could go no further “since it will be difficult enough for us to push what we have proposed, or its equivalent, through in the discussions we shall have next month with the farmers.” (Ibid., National Security File, Head of State Correspondence File, U.K., Vol. 1 [2 of 2], PM Home Correspondence, 12/20/63–8/5/64, Box 8)

3 A U.S. note to be presented to the British Government was transmitted in telegram 4590 to London, January 29 (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK) and a note from the British Embassy to the Department of State, January 31. (Ibid., INCO–GRAINS UK)

4 Sent in telegram 4813 to London, February 4. (Ibid., INCO–GRAINS 17 UK)

201. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman) 201. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Harriman)1

Washington, February 21, 1964.

SUBJECT

New Sugar Legislation

Attached for your attention and consideration is the Bureau of Economic Affairs draft of a proposed Department position on new sugar legislation.2

We shall be faced this year with another determined drive by domestic farmers to increase their share of the United States sugar market and to reduce the foreign share. A few years back the domestic share of our market was 52–53%. It is now 59%. The Department of Agriculture proposes to increase it to 65%. The industry wants 70%. Sugar is one of our largest import items, mostly from the less developed countries. The prospect of a major rise in the domestic share of the market presents a serious foreign policy problem, most particularly in our relations with Latin America.

In our draft, we have outlined a long-term program for putting both our imported sugar supplies and the position of the sugar producing countries on a stable basis. It would hold down the domestic share of the market; it combines a guaranteed price with country quotas; it would retain a share of the United States market for a non-Communist Cuba; it would phase out premium payments on sugar imports.

We can expect difficult inter-agency negotiations before an Executive Branch position is arrived at. The draft attached would thus be an initial bargaining position. We probably will not be able to maintain it intact.

Your comments on the attached should be sent to Deputy Assistant Secretary Jerome Jacobson, Bureau of Economic Affairs. They are solicited on an urgent basis.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar, New Legislation. Confidential. Drafted by Henry Brodie (E/OR). The memorandum was also addressed to the Assistant Secretaries of State for African Affairs, Inter-American Affairs, European Affairs, Far Eastern Affairs, and Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs. The source text bears a handwritten note from Harriman to Under Secretary Ball that reads: “What do we do about this? This is your pigeon, isn't it?”

2 Drafted in E on February 20, not printed.

202. Memorandum From President Johnson to the Director of the White House Office of Emergency Planning (McDermott) 202. Memorandum From President Johnson to the Director of the White House Office of Emergency Planning (McDermott)1

Washington, February 24, 1964.

SUBJECT

National Stockpiles

I have had an opportunity to review the materials which you prepared last month summarizing significant developments during the past two years and setting forth two basic questions in the handling of the national stockpiles.2

With regard to the question of whether the stockpile objectives for the various items should be based on criteria which assumes the availability of materials from friendly nations not contiguous to the United States in developing new objectives I believe it is desirable to remain with the present criteria which includes as emergency sources of supply only those which are domestic or from contiguous countries. I understand that this will in no way affect the disposal program as recommended by the Executive Stockpile Committee. Should it become clear that application of this criteria requires new acquisition of materials now in the stockpile inventory, please bring this to my immediate attention.

With regard to basic guidelines in disposing of surplus materials, existing practices should be continued, namely, that disposals are to be made only when this can be done without serious disruption of domestic or foreign markets and after proper evaluation of international considerations. The general procedural machinery established for making these determinations now in effect appears to be appropriate and desirable, and should also be continued.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 318. No classification marking. The source text is Attachment B to Document 370.

2 These materials have not been found.

203. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 203. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, March 17, 1964.

SUBJECT

Sugar Legislation

We must shortly decide on new sugar legislation. The foreign provisions of the 1961 Sugar Act expire December 31 and domestic producers expect to enlarge the domestic quota at the expense of foreign suppliers.

There are four principal points to the Department's sugar program: 1. Existing statutory quotas would be maintained.

2. The present “global” quota—the “Cuban” quota—of 1.7 million tons would be temporarily shelved and be converted into temporary statutory quotas. These temporary quotas would be returned to Cuba when she rejoined the free world.

3. We would continue the progressive “recapture” by the U.S. Treasury of the premium, if any, between the U.S. price and the normally lower world price for sugar. The 1962 Act provided that the premium allowed statutory quota holders should be diminished by 10 per cent per annum. In 1964 30 per cent of the premium will be recaptured. All the premium would be recaptured on the “temporary” statutory quota. (The recapture provision will have meaning only if world prices fall sharply.)

4. Foreign producers would have an incentive to supply us with sugar even in a tight market because they will receive a guaranteed price for sugar sold here of something around 4.15 cents per pound. This covers the cost of production of efficient producers; and is a guarantee that should be attractive. As a counterpart, they will be penalized if they fail to fill quotas at something near the target price provided in the act of nearly 7ȼ a pound. They will also lose pound-for-pound of their quota to the extent they fail to fill quota within the 7ȼ figure.

The Department of Agriculture generally agrees that this program should assure us of sugar at a reasonable price.

The Bone of Contention:

Domestic producers want to take over permanently 1 million tons of the 1.7 million tons global quota which we propose to convert into temporary quotas. USDA is less immodest, proposing that only 500,000 tons of this be permanently reassigned. USDA argues that: 1. We should rely more heavily on domestic production in order to assure ourselves of sugar at responsible prices.

2. Domestic beet producers were permitted to plant about 500,000 tons more than their marketing quotas. They should be permitted to market this sugar.

3. There are many underpriviledged—poverty stricken—farmers in the United States that should be favored over foreign producers of sugar.

The USDA position would cause foreign producers to lose a minimum of $50 million annually in sales of sugar to the U.S. (assuming an average net price to them of 5 cents per pound). Most of the loss would be suffered by Latin America and by countries that have limited opportunities to produce alternative crops. These countries are customers for America's goods and recipients of U.S. aid.

A cutback of foreign access to this market would be particularly bad coming at this time. We are seeking, first, to hold our foreign markets and then to increase them by sharing in their growth. This is what we've done for Australia and New Zealand in the Meat Agreements. Indeed, USDA is the foremost proponent of this philosophy. On the other hand, for sugar—on the eve of the Kennedy Round and the UNCTAD—Agriculture wishes to cut back foreign suppliers.

If the domestic quota is increased, we will have to reconsider our position on “premium recapture”. To offset the loss of income in this market, we might have to permit foreign producers to enjoy a “premium” on their sales here. But this would be likely to harm their long run position here. So long as a premium is paid to a farmer overseas, opposition to reliance on foreign suppliers will be formidable. It harms our balance of payments. Moreover, many Senators feel that the premium might just as well be paid in the form of a subsidy to the American farmer.

Foreign sugar can best hold the market by being available at a lower price than paid for U.S. sugar. This means that premiums should be turned over to the U.S. Treasury as is now provided under law.

Tactics

Under Secretary Murphy indicates that there is no compromise on the question of the domestic quota. He intends for the President to settle the matter. As a first step in this direction, an inter-agency committee is preparing an “issues” paper setting forth agreements and disagreements. The paper will indicate that the Bureau of the Budget and the Council of Economic Advisers have positions fairly close to ours. USDA will be isolated. The paper may go to the President within a week or ten days.

Recommended Action

Under Secretary Murphy or Secretary Freeman may raise the quota question with the President sooner. It may be prudent for you also to mention the matter to the President soon so that he is not caught unawares by USDA.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar, New Legislation. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jerome J. Jacobson (E) and cleared by Dutton (H) in substance.

204. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 204. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, March 17, 1964, 1840Z.

1385. Following is text main substantive sections of US paper submitted to Cereals Group March 17 as revised after meeting with exporting countries:

OBJECTIVES

An international grains arrangement, in common with the trade negotiations as a whole, should aim at promoting a more efficient use of resources consistent with reasonable protection of farm incomes in exporting and importing countries. The central objective of such an arrangement as established by the GATT Ministers is to provide acceptable conditions of access to world markets for cereals in furtherance of a significant development and expansion of trade.

Other objectives of an international grains arrangement should be to promote a better balance between world production and consumption, to assure adequate supplies of grains to importing countries at equitable prices; to encourage the consumption of grain; and to further the orderly programming of non-commercial sales, consistent with the achievement of the objectives of the grains arrangement. These objectives should be sought in ways that take into account the interest of both producers and consumers and of importing and exporting countries.

In pursuance of these objectives, the role assigned to each of the elements listed above would be as follows:

(1) Domestic Policies

It has been agreed that, with regard to certain agricultural commodities like grains, the negotiations designed to achieve the objectives established by the GATT Ministers must deal with more than the reduction of protective devices at the border. Since domestic price support and related programs frequently have a major impact on the opportunities for trade in such commodities, such programs should be brought into the negotiations. The desirable objective of adequate income protection to farmers must be reconciled with the equally desirable objectives of trade liberalization and expansion of world trade based upon comparative efficiency.

The concept of identifying, binding, and reducing where possible domestic cereals price and income supports may have a useful application in a grains arrangement. No single formula will fit all cases. The end result, however, must be a combination of policies which enables exporting and importing countries to carry out the trade objectives that the GATT Ministers established. The binding of levels of protection would, however, be useful only if such levels are not determined unilaterally but remain negotiable.

The U.S. would be willing to consider commitments of a reciprocal nature where this would contribute to the efficacy of an international grains arrangement. Among other things, the U.S. would consider undertakings on the part of the Contracting Parties to limit price supports. To take other measures to limit production and marketings, and to carry and manage stocks as a matter of policy in order to aid in securing an adequate cereals reserve.

The U.S. is also committed in principle to the reduction of export subsidies in cereals and is prepared to consider such an undertaking as part of the international cereals arrangement.

(2) Access

We seek the greatest possible liberalization of trade. Barriers to trade, whatever form they take, should be reduced. This must be accomplished in a manner which takes into account the need to provide agricultural producers in both importing and exporting countries reasonable income protection.

But, since we are in an uncharted area in these negotiations, special measures are required to assure the continuation of a satisfactory flow of trade and the sharing of markets between domestic production and imports on a fair and equitable basis. Acceptable conditions of access to world markets should be assured by importing countries maintaining imports at least equal to the average levels of a recent representative period adjusted for growth proportionate to the increase in their total grain consumption. To this end, importing countries should agree to arrange their domestic policies so that there is a reasonable expectation of achieving the access objective. Moreover, the importing countries should agree to take prompt and effective remedial action if imports are not maintained at the agreed levels.

Specific commitments of individual countries could vary, depending on the particular measures of restraint and stimulus applied. Producer returns would be one of the crucial elements, and moderate price levels for both wheat and feed grains should be negotiated. The higher the prices in importing countries the greater the incentive to producers to expand uneconomic production and the more compelling the need for specific undertakings by importers in order to assure room in their markets for grain imports.

(3) International Prices

Provisions regarding international grains prices should form a part of an international arrangement. These provisions should have as their primary objective the stabilization of world grain prices within an equitable range.

Pricing arrangements might consist of a maximum-minimum price range applicable for all commercial sales. Price differentials by grades and qualities of various cereals would need to be established. The U.S. would be prepared, in cooperation with other exporters, to consider undertakings to supply agreed proportions of member countries' cereals consumption within the range and at the maximum price.

The present price range in the International Wheat Agreement and the current general level of world grain prices could be regarded as constituting a basis for initial discussion of world grains prices under the arrangement.

Suitable arrangements for moderately higher prices could be explored, however, consistent with the objectives of the arrangement.

(4) Assurance of Supply

Provisions regarding the establishment and maintenance of reserve stocks by Contracting Parties should be included in a grains arrangement. Such provisions should have as their objective the maintenance of stocks in amounts necessary to facilitate the fulfillment of other provisions of the arrangement and to assure importers of sufficient supplies. Maintenance of reserves of stocks to assure sufficient supplies would be primarily the responsibility of exporters. The level of reserves by individual Contracting Parties would be in relation to their traditional share in world commercial grain trade and their ability to finance a storage policy.

(5) Non-Commercial Grain Distribution

Consideration should be given to including in an international grains arrangement provisions for making cereals available for non-commercial purposes. This activity should be consistent with, but secondary to, the main objective of the arrangement. Support to the program, including contributions of grains, should be shared by both importers and exporters.

(6) Coverage

The GATT Cereals Group has indicated, with respect to coverage, that wheat, wheat flour and the main coarse grains should be included. The latter group would probably include corn, sorghum, barley, rye and oats.

(7) Administrative Arrangements and Procedures

An international grains arrangement negotiated within the context of trade negotiations is a departure from the traditional purposes for which international commodity arrangements have been undertaken. Basic provisions having a trade significance must have the same degree of continuity as other trade concessions such as tariff bindings.

Provision would have to be made for periodic review and consultations, however, with the view to assuring the achievement of the objectives and commitments of the arrangement. Provisions of the arrangement should be reviewed so far as possible simultaneously with general trade negotiations, and, in any event, at intervals of not more than three years.

It is impossible to foresee at this time the form which administrative arrangements should take. The relationship of the international grains arrangement to the present International Wheat Agreement would have to be considered.

(8) Membership

Initially membership in an international grains arrangement would be open to all contracting parties of the GATT. Provision could also be made for participation in the arrangement by non-GATT countries.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Unclassified. Repeated to Bonn, Luxembourg for USEC, Brussels for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, The Hague, London, Ottawa, Canberra, Buenos Aires, and Tokyo.

205. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 205. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, March 17, 1964, 6 p.m.

TAGG 1891. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. Cereals meeting opened at 10 a.m. today. Wyndham White, Chairman, recalled group previously had agreed this session would mark opening of actual negotiations. Then invited delegates views as how proceed. US delegate spoke first. After recalling objectives established by GATT Ministers, presented US recommendations regarding broad treatment to be accorded each of elements which group at previous sessions had identified for consideration. Presented reasons why negotiations must focus on domestic agricultural policies and indicated proposal for measuring and binding levels of farm income support might have useful application. Emphasized, however, negotiations must not stop at this but must include also negotiations reductions in levels of protection. Then proceeded to explain why in view of need to reconcile trade objectives with domestic agricultural policies specific access undertakings would be required on part of importers. Copies of US paper were then distributed to delegates followed by general statements welcoming US initiative by exporting countries, UK and Japan. Community spokesman (Meyer-Burckhardt) noted divergency of view between US proposal and Community's approach but asked for time to study US proposal before commenting and confronting with Community's proposals. Meeting then adjourned until 10 a.m. Wednesday.

UK delegate indicated he would be prepared to present to group details new UK cereals arrangement at afternoon session Wednesday. Following these presentations, we shall seek cooperation of all participants for organizing agenda substantially around US proposals. Thursday and Friday will be devoted to meeting of agriculture committee. Wyndham White proposed resume meeting cereals group next week but EEC reserved position in view meetings agriculture ministers. Decision postponed until Wednesday. WW also proposed cereals groups should reconvene immediately following Easter recess.

Exporters caucus March 16 produced near consensus on US paper with familiar differing emphasis (Australia more favorable to price increases, Canada less favorable to food aid). Some minor revisions, not changing substances, made in US submission at exporters suggestion. Text main substantive elements US submission sent in following cable.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo. Passed to the White House for Herter at 3 a.m. on March 18.

206. Memorandum of Conversation 206. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, March 18, 1964.

SUBJECT

Wool

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

The British Ambassador

Mr. Nigel Trench, Counselor, British Embassy

Mr. T. J. Hirschfeld, Officer in Charge, Cambodian Affairs

The Secretary noted that other wool producers such as Italy and Japan were now coming into the United States market thereby creating some concern among domestic producers. He mentioned that he had just received a Congressional delegation representing these producers and suggested that the British might have some interest in a marketing agreement.2 Lord Harlech replied that although his government was utterly opposed in principle to such an idea, it might, nevertheless, “be intriguing to certain sections of British industry.” He said that “the experts” would be in touch soon.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL US. Confidential. Drafted by Hirschfeld on March 18 and approved in S on March 23. The source text is labeled “Part II of II.”

2 A memorandum of conversation of the meeting between Secretary Rusk and a delegation of six Senators and eight Representatives on March 18 is ibid., INCO–WOOL 17 US.

207. Memorandum of Conversation 207. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, March 19, 1964.

SUBJECT

Wool Textiles

PARTICIPANTS

See attached list2

Mr. Darman 3 summarized for the Under Secretary the background which led up to the meeting in Paris on March 11–12 of representatives of wool textile industries from 14 countries of Europe, the United States, and Canada. He referred to the meeting of the International Wool Study Group in December 1962 which provided an opportunity for the wool textile industry members of the United States delegation to make contacts and to have conversations with their counterparts in the United Kingdom. This led to several industry meetings with the British in the months that followed. The British industry was concerned as to what could be done to recover the market in the United States which they had lost to the Japanese. There was a mutual understanding by the United States and United Kingdom industries that it would be desirable to take action internationally to control trade in wool textiles. Mr. Darman pointed out that the wool textile industries of the EEC had quite independently come to the same conclusion, and, as a result, in December 1963 a meeting was held in Rome of representatives of the wool textile industries of the EEC, United Kingdom, some other EFTA countries, and the United States. Except for the United States delegation, the representatives of the other industries were manufacturers of tops, yarn, and cloth. Knitters and apparel manufacturers were not represented since these two sectors were still growing in Europe and they had not yet come up against low-cost competition.

At the Paris meeting, Mr. Darman reported, an international agreement based upon market disruption, such as in the cotton textile agreement, was proposed by the Europeans as a means of getting a unified approach to the problem. The United States industry delegation refused to discuss any details with regard to an international wool textile agreement. This has been a consistent position of the industry on the grounds that it was up to governments to negotiate details of any agreement. Mr. Darman said that the French industry delegation wanted language in a resolution which would recommend that governments not take unilateral action to curb imports of wool textiles while international consideration was being given to this problem. The United States delegation opposed the French proposal because the threat of unilateral action by the United Stares Government is of real concern to the Europeans. If we were to support such language it would eliminate the threat. The United States delegation, therefore, took the position that it was willing to go home without an agreement with the other industry delegations if such language were put into the resolution. The French delegation backed off from their proposal, which, Mr. Darman said, was an indication that the Europeans really want an agreement.

The Under Secretary said that the Department's reading of the situation was that the Italian Government probably would be willing to negotiate an agreement, that the Japanese Government could probably be persuaded to enter into negotiations if other countries were to do the same, but that the United Kingdom Government remained adamantly opposed to an agreement. He mentioned that the British Embassy had given us an aide-memoire to this effect as recently as March 17.4 He asked the industry group what its reading was of the situation. Mr. Darman replied that the British industry had told the United States delegation that the kind of position which the United Kingdom gave the United States on March 17 was to be expected and that it was necessary for the United States at a high level to make a pitch for an agreement to the British Government.

Mr. Ball said that the British have the capability of digging in and not budging on an issue. However, we would not necessarily take the aide-memoire of March 17 as the final word on the situation.

Mr. Darman said that he had two pieces of information which he would like to convey to the State Department. First, he was told by Messrs. Schilling and de Precigoux, who were the heads of the German and French wool textile industries, respectively, that they had visited Wyndham White in Geneva recently to discuss the problem of wool textiles. The two industry representatives had informed Mr. Darman that Wyndham White had said that he felt GATT would not oppose an international wool textile agreement and that in view of the difficulty for any one government to raise the issue of an agreement, Wyndham White was willing to take the initiative to do so.

The second piece of information which Mr. Darman said he had was that Schilling reported he had had lunch with Ambassador Blumenthal in Frankfurt recently and that Ambassador Blumenthal, after hearing Schilling's view of the need for an international agreement, was reported to have said that it was a constructive approach.

The Under Secretary said that it would undoubtedly be better for GATT or for the EEC to take the initiative in the matter. He had in mind canvassing the situation while in Geneva during the coming week. He suggested that the group meet again with him in two weeks, after his trip to Europe.

Mr. Darman thanked the Under Secretary for taking the time to see them.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer and approved in U on March 26.

2 The list is not printed. Under Secretary Ball met with eight representatives from the textile industry.

3  Morton Darman, Chairman of the Executive Committee of the National Association of Wool Manufacturers and President of the Top Company, Boston.

4 Text of the British aide-memoire of March 17 is in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4.

208. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 208. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, March 19, 1964, 7 p.m.

TAGG 1894. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. All day session cereals group opened with EEC (Rabot) response to US paper. EEC takes same approach to grains as to agriculture in general. Reference price could be negotiated and each country would agree not exceed margin of support measured from reference price.

Should try attain price stability at reference price and better balance supply and demand. Closed with statement rejecting access commitment saying that after considering both domestic policies and production in each country, exporting and importing, we must see whether we have obtained maximum desired.

EEC was unable to continue with detailed comments on US suggestions because of disagreement within delegation.

Discussion then proceeded on basis US paragraph on international prices. Most exporters agreed that US and EEC positions did not seem much different since US submission encompassed broad range of possible prices including possibility of moderate increases. Rabot, however, stated real differences seemed to exist. IWA margins too wide and stability which now prevails is due largely to restraint of a few major exporters. In future, world should have price on basis not wholly dependent on wisdom of few exporters. Cited advantages of EEC approach which would provide much narrower margins than IWA.

US said understood that both (1) range like present IWA range and (2) reference price used for calculation of variable levies could be considered together. Attempt to set rigid international price would severely limit role of private trade. EEC replied did not see how both could operate at once.

After several attempts smoke out EEC on what reference price Community had in mind, replied should be price which would allow efficient countries not to resort to export subsidies. Comment: We assume he meant a $2 per bushel price for US wheat. End comment.

In response to Wyndham White invitation explain how access could be assured by EEC through negotiations of Montant de Soutien, EEC explained “access assurances are superfluous”. EEC in efforts to reconcile paragraphs 39 and 110 of Rome treaty attempting to reach levels of production which will maintain acceptable conditions of access, willing assume three year commitments on domestic policy, then as prices change traditional exporters will have an opportunity at end of period to review agreement in light of access at that time. (If not satisfied need not renew agreement.) Community access assurances without commitment on price policy (mutually exclusive) would leave Community free to pursue internal arrangements which could result in surpluses. If Community then purchased beyond its needs, would be forced to sell next year and destroy stability market. For these reasons, EEC rejects quantitative assurances.

Engholm (UK) opened PM session with lucid presentation UK cereals arrangment—one which he differentiated between end objectives of maintaining fair balance between domestic production and imports and means to this end which involve rearranging domestic policies.

US delegation then contrasted this clear cut contribution to trade objectives Kennedy round with EEC position which was to give three year binding Montant de Soutien (MDS) unilaterally determined, with no agreement reached in negotiations purpose to be achieved by such binding.

EEC was in effect telling exporters they must accept position as is and face possibility of seeing their trade wiped out by increased EEC production. How could this be reconciled with objectives agreed by GATT Ministers and EEC decision to take account of third country interests? Binding of MDS limited to three years was of limited value to exporters. It was all the more important that there should be clear EEC commitment to trade expansion, and assurance of corrective measures if policies adopted by EEC did not achieve this objective. Exclusive emphasis on MDS meant concentration on means and failed to face up to end which was trade expansion. This objective needed to be spelled out in quantitative terms. EEC seemed to have recognized this in internal discussion in which certain quantities had been mentioned. Noted UK and Japan saw merit in this approach. Success of Kennedy round depended on acceptable compromise.

US statement followed strong endorsement both US and UK interventions by other exporters and Japan, who specifically endorsed US approach and market access concept. (Community representative overheard to remark we are isolated.)

Chairman then attempted move discussion back to items 1 and 2, US paper. EEC declined be drawn into meaningful discussion, however, saying binding level of support in their view sufficient.

US delegation, while expressing understanding present limitations under which Community spokesman operating, again emphasized binding of support only means to an end which must be spelled out and agreed upon. He concluded by noting other exporters had already indicated progress in cereals essential to their participation in Kennedy round. This no less true for the US, just as in disparities meaningful compromise would have to be found on cereals group for US to go forward and conclude trade negotiations.

Toward end of session question of timetable for further meetings came up. Rabot said EEC unable to continue meeting next week. This evoked strong criticism from several delegations. Net result was that firm calendar for all meetings for month of April likely will be established. Will be at least one more meeting cereals group this week at which discussion negotiations of domestic problems will be continued but likely no meetings next week.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

209. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Johnson to President Johnson 209. Memorandum From Acting Secretary of State Johnson to President Johnson 1

Washington, March 20, 1964.

SUBJECT

Wool Textiles: Your Meeting March 20 with Apparel Union Representatives

Problem

The apparel union representatives may raise with you the question of wool textile imports. They may ask for a renewal effort by the Administration to negotiate an international wool textile agreement similar to the agreement in effect for cotton textiles. They may refer to President Kennedy's seven-point program of May 1961 which included a directive to the Department of State to negotiate an international textile agreement and they may point out that this has not been fulfilled with regard to wool textiles.2 They may also make the point that wool textile imports have risen to about 20 percent of domestic consumption in 1963, and that this is having an adverse effect on the producers of various wool products, including apparel.

Recommendation

It is suggested that you comment along the following lines: 1. Vigorous efforts have been made to secure the cooperation of Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom. They have not been successful to date. The Department has made every effort over the last year and a half to secure the cooperation of these countries, but to date they have not been willing to negotiate a wool textile agreement. As recently as March 17 the British Embassy gave us a negative response upon instructions from London.

2. The Administration is aware of the seriousness of the import problem. Secretary Rusk has told Congressional leaders that we will make another all-out effort to secure the cooperation of the major exporting countries. At a meeting with fourteen members of Congress led by Senator Pastore on March 18, the Secretary informed the Congressional group to this effect.3 Under Secretary Ball plans, in connection with his trip to Europe next week, to canvass the situation, including, if necessary, a stopover in London to discuss the matter with the President of the Board of Trade, Mr. Heath.

3. A wool textile agreement is much more difficult to secure than was the case with cotton textiles. Most of the countries exporting cotton textiles to us are less-developed countries; the cotton textile agreement we negotiated secured for them increased access to the restricted markets of Europe. On the other hand, the major suppliers of wool textiles (Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom) are all industrialized countries; there is no leverage here similar to that in the case of cotton textiles.

U. Alexis Johnson 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL US. No classification marking. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer (E/OR) on March 20 and cleared by Trezise (E) and Joseph A. Greenwald (E/OT). Attached to the source text is a March 20 transmittal memorandum from Benjamin H. Read (S/S) to Buddy.

2 For text of President Kennedy's seven-point program to assist the U.S. textile industry, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1961, pp. 345–346.

3 See footnote 2, Document 206.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Johnson signed the original.

210. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 210. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, March 20, 1964, 1325Z.

TAGG 1899. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. Holding press backgounder on Cereals Group and Agriculture Subcommittee meetings 11 am March 21. Following is text of statement which will be distributed at that time on non-attibutions basis:

Press Background Statement on Cereals

The US this week submitted proposals to the GATT Cereals Group outlining a world grains arrangement. (The Cereals Group is one of the specific negotiating bodies in which the Kennedy Round is being conducted.) The US proposal can be considered to open the substantive phase in the negotiation of international trading arrangements for grains. The main objective of such arrangements would be to assure the beneficial expansion of trade and access to commercial markets while at the same time affording reasonable protection of farm incomes in exporting and importing countries.

In May 1963 the Ministers of the nations participating in the Kennedy Round specifically directed the negotiators to seek acceptable conditions of access to world markets in furtherance of a significant development and expansion of world trade for agricultural products including grains.

The Cereals Group has held previous meetings in June and November 1963 in which various elements which might be included in a world grains arrangement were discussed.

The United States has now made the following specific proposals on the content of a world grains arrangement: 1. Domestic policies. It has been widely agreed that certain national domestic agricultural policies have a significant impact on international trade. In fact internal farm policies are frequently of primary importance in determining trade opportunities for grains. The US has proposed that relevant domestic agricultural policies in grains exporting and importing countries be subject to negotiation.

Domestic price and income support measures have a particularly important impact on trade opportunities. Higher returns to producers tend to encourage more rapid increases in production particularly through more rapid or intensive adoption of modern agricultural technology. Higher prices also tend to retard growth in demand particularly in the case of feed grains. Such accelerated production increases or retarded growth in demand can reduce the market normally supplied by imports or can produce burdensome surpluses.

Specifically therefore the US would be willing to consider reciprocal commitments with respect to limits of price supports, maintenance of production controls, management of stocks, reduction of export subsidies and other domestic policies which would contribute to the objectives of a world grains arrangement.

2. Access assurances. In addition to negotiations on domestic policies the US proposal includes a second major element—assurances of access into traditional world markets. It is clear that those adjustments in domestic grains policies which are likely to be negotiable will in themselves not be adequate to achieve an orderly expansion of trade. In this situation more precise trade commitments—in the form of access assurances—will become necessary. The objective would be to assure the sharing of markets on a fair and reasonable basis between domestic production and imports.

3. International prices. Provisions regarding international grains prices should form a part of an international arrangement. These provisions should have as their primary objective the stabilization of world grain prices within an equitable range and guarantees that grain will be made available to importing countries within these prices. The present general level of world prices provides a useful starting point for discussion of future world cereals prices.

4. Assurance of supply. Provisions regarding the establishment and maintenance of reserve stocks by Contracting Parties should be included in a grains arrangement. Such provisions should have as their objective the maintenance of stocks in amounts necessary to facilitate the fulfillment of other provisions of the arrangement and to assure importers of sufficient supplies.

In addition to these elements the US has suggested inclusion in the grains arrangement of provisions relating to non-commercial distribution commodity coverage and various technical and administrative procedures.

The US also indicated that the EEC proposal involving measurement of the “Montant de Soutien” from a “reference price” might have a place in a grains arrangement. This role would be to facilitate the binding of the levels of producer price supports for grains. But world trading prices must remain flexible enough to facilitate commercial trading. Rigidly fixed world prices would not be acceptable.

Negotiation of a world grains arrangement is an ambitious undertaking. Technical complexities and economic and political difficulties are considerable. The proposal the US has submitted represents the first major step in the negotiation of the grains arrangement. While these negotiations will be lengthy they must progress in phase with other elements of the Kennedy Round.

Press Background Statement on Agricultural Negotiations

The United States today formally responded to the EEC's proposal for a negotiating plan for the agricultural phase of the Kennedy Round. In February the Community proposed that negotiation on agricultural products should not consist of traditional reductions in tarriffs but should aim at the consolidation of the amount of domestic price support measures. This “Montant de Soutien” approach was considered more appropriate by the EEC because of the various measures other than tariffs affecting agricultural trade.

In its response the US recognized that for certain agricultural products trade opportunities are determined by measures other than tariffs. An approach along the lines of the “Montant de Soutien” may be appropriate in some of these cases in facilitating the expansion of trade provided reductions in protection can also be negotiated. On the other hand very significant volumes of world agricultural trade occur in instances where the tariff is of primary importance. About half of US agricultural exports to the EEC (about $500 million excluding cotton) take place over zero duties or fixed tariffs which are the sole or major barrier to trade and are bound as a result of GATT trade agreements. The US and other nations agricultural exports to other importing countries are also largely subject to traditional tariff or duty free commitments undertaken in the GATT.

The US made it clear the negotiations must be based on the continuation of existing bindings. A general application of the “Montant de Soutien” approach would impair these bindings. Moreover the variety of agricultural products and the complexities of agricultural production and trade policies make an across the board application of the “Montant de Soutien” approach unworkable. Mere binding of margins of support would not achieve the objectives agreed to by the GATT Ministers in May 1963 specifically to provide acceptable conditions of access to world markets for agricultural products in furtherance of a significant development and expansion of world trade in such products.

In this week's meeting of the Kennedy Round Agriculture Subcommittee the US indicated that it was prepared to accept a pragmatic approach to agricultural trade problems with a view to securing an orderly expansion of agricultural trade while remaining cognizant of the need to maintain farm incomes in exporting and importing countries. Such a pragmatic approach could include a sector by sector examination of agricultural trade to see which negotiating methods appeared likely to offer the best prospects for success for each particular sector. In a few areas an approach similar to the “Montant de Soutien” may be appropriate. In other sectors traditional tariff reductions or other methods may offer the best prospects for successful negotiations. In any case any participant would be free to make any proposal he saw fit as to methods to be applied to agricultural products.

The US has proposed that the Agriculture Subcommittee promptly undertake this pragmatic examination of which negotiating methods to apply to the various agricultural sectors with a view to assuring that a basis for negotiation on agriculture exists prior to the May 4 formal opening of the Kennedy Round.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Unclassified; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

211. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 211. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, March 20, 1964, 8 p.m.

TAGG 1900. Pass Herter, Agriculture. GATT Cereals Group, March 19–20.

Wyndham White attempted steer Cereals group discussion into role Community's concept of reference price as (1) base from which to meas-ure “Montant de Soutien” (2) stabilizing element for international prices. EEC agreed reference price meant to have double role.

EEC expanded somewhat on MDS with examples and citing of statistical sources available for calculation on renumeration to farmers, but refused specify rule to be adopted if world prices rose above reference price. Said most increases in world price would be result of short supply in which case importing countries probably justified in raising returns to their producers.

In response to UK question about effect indirect subsidies, EEC reiterated its approach not “untouchable”; but to facilitate negotiations EEC proposes to treat only direct subsidies at this time. Indirect subsidies could be taken into account, if necessary, when arrangements come up for renewal.

EEC several times drew attention to what it called singular example of its willingness see some of its producers take reduced returns and to bind future returns. Cited this undertaking as fair balance domestic and foreign interests.

EEC conceded that falling costs, increased productivity could lead to increased production under protection bound MDS. Said, however, CPs would have opportunity of annual confrontations plus decision on renewal every three years. Again sought emphasize stabilizing impact through fact EEC market will be in contact with world market and bound not to develop its policies unilaterally.

Most exporters expressed inability see that there would be contact with world market and emphasized need quantitative assurances in order bring world price to bear on EEC system.

US said unable see how market mechanism could operate with reference price concept. Inquired whether EEC willing contemplate direct transfers to exporting countries of levy collections. There was no direct reply.

US summarized by pointing to objective of balanced supply and demand. Asked EEC how fixed reference price at or above world prices would cope with present problem of chronic over supply. Making point that under EEC proposal accommodation would have to be made by exporters. This was not denied by EEC.

Discussion reference price continued Friday morning. US concluded not clear that reference price necessary to limit producer returns or that it would even accomplish this purpose. US had strong reservations about high fixed international price as it would (1) tend to aggravate supply management problem; (2) impede free grain trade. Furthermore, fixing prices on CIF basis would fail to stabilize producer returns in exporting countries because of freight rate fluctuations. UK, Canada, and Argentina supported US. Australia put in mild plug for higher international price; felt that distant suppliers must be permitted to absorb freight differentials to remain competitive in principal markets. EEC expressed satisfaction that there seemed to be general agreement on “moderate increases” of international prices and concept of “Montant de Soutien”. US made clear concept as put forward by EEC not accepted. Said EEC approach seemed unnecessarily complicated but US willing to consider circuitous route provided it leads to objective laid down by GATT Ministers. Trouble was approach suggested by EEC without major modifications and additions failed contribute to this end. Emphasize final judgment on role reference price could only be made on basis of contribution it makes achievement objectives—increased export opportunities and improved conditions of access. EEC repeated view that EEC approach would create acceptable conditions of access. Meeting concluded on this familiar note.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo and passed to the White House on March 21.

212. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 212. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 21, 1964.

SUBJECT

Sugar Legislation

We have been discussing with Agriculture and other agencies concerned the fact that sugar legislation must soon be considered in anticipation of expiration of the 1961 Sugar Act2 on December 31. We are in general agreement on recommendations to be made to the President but differ on one major point: whether a substantial portion of supplies now coming from abroad should, instead, be supplied domestically. The agencies are preparing a statement of the problem and proposed solutions for consideration by the President. This is simply to alert you to that arrangement and to the fact that a decision will have to be made as soon as possible after our statement is received, inasmuch as Chairman Cooley contemplates hearings in the near future.

J.W. Davis 3

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar, New Legislation. Limited Official Use. Drafted by G. Hilliker (S/S) on March 21 and cleared by Jacobson (E).

2 Reference is to P.L. 87–15 of March 31, 1961, “To Amend and Extend the Sugar Act of 1948, as Amended.” (75 Stat. 40)

3  Davis signed for Read above Read's typed signature.

213. Memorandum of Conversation 213. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, April 1, 1964.

SUBJECT

Possible International Wool Textile Agreement—Japan

PARTICIPANTS

Embassy of Japan Mr. Susumu Nakagawa, Minister

Mr. Shigeru Otsuka, First Secretary

Department of State Mr. Philip H. Trezise, Acting Assistant Secretary for Economics Affairs

Mr. Claus W. Ruser, Chief, Fibers and Textiles Division, Office of International Resources

Mr. Robert J. Wilson, International Economist, EA/J

Mr. Nakagawa called to present an Aide-Memoire reaffirming the opposition of the Japanese Government to an International Agreement for wool textiles (copy attached).2

Mr. Trezise inquired whether the Government of Japan felt that such an agreement was near. Mr. Nakagawa replied that his Government was not sure how to interpret recent developments. He noted the recent meeting in Paris of representatives of the United States and European wool textile industries and press reports that a Congressional Delegation and industry leaders had recently met with Department officials to review the question of an international agreement.

Mr. Trezise inquired what import restrictions Japan still maintains with respect to wool textiles. Mr. Nakagawa and Mr. Otsuka said that Japan no longer maintained any quantitative import restrictions on wool textiles but they were not sure about the tariff on such imports. (Mr. Otsuka subsequently telephoned Mr. Ruser to advise him that the rate of duty on most wool fabrics was 20 percent, with some wool textiles dutiable at 15 percent.) The Japanese officials said that there was an inter-governmental agreement between Japan and the United Kingdom under which wool fabrics exports from the United Kingdom are limited, but they were not sure about the level of exports permissible under this bilateral agreement. (Mr. Otsuka subsequently advised that the export ceiling under this agreement was confidential and that the Embassy was asking authority to disclose the export levels.) The Japanese officials were not certain whether there were similar understandings with other wool textile exporting countries but promised to provide whatever information might be available.

The conversation then turned to restrictions on wool textile exports from Japan to Western Europe. The Japanese officials referred to export agreements with the United Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germany but they were unable to provide any details and were unable to confirm the existence of similar agreements with other European countries. They promised to provide additional information on these arrangements.

Mr. Trezise then turned to the pressures facing the United States Government from wool textile interests to negotiate an international wool textile agreement. He noted the argument of the United States industry that the United States even now is the only major industrial country to maintain a completely open wool textile market; whereas many European countries continue to maintain quantitative import restrictions. This fact presents the United States Government with a point of considerable difficulty: imports to this country continue to rise while other countries do not seem to be prepared to eliminate their quantitative limitations.

The Japanese officials agreed that the possibility of an “international wool textile agreement would be considerably lessened if there were freer trade in wool textiles.”

Mr. Trezise then stated that we are still studying the question of an international agreement and that no decision had as yet been reached whether and how to proceed on this matter. He noted that we had several times discussed with the British and Italian Embassies the attitudes of their Governments towards an agreement, but that no formal approach had been made since late 1962 to discuss such an arrangement. The United Kingdom remained firmly opposed to such an agreement, whereas the attitude of the Italian Government, while opposed, was perhaps somewhat more ambiguous. The United States Government had always felt that an international agreement would have to include Italy, Japan and the United Kingdom. Not much thought had been given how and to what extent other significant suppliers would have to be brought under such an agreement.

Mr. Trezise reassured Minister Nakagawa that we would approach Japan before we would take formal and public steps to initiate negotiations of an agreement, if we should decide to take action. The United States was very conscious of Japanese trade interests in this area and the problem of avoiding discrimination against Japan.

Mr. Trezise confirmed that political pressures on the Administration to act were very strong.

Mr. Nakagawa then referred to recent press reports that Congres-sional leaders interested in this matter were expecting a report from the Department on the current attitude of other friendly countries towards an agreement.

Mr. Trezise indicated that Congressmen and industry representatives would have to be told that the Department is not yet in a position to give such a report. He reemphasized that further work would have to be done within the Government and that we would not approach any other Government on this matter until these studies had been completed. No decision has as yet been made on whether and how to proceed on this matter.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Claus W. Ruser (E/OR/FTD) and approved in E on June 12.

2 Not printed. The Japanese aide-memoire, dated March 31, stated that “in view of the recent developments in the international woolen textile trade involving a move of American and European private business circles concerned to conclude an international woolen textiles agreement, the Japanese Government wishes to reaffirm its position of opposing such agreement of any nature, which would serve only to impair international free trade in woolen textiles.”

214. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 214. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, April 9, 1964, 6 p.m.

TAGG 1936. Pass Agriculture. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. GATT Group on Cereals.

Statement by cereals exporting countries, April 7.

Discussions in the group in the period 17 March to 3 April have significantly clarified the positions of member governments on each of the “elements” which, it had been agreed earlier, should be taken into account in an international grains arrangement and have revealed certain areas of possible agreement.

It is the considered view of the exporting countries, however, that further progress in the negotiation as a whole is dependent upon a narrowing of the basic differences which appear to exist in respect to the ways and means of giving effect to the objective set out in the ministerial resolution of May 1963 “to create acceptable conditions of access to world markets for cereals in furtherance of a significant development and expansion of world trade in cereals.” Fulfillment of the objective will involve a satisfactory outcome to negotiations in all the elements previously agreed upon, all of which are, of course, closely interrelated. But the fundamental issues are those concerning questions of domestic policies and assurances of access opportunities.

The position of exporters in respect to these vital questions can be stated clearly and simply: (A) All contracting parties would undertake to so arrange their domestic cereals policies as to achieve the objectives established by GATT Ministers. The agreement itself and the obligations undertaken thereunder should represent GATT commitments and have the same validity and continuity as tariff bindings.

(B) Cereals importing countries would so set their prices and otherwise conduct their domestic cereals policies as to assure cereals exporting countries as a whole the opportunity to compete for at least their present share of importers consumption. This would require cereals importers to maintain their cereals imports at levels at least equal to those of a recent representative period and provide exporting countries as a whole with the opportunity to share proportionately in any growth in consumption in importing countries.

(C) To this end, the levels of producer prices for grain should be established and bound at levels which will effectively reduce the incentive for uneconomic production.

(D) The mere binding of margins of support as suggested by the EEC will not achieve the objectives established by the GATT Ministers. It is essential that the bindings be at levels which are consistent with these objectives. While the means used to attain these objectives may take the form in some countries of reducing and binding domestic prices and income supports, in other cases, negotiation of reductions and bindings of tariffs and other border controls may suffice. In still other cases, the measures that might be employed to carry out the access objectives may include the limitation of guaranteed returns to producers to specified quantities.

(E) Whatever methods are employed must be effective in achieving objectives established by GATT Ministers. To this end, importing countries would therefore not only undertake to arrange their domestic cereals policies so as to meet the objectives of the arrangement but would also commit themselves to take prompt and effective remedial action in the event the objectives were not realized. The nature of the remedial action would be at the discretion of the importing country.

(F) The exporters, on their part, are prepared to negotiate similar limitations on their domestic cereals policies to the extent required to carry out the broader objectives of the arrangement including a more economic balance between world supply and demand. Specifically, they are willing to commit themselves to adjust as required their production and stocking policies, and to follow marketing practices that assure importers a regular supply of cereals at equitable and stable prices. To this end, exporters are willing to undertake to supply importers requirements within a specified price range.

All parties should agree to progressively reduce export subsidies.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USRO, Rome, London, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter on April 10.

215. Editorial Note 215. Editorial Note

The United States and the United Kingdom concluded an agreement on grain imports by an exchange of notes between Ambassador David K.E. Bruce and the Earl of Dundee, British Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, in London on April 15, 1964. The agreement entered into force on the same date. For text, see 15 UST 541; TIAS 5581. For Special Representative Herter's statement of April 16 announcing the agreement, see Department of State Bulletin, May 4, 1964, pages 703–704. Additional documentation on the negotiations leading to this agreement is in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK-US.

216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the European Communities 216. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the European Communities 1

Washington, May 3, 1964, 10:42 a.m.

BUSEC 679. Ref: ECBUS 1395, repeated Geneva ECBUS 570.2 Wool Textiles. Letter Ernst possesses may be based upon meetings March 18 and 19 between Congressional leaders, domestic industry reps, and Secretary and Under Secretary which were reported in trade press.3 These press reports and apparently letter did not accurately report what Secretary and Under Secretary said. Memcons pouched attention Price.

Mission should reply to Ernst along following lines: 1. We suspect letter and rumors to which he has referred based upon meetings late March between USG officials and Congressional leaders and wool textile reps which widely reported trade press here. These meetings were follow-ups to Paris meeting of wool textile industry reps earlier in March. No commitment was made at Washington meetings as to any specific course of action other than to look closely again at wool textile problem.

2. We appreciate Ernst calling this matter to our attention and have noted his request for prior consultation.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4 GATT. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Hugh W. Wolff (E/OR/FTD) and Stanley Nehmer (E/OR); cleared by Julius L. Katz (E/OT), Deane R. Hinton (EUR/RPE), Robert Anderson (U), and David Rowe (S/S); and approved by Philip H. Trezise (E). Repeated to Geneva.

2  ECBUS 1395 from Brussels, April 30, reported that Ernst of the EEC Commission had a letter from an unnamed U.S. textile firm that claimed that the U.S. Government intended to approach other governments concerning a wool textile agreement. The EEC would require time to consult with member states and individual firms in order to devise a common position for such a meeting. (Ibid.)

3 See footnote 2, Document 206, and Document 207.

217. Memorandum of Conversation 217. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 5, 1964.

SUBJECT

Wool textile imports

PARTICIPANTS

See attached list2

Mr. Elbert explained that the Wool Product Importers Group, which was affiliated with the National Council of American Importers, had been formed in January 1963 following a meeting between President Kennedy and Senator Pastore, at which the latter urged action to limit imports of wool textiles. The WPIG had written to the President opposing Senator Pastore's proposal.

Mr. Daniels said that the group was seriously disturbed by the efforts of the textile industries in America and Europe to promote an international agreement on trade in wool textiles. They were particularly concerned that industry spokesmen were misrepresenting what had occurred. Referring to a memorandum which he distributed (copy attached),3 he related the history of industry meetings in Rome and Paris and pointed out that the knitwear and garment people, important elements of the industry, had not been represented at the Rome meeting. Subsequently, although represented at the Paris meeting, they had split over the resolution. The Italian knitwear industry and the British garment industry were completely opposed to any international arrangement. Furthermore, the European and American-Canadian positions as to what type of agreement was desired were “oceans apart.”

Mr. Daniels said that despite industry pressure the British and Italian Governments remained firmly opposed to an agreement. So were the Belgian, Netherlands and Swiss Governments. In Japan, both government and industry were opposed.

Continuing, Mr. Daniels discussed briefly each of the points set forth in the attached memorandum. In addition, he made the following arguments.

1. The domestic fabric industry is not being injured by imports. The imported goods are high quality fabrics which do not compete with American-made low and medium-grade fabrics.

2. The real problem is a combination of automation, the movement of the industry southward from New England, changes in styling, mergers, etc.

3. Statistics on mill closings cited by the industry and its represent-atives in Congress are misleading. Most of the mills which had been sold were re-opened and back in full production. Those which remained closed had in many instances not been making the type of goods which would be affected by imports.

4. The United States industry was dominated by the “big three”, Burlington, Stevens and Deering-Milliken, which together probably accounted for 75% of United States production of wool fabrics. They had an absolute monopoly on blended fabrics of dacron and wool and were not being hurt in any appreciable way by the imports of higher quality goods.

Mr. Daniels produced a series of charts showing imports compared to domestic production of woolen and worsted fabrics and woven apparel cloth, wholly or chief weight wool. These indicated that except in the year 1959–60 there was no correlation between rising imports and declining production. In summary, he saw no justification for the USG to jeopardize the GATT trade negotiations by a new approach for a wool textile arrangement.

Following a brief discussion on some of the points raised, the Under Secretary thanked Mr. Daniels and his colleagues for their interesting and helpful presentation.

Mr. Daniels voluntered to provide additional data on the production and imports of woolen sweaters and other knitwear.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Unclassified. Drafted by Hugh W. Wolff (E/OR/FTD), cleared by Robert Anderson (U) and Nehmer, approved in U on May 12.

2 Not printed. Under Secretary Ball met with three officials of the Wool Product Importers Group: Edwin Elbert, Bernard Hohenberg and Michael P. Daniels.

3 Not printed.

218. Memorandum of Conversation 218. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 13, 1964, 4:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Wool Textiles

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Ryuji Takeuchi, Ambassador of Japan

Mr. Yoshio Ohkawara, Counselor, Japanese Embassy

Mr. George W. Ball, Acting Secretary

Mr. Claus Ruser, Chief, Fibers and Textiles Division, Economic Affairs

Miss Thelma E. Vettel, Special Assistant to the Director for East Asian Affairs

The Ambassador referred to the Acting Secretary's meeting on April 17 with the recent Japanese Economic Mission to the United States and, in particular, to his discussion with them on the wool textile problem.2 He wondered if there had been any further developments.

The Acting Secretary said there still had been no U.S. policy decision to try to press for an international wool textile agreement. He said we were still exploring the problem and that he did not know if we would have to go ahead to propose such an agreement.

The Ambassador remarked that many Japanese believed that this problem had something to do with the Presidential election in the U.S. and that therefore the U.S. Government may have to press for an agreement.

The Acting Secretary reiterated that no decision had been made and that he did not know what the decision would be. He said that the problem was under active consideration. He noted that the Government has had very strong representations from the Congress and is working at the situation. He asked that the Ambassador not conclude that we are going ahead since the matter is still very uncertain.

The Ambassador said that he did not think it was necessary to state again the Japanese Government's strong position against such an agreement. He said opinion in Japan came not only from those concerned in the wool industry itself but also from much wider considerations since it would upset many things upon which Japan bases its policies.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Thelma E. Vettel (FE/EA) on May 21 and approved in U on May 22. The source text is labeled “Part II of III.”

2 Not further identified.

219. Memorandum of Conversation 219. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, May 22, 1964.

SUBJECT

Wool Textiles

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Ugo Morabito, Commercial Minister, Italian Embassy

Mr. Jerome Jacobson, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Economic Affairs, Department of State

Mr. Hugh W. Wolff, Assistant Chief, Fibers and Textiles Division, Office of International Resources

Mr. Morabito said he had received confirmation from his Government that both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Foreign Trade were opposed to an international agreement on wool textiles similar to the Long-Term Cotton Textile Arrangement. He added that he thought the worst was over so far as the United States industry was concerned. Exports of wool textiles from Italy to the United States had fallen off sharply. The down-turn was particularly evident in fabrics, exports of which in 1964 would perhaps be as low as one-third last year.

Mr. Jacobson asked about the position of the Italian industry concerning an international agreement. Mr. Morabito replied that the fabric industry favored an agreement but the knit outerwear industry was opposed. The former were worried about competition from the Japanese, a concern which was not felt by the outerwear people.

In response to a question about the attitude of the EEC countries, Mr. Morabito said that he believed Italy was the only member country seriously interested in exporting wool textiles to the United States. The other governments recognized the primacy of Italy's interest and would go along with her in order to be helpful. Mr. Jacobson asked about the position of the EEC countries on a possible reduction of tariffs on wool textiles in the Kennedy round. Mr. Morabito thought that France was the key country in this respect. The French textile industry was politically powerful and would probably oppose any meaningful reduction.

Mr. Jacobson then turned to a summary of United States wool textile imports for the first three months of 1964. Although this indicated a reduction of 50% in fabric imports from Italy, these figures were somewhat misleading. Over-all imports were almost the same as last year except for the fact that there had been an abnormally large amount of trade during the first quarter of 1963 in a single type of goods (category 126, laces and articles of lace, etc.). Mr. Morabito said that the Italian fabric industry was seriously concerned over its loss of a large portion of the United States market in recent months. The difficulty in the industry was to some extent a reflection of the unsettled political and economic conditions in Italy at this time and recent large wage increases, and he could not predict when the situation would improve. Mr. Morabito said that on his return from his short trip to Canada he hoped to be able to provide more specific information concerning Italy's anticipated exports of wool textiles to the United States.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–IT. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Hugh W. Wolff and approved in E on June 2.

220. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Agriculture (Murphy) to the President's Deputy Special Counsel (Feldman) 220. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of Agriculture (Murphy) to the President's Deputy Special Counsel (Feldman)1

Washington, May 27, 1964.

SUBJECT

Exports of Domestically Produced Extra Long Staple Cotton

This memo is submitted as you requested.

The Problem

We have a current “glut” in the U.S. supply of extra long staple cotton (ELS) created by increased U.S. production and decreased domestic consumption of such cotton. The United States consumption of this cotton had been trending sharply upward for several years. In the last year this upward trend has been sharply reversed. Stocks on hand are moving up from about 89,000 bales on August 1, 1963, to an estimated 183,000 bales on August 1, 1964. Despite the fact that the acreage allotment was cut from 150,000 acres for 1963 to 112,500 acres for this year's crop, it is now expected that the 1964 crop will add some 50,000 bales to the U.S. carryover. As matters now stand under present legislation, it is indicated that an acreage allotment cut to less than 75,000 acres will have to be announced not later than October 15, 1964—a cut of more than 50% in two years. Yield is about one bale per acre.

Domestic production is supplemented by imports, for which there is an annual quota of 85,600 bales.

ELS producers in the U.S. are mostly in Arizona, New Mexico, California and West Texas. Strongly supported by Senator Hayden, they are urging the USDA to conduct an export program to move enough of the surplus to prevent further drastic cuts in acreage. (As explained later, these exports would not in fact prevent sharp acreage cuts.) CCC now has 37,000 bales in inventory and 115,000 bales under price support loans, making a total of about 150,000 bales that could be available for export.

USDA proposed an export sales program for these stocks on competitive bids at not less than the world market price2 and in a manner designed to avoid disruption of world markets. We asked the State Department for its comments. It is estimated that prices received under such a program would be in the range of 40 to 45 cents a pound, compared with a support price of 49.25 cents for this year's crop. The State Department objects strongly to the proposed export sales program because of the interest of other ELS producing countries—U.A.R., Sudan and Peru. State's objections were stated at length in a letter to me, dated May 12, 1964 (Attachment A).3

State's Objections

State's objections have implications which extend beyond this specific problem. They appear to indicate that by a series of consultations with foreign governments we have unduly restricted the freedom of action of the U.S. to protect the interest of its own producers and to expand its exports. Even so, we believe State's objections are considerably overstated.

1. U.S. obligations under the GATT . We strongly disagree with State's view on this. We are satisfied that the proposed program would not violate U.S. obligations under the GATT. The basis for this conclusion is set forth in Attachment B.4 We are at a loss to understand why State should strain to construe this provision against our interest, and we would regard it as quite unfortunate if this should be accepted as the U.S. construction of this provision.

2. Relations with other exporters and assurances given them. Unfortunately, it appears to be true that the U.S. has made representations to ELS exporting countries that might be drawn in question by the proposed export sales program, and USDA is not without fault in this regard. However, to say that this program would be “contrary to solemn promises” appears to be another unwarranted construction against the U.S. own interest. Attached is a copy of the note given to Peru on April 9, 1964, and a copy of the note from Peru which gave rise to it (Attachments C and D).5 Several points should be made about these notes. The U.S. note to Peru does not give solemn promises to Peru concerning future program; rather it states the then current policy. In this connection, it should be noted that the letter from Mr. Sherman of USDA on March 11, 1964, which apparently is the basis for saying USDA concurred in the assurances given Peru on April 9, 1964, contains the following language: “The comments contained in Mr. Duncan's letter are still applicable. It might also be added that the Secretary of Agriculture has broad authority to take action concerning extra long staple cotton. Even though he has shown the kind of restraint referred to in Mr. Duncan's letter, it is possible to review existing policies at any time that circumstances seem to indicate that a need exists.”

The note from Peru is inaccurate as to the facts in several material respects, most significantly perhaps in asserting that there is already a surplus of several hundred thousand bales of American extra long staple cotton in the hands of CCC. The most notable thing about Peru's note, however, is that there is no showing that a U.S. export program would injure Peru in any way—just the unsupported assertion that it would be disastrous. Couple this with the fact that Peru has been claiming for several years to be badly hurt by U.S. policies with respect to ELS, while in actual fact, as pointed out in the U.S. note, both Peru's total imports and exports to the U.S. of cotton have been climbing very sharply. This raises the question whether, in determining how far we should go in abstaining from measures to increase our own exports in order to protect markets of other exporting countries, we are to exercise some independent judgment or merely accept the unsupported assertions of the other exporters.

In the present situation, it is possible that other ELS exporting countries might be helped instead of hurt by a U.S. export program which could help them retain ELS markets now being lost to man-made fibers because of a current shortage in the supply of this kind of cotton in foreign countries. (See Attachment E.)6

3. USDA assurances that no export subsidy was contemplated. The statements in Mr. Ioanes' letter of November 7, 1962,7 were accurate and the proposed export sales program would not be in conflict with them. The statement of Mr. Duncan in his letter of July 5, 1963,7 was not accurate, as the State Department undoubtedly knows, because USDA in 1960 actually announced that such a program was to be put into effect. This announcement was not implemented because of, as I understand it, the strong objections of the State Department. Nevertheless, I agree that USDA has gone too far in giving assurances that could be used to restrict U.S. freedom of action, and I will do what I can to prevent that in the future.

4. Two-price system for ELS . The U.S., after most extended consideration of the difficulties of a two-price system for upland cotton, did not decide to end the two-price system by making impossible the exportation of such cotton. On the contrary, it established more firmly than ever the policy of an export subsidy on upland cotton to maintain our fair share of world markets. There is no reason here to suppose the U.S. would refuse to export ELS cotton at world prices to meet the current problem.

5. The social benefits to U.S. citizens. By my standards, any U.S. citizen is an important number. The number of producers sharing in the 1963 U.S. crop of ELS cotton as landlords or tenants was 5,884. The size of the average farm allotment is about 30 acres. Over 55% of the allotments were less than 15 acres. Fifteen acres of ELS cotton represents a gross income of perhaps $3,500 to $4,000—and a net income of only a fraction of that. Perhaps the ELS price support program should and can be modified along the lines of the new law for upland cotton to make larger producers more competitive in world markets, while retaining added protection for smaller producers. In the meantime, we cannot agree that this group of ELS cotton producers is unimportant.

Effect on 1965 Acreage Allotments

Having said all this, the actual fact is that an export program ending prior to August 1, 1965, to remove current excess stocks would not have a substantial effect on the 1965 acreage allotment. The formula for fixing the allotment is based on anticipated domestic consumption and exports, and the allotment is not reduced because of large supplies on hand. These supplies might shade the judgments used in making estimates of consumption and might impair future general prospects for the program. Such stocks will not in and of themselves result in sharp cutbacks in the acreage allotment that must be announced before October 15, 1964. Indeed, it seems most probable that a sharp cut will be necessary even if present supplies are exported. The growers and Senator Hayden have not asked for a permanent export program.

Treasury Receipts and Balance of Payments

Apart from effects on U.S. producers, the export sales program would reduce Government expenditures and have a favorable effect on the balance of payments. It would probably yield about $30 million in Government receipts and gold inflow. The commercial demand for ELS cotton appears to be strong enough and distinctive enough, so that export sales for dollars would largely represent additional dollar exports not otherwise available to us.

Failure to Implement an Export Sales Program

It is pointed out that the practical alternative to going ahead with the proposed program is for the Government to incur about $15.00 per bale in carrying charges on some 125,000 to 150,000 bales of ELS cotton on a recurring annual basis. The cost which would be incurred in disposing of the excess ELS cotton stocks in the world markets under the present world supply situation will, in a matter of two or three years, be offset by carrying expenses and the excess U.S. supply problem will doubtless still exist at the end of such period.

Recommendations

In view of the fact that exports of U.S. grown ELS cotton at this time, with the current shortage of ELS cotton in foreign countries, would not seriously interfere with marketings by other exporting countries—and in fact might well help them preserve future markets they would otherwise lose to synthetic fibers—I strongly recommend that we move ahead immediately with an export sales program at prevailing world prices. This would have important benefits for the U.S. Government and the U.S. economy, even though it would not prevent sharp cuts in the 1965 acreage allotment. The program would not be announced until after consultations with U.A.R., Sudan, and Peru.

Whether or not the decision is made to go ahead with an export sales program in this instance, we would regard it as important: (1) Not to adopt a construction of Article XVI (3) of the GATT which is adverse to the interest of the U.S.;

(2) To refrain from future assurances to other countries that unnecessarily restrict the freedom of the U.S. to expand exports; and

(3) For the U.S. to exercise some independent judgment about the effects of our exports on world markets and, within the limits of our international obligations, to make its own decisions on export policy with due regard for the legitimate interests of both itself and other exporting countries.

State Department representatives have indicated they would like to take this matter up personally with the Secretary of State. I am sending a copy of this memo and attachments to Assistant Secretary Griff Johnson. I am also sending copies to Walter Jenkins, Ralph Dungan, Bill Roth, and Francis Bator, who have requested them, and to Assistant Secretary of the Treasury John Bullitt, because of that Department's interest in the balance of payments.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. No classification marking.

2 In the margin is the handwritten word “meaning?” with a line drawn to this point in the text. Other handwritten marginalia are illegible.

3 Letter from Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Trezise to Under Secretary Murphy, May 12, not printed.

4 An undated and untitled paper, not printed.

5 Note from Peruvian Ambassador Pastor to Secretary Rusk, March 3, and note from Deputy Assistant Secretary Trezise to Ambassador Pastor, April 9. The notes are not attached but are in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON PERU.

6 An undated and untitled paper on Egyptian extra-long staple cotton, not printed.

7 Not found.

221. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 221. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 3, 1964.

SUBJECT

Extra-Long Staple Cotton

This memorandum is for Messrs. Dungan, Feldman, and Bator.

My memorandum to Mr. Buddy dated May 12, 1964 transmitted a copy of a letter to Under Secretary of Agriculture Murphy setting forth the Department's objections to a proposed export subsidy on extra-long staple cotton.2 Mr. Murphy has commented upon that letter in a memorandum to the White House dated May 27, 1964.3 Our comments on Mr. Murphy's memorandum are forwarded herewith.

The points we wish to stress are these: (1) under present circumstances we cannot grant an export subsidy consistently with our obligations under the GATT; (2) the benefits to be derived from such a subsidy, which would affect only one percent of our total cotton production, are nowhere near commensurate with the damage that would be done to our relations with the major producers of extra-long staple cotton and with the developing countries generally; and (3) the present surplus results from a substantial increase in the acreage allotment since 1960–61 due to overestimating the anticipated consumption increase. This is a problem which can and should be corrected domestically, rather than exported to the disruption of the world market.

J.J. deMartino 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use.

2 See footnote 3, Document 220. Read's May 12 memorandum to Buddy is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47.

3  Document 220.

4  De Martino signed for Read above Read's typed signature.

222. Note From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 222. Note From Robert W. Komer of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 10, 1964.

Mac—

A shrill scream on long staple cotton, which I just heard about from State (I do wish Francis would clue the rest of us on the things with political hooks attached).

NEA is terrified that our doing something we've never done before will be taken by Cairo as a clear signal that we've changed our policy—coming just after Eshkol visit.2 I gather Peru will scream too.

Can't this decision be stalled until November? I realize that favorable market is reason for moving now, but how much net gain is there for US? Does LBJ need any more political support? And are the financial gains enough to justify?

At minimum, if we do go ahead, let's be sure to explain first to Lima and Cairo why we're doing so. This might help a little.

RWK

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Secret. An attached note from Bator to Buddy, dated June 8, notes that a meeting had been scheduled for Thursday, June 11, at 2:30 p.m. to resolve the dispute between the Departments of State and Agriculture over whether the Commodity Credit Corporation should be authorized to export domestic extra-long staple cotton at a subsidized price.

2 Israeli Prime Minister Eshkol made an official visit to Washington June 1–3.

223. Memorandum for the Record 223. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, June 11, 1964.

SUBJECT

Extra Long Staple Cotton—Meeting, Thursday, June 11, 1964—Situation Room, White House

PRESENT

White House—Buddy, Feldman, Brubeck, Bator

State—G.G. Johnson, Grant, Adams, Nehmer

Agriculture—Murphy

STR—Roth

CEA—Ackley

B.O.B.—Capron, Schultze

It was agreed that: 1. Agriculture will attempt to speed up the export of foreign produced ELS, taking care, however, not to drive down the world price appreciably below its present level. (We shall know more about the prospects, and Agriculture will consult with State, after next week's bids are in.)

2. Agriculture, State and B.O.B. will explore the possibility of disposing of ELS stock under PL 480.

3. Messrs. Murphy and Feldman are at liberty to tell the U.S. parties at interest that (a) the foreign stock will be sold at an accelerated rate—subject to the proviso about price; (b) subject to the state of the market, an export program for domestic ELS will almost certainly be undertaken with, however, no bids to be accepted at less than the 49 cent domestic support price. About the possibility of exporting domestic at less than the support price, they are to be noncommittal and avoid raising people's hopes.

4. State is to warn its clients that we do expect to reduce our ELS stock at the fastest rate possible without breaking the market but that we do not, as of now, plan to sell domestic at less than the current U.S. support price. It should be made clear, however, that as regards the future, no one can be certain.

FMB

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. No classification marking. Prepared by Francis M. Bator. An attached note from Bator to McGeorge Bundy, dated June 11, reads: “Mac: I have checked this with Murphy and Johnson's man, Nehmer. They are content.” A further handwritten note by Buddy reads: “Good work. Told D. Walker, 6/12/64.” Bator's typed notes, June 11, which he apparently drafted in preparation for this meeting, are ibid.

224. Memorandum From the Department of State to Members of the President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee 224. Memorandum From the Department of State to Members of the President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee 1

Washington, June 13, 1964.

SUBJECT

Wool Textiles

The Department of State has made an intensive investigation of the wool textile import problem. As part of this investigation, two Special Representatives of the Secretary of State, Messrs. Wilson W. Wyatt and Warren M. Christopher, made a special trip to Europe in mid-May. It is their belief that the prospects for an international wool textile agreement are remote at this time, but that an alternative proposal may offer a solution. Their report is attached at Tab A.

Based on our investigation, we have reached the following conclusions: 1. The scope of our wool textile import problem is not industry-wide but is limited to knit outerwear. Overall imports of wool textiles, measured on a square yard equivalent basis, increased only 1.5 percent in 1963 over 1962. Total imports in the first four months of 1964 declined one-third from the same period in 1963. Imports during the twelve-month period ending April 1964 were also significantly lower than during the twelve-month period ending April 1963.

Imports in 1963 from all EEC countries, from the United Kingdom, and from Hong Kong were all below 1962 levels. Imports from Japan, however, increased 12 percent. These nine countries accounted for 85 percent of our wool textile imports in 1963.

Woven fabric imports (about 30 percent of the total) and yarn imports (about 13 percent of the total) were down slightly in 1963 and in the first four months of 1964.

On the other hand, imports of tops (about 8 percent of the total) were up in 1963, but were much lower in the first third of 1964 than in the same period a year ago. Imports of apparel (about 35 percent of the total) rose in 1963, and have remained high in 1964. This rise in apparel imports, however, was caused solely by increased imports of knit outerwear from Italy. Imports of other apparel remained about the same as a year earlier. The value of knit outerwear imports in calendar year 1962 was $78 million. In 1963, their value was $99 million. Two-thirds of the knit outerwear came from Italy in 1963, whereas only half the 1962 imports were of Italian origin.

A more detailed picture of our wool textile import situation is attached at Tab B.2

2. Wyndham White's Article XIX proposal offers the most promising approach to meet the problem of increased imports of knit outerwear. Five approaches have been suggested to meet the wool textile import problem: (a) Negotiation of an international wool textile agreement patterned after the Long-Term Cotton Textile Arrangement. The governments of our major wool textile suppliers have stated that they would not accept an international agreement. Wyndham White has said an international agreement is “completely non-negotiable”. (See Tab A.) Although some European wool textile industries are now in favor of an agreement, no European government has adopted this position. The British Government has repeatedly stated that no matter what position its industry takes, it will not support nor participate in an international agreement. The Japanese Government is even more adamantly opposed to such an agreement.

Without United Kingdom participation there is no hope for a wool textile agreement. Even if the United Kingdom were to participate, obtaining Japanese participation would be an extremely difficult task and seriously damaging to our overall relations with Japan. (See Tab C.)3

(b) Import quotas. The Administration has refused to recommend such action for three reasons. First, imposition of quotas would either require the United States to pay substantial compensation or expose the United States to damaging retaliation. Second, it would significantly weaken our chances for a successful Kennedy Round. Third, it would establish a precedent for protection which could rapidly spread to other products. We see no reason for altering the Administration's position in the present circumstances.

(c) Escape clause or national security action. The industry has declined to take its case before the Tariff Commission. The Office of Emergency Planning has concluded that textiles do not require national security action.

(d) Negotiation of higher tariffs or quotas in the Kennedy Round. The mere suggestion that the United States may have wool textiles on its exceptions list for the Kennedy Round has evoked strong protests in Europe, particularly in Italy. We could negotiate increased protection of wool textiles as part of the Kennedy Round only if we were willing to make the bargain by granting concessions wholly out of line with the value of the protection we would receive.

(e) New interpretation of GATT Article XIX. Wyndham White has suggested a new interpretation of the GATT Article XIX “escape clause” to permit discriminatory action when imports from one or a few countries cause “market disruption”. The proposal is aimed at meeting fears that deep tariff cuts in the Kennedy Round could lay domestic markets open to disruptive low-cost imports. Wyndham White weds the broadened Article XIX interpretation to a concurrent agreement by the major trading countries to take discriminatory action only if an international panel of experts finds actual “market disruption”. He would use the “market disruption” standards agreed to by the GATT contracting parties in 1960 and set out in the Long-Term Arrangement.

If Wyndham White's proposal were adopted, the United States might be able to claim “market disruption” in knit outerwear. As pointed out in section (1), if we could meet the problem in this segment of our wool textile industry, the whole wool textile import situation would probably be stabilized.

3. Wyndham White's proposal requires intensive study. Wyndham White's proposal seems to be, therefore, the most promising approach to our wool textile import problem. Its ramifications extend, of course, far beyond this problem, and they will require careful analysis. We have already begun an intensive study of the proposal's possibilities in connection with our preparation for the Kennedy Round negotiations. At our next Geneva meeting on the proposal, we will suggest that a GATT Working Party be established to analyze the proposal.

Although our study is by no means complete, we believe that Wyndham White's proposal may have several positive advantages, particularly as applied to our wool textile situation. The proposal creates, however, a number of domestic legal and political questions that must be resolved in the context of our overall trade policy. These questions include the wisdom of permitting developed countries to impose discriminatory restrictions, the scope of our own domestic legal authority to enter into such an agreement, and the effect of the proposal on our relations with less developed countries.

We believe that we may be able to resolve these questions, at least for wool textiles, but a considered judgment must await the conclusion of our study. As an alternative, we may be able to suggest a variant of the Wyndham White proposal which could meet our requirements.

Recommendations

(1) In line with the findings of Messrs. Wyatt and Christopher (Tab A), we should proceed as rapidly as possible with our intensive study of Wyndham White's proposal and variations of this proposal, with particular attention to our wool textile problem.

(2) We should impress upon the domestic industry and the interested members of Congress that this course seems to be the most fruitful approach to the situation, although we recognize that the industry considers knit outerwear imports to be only a portion of the total problem. We should also indicate that if the industry should reject this approach, it is difficult to foresee any feasible alternative in the future.

(3) If Wyndham White's proposal should not be adopted by the GATT within a reasonable period of time, we should re-examine the situation. No matter what happens, the entire wool textile problem should be kept under close and constant surveillance by this Committee.

Tab A

REPORT OF THE SPECIAL TEXTILE MISSION

The mission left Washington on May 11 for Europe for such conferences as might be indicated in determining whether an international wool textile agreement is presently negotiable. Initial conferences were scheduled for Geneva, and, depending upon developments, it was contemplated that there might be additional conferences thereafter in one or more of the following: London, Brussels, Rome, Hong Kong, and Tokyo.

Conferences in Geneva with Ambassador Blumenthal and other members of the United States Mission and with Eric Wyndham White, the Executive Secretary of GATT, revealed that a new procedure under Article XIX of the GATT for dealing discriminatorily with problems of market disruption was in the process of being launched with the United States, the United Kingdom, the EEC, and Japan for consideration as a part of the machinery of GATT.

Since (1) the groundwork for this development had already been thoroughly laid, (2) the proposed procedure appeared to hold some promise as a method of solving the wool textile problem, (3) the proposed procedure was regarded by the Executive Secretary of GATT as of vital importance to the success of the Kennedy Round, and (4) open discussion of a possible international wool textile agreement at this time was thought by Wyndham White to be possibly fatal to the consideration of the new procedure, the mission concluded that it was unwise to proceed to other capitals to discuss the possibility of an agreement, without further decision in Washington.

The mission gave intensive study in Geneva to what might be accomplished through the context of the new GATT procedure, and how this development might be directed toward solution of the wool textile problem. It believes that the contemplated new procedure can be effective in achieving solutions in meritorious wool textile cases, such as in the knit outerwear problem. It also is convinced that cooperation with respect to consideration of the proposed new procedure will be helpful to the United States with respect to our general wool textile problem. Therefore, it is necessary that the proposed new procedure be studied intensively and expeditiously.

The mission found that Wyndham White, who had been of decisive benefit in securing the cotton textile agreement, is convinced that an international wool textile agreement is “completely non-negotiable” under present circumstances. The mission also is inclined to believe that the prospects for such an agreement at this time are remote.

1. New Procedures under Article XIX of GATT . Wyndham White has developed a proposal for new procedures under Article XIX of GATT which he is vigorously pursuing in discussions in Geneva with representatives of the EEC, Japan, the United States, and the United Kingdom. These new procedures have a practical significance at the present time because of the deep linear tariff cuts contemplated under the Kennedy Round. Contracting parties, particularly the countries of Western Europe, may be reluctant to make deep cuts unless there can be some mechanism under GATT which can be used to limit rising imports. Recognition of the problem of wool textiles also explains Wyndham White's desire to gain acceptance for these new procedures in the near future.

The new Article XIX procedures would not require an amendment of GATT. The procedures would permit discriminatory action (quantitative restrictions as well as increases in tariffs) as opposed to past invocations of Article XIX on a nondiscriminatory basis. This article has been used from time to time in the past when an importing country felt that it needed to take emergency action because imports were creating serious injury. As a matter of policy, the contracting parties had not used Article XIX on a discriminatory basis. However, with the development of low-cost imports, which may be exacerbated by the tariff cuts contemplated under the Kennedy Round, it is necessary to develop these procedures to permit restrictions on particular imports from particular countries which may cause market disruption.

The ability to take discriminatory action under Article XIX, therefore, would be completely new. Wyndham White is convinced that this is a means of solution for reasonable and meritorious cases of market disruption from disruptive imports at excessively lower prices. He contemplates that rollbacks in trade would be possible under these procedures.

Precedents exist for this approach in the escape clause or safeguard provisions of the Treaty of Rome and the Stockholm Convention. Even though the member states of the EEC and EFTA had entered into free trade association among themselves, with the understanding the safeguard provisions could be invoked in case a particular industry was being hurt by imports from another member state, the safeguard provisions of the Rome Treaty have been little used and the similar provisions in the Stockholm Convention appear never to have been used.

Wyndham White proposes that a small panel of high-level, respected, and experienced people be constituted to pass on market disruption claims. The panel would be similarly constituted as the one which arbitrated the “chicken war”. As in the case of the poultry arbitration, it is envisaged that action could be rapid, within two weeks or so. In an emergency, restrictions could be imposed before the panel could act. The restrictions could remain if a finding to the contrary is not made by the panel within thirty days. The decision of the panel would be binding; there would be no appeal to the GATT contracting parties. Compensation would not necessarily have to be paid if action were taken under the new procedures. In any event, this question is being ignored in the consideration being given to the new procedures at this time. Wyndham White assumes that the new procedures would not result in any compensation or in grounds for retaliation being established.

Wyndham White contemplates that if a consensus in favor of the new procedures can first be obtained from the EEC, Japan, the United States, and the United Kingdom, a working party would be established to work out details. He envisages that the Big Four would adopt these procedures and the others could subscribe to them. The new procedures would be embodied in a protocol, probably as part of the Kennedy Round, but it would not be necessary to wait until the conclusion of the trade negotiations for the new procedures to become effective.

Looking at the new procedures from the standpoint of wool textiles, we feel that they would be in our interest. They would offer the possibility of new discriminatory action in meritorious cases. They would probably remove the element of retaliation from Article XIX cases such as resulted from our invocation of this article in the carpet and glass cases in 1962. They would permit quick action. They have the possibility of becoming effective in the immediate future. They would not prevent consideration of a wool textile agreement at a later date, should such a course be decided upon. In short, we feel the new procedures would launch an international procedure for dealing judiciously with market disruption on a discriminatory basis.

2. Probable Application of the New Procedures to Wool Textiles. The new procedures would permit the United States to deal with import problems faced by those sectors of the wool textile industry facing market disruption. The discriminatory application of these procedures would make possible action in the form of quantitative restrictions against imports from specific countries with regard to specific categories of wool textiles. It is not inconceivable that consultations which the United States might have with the governments involved prior to invoking Article XIX would result in these countries taking action themselves to control their exports without the need for the United States to impose quantitative restrictions on their trade.

The governments now involved in consideration of these new procedures accounted in 1963 for 85 percent of our total imports of wool textiles. Cases might be initiated upon the achievement of a consensus from among the “Big Four”. It might be possible to institute a case by late summer or early fall.

It must be emphasized that this procedure can only be effective with regard to good cases where the United States can show reasonably that there is a situation of market disruption. The objectives of the new procedures would be defeated if the United States or any other importing country were to submit “poor” cases constantly for adjudication.

It should also be emphasized that invoking the new procedures does not close the door to other actions by us if, by chance, we should not be successful as to what we consider to be meritorious wool textile cases.

3. Present Sensitivity of Discussion of Wool Textile Agreement. We consider it essential that there be no public discussion of the relation of the new procedures to the United States domestic wool textile problem. To do so might well kill any chances for the new procedures being adopted since other countries now considering these procedures might feel that we are interested in them only as a means of solving our domestic wool textile problem.

Furthermore, it was, and still is, our feeling that a discussion of a wool textile agreement with other governments while they were considering these new procedures could taint or jeopardize the chances for success of either the general problem or the textile problem. We felt that the power of decision on the basic proposal to develop new procedures for Article XIX would be pre-empted by discussion of a wool textile agreement with other countries at this time. Since it was beyond our responsibility to pass judgment on the new procedures, we did not wish to take any action to jeopardize the current consideration of them. Hence we did not proceed beyond Geneva and for the same reason we did not discuss the wool textile problem with representatives of other governments as were present in Geneva. In any event, as pointed out above, we had the judgment of Wyndham White as to the non-negotiability of a wool textile agreement at this time.

Wilson W. Wyatt 4
Warren M. Christopher

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles, Cabinet Committee on Textiles. Limited Official Use. According to a covering memorandum from Nehmer to Read, also dated June 13, copies of the memorandum were distributed to Secretary of Commerce Hodges, Secretary of Labor Wirtz, Under Secretary of Agriculture Murphy, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury Wallace, and the President's Deputy Special Counsel Feldman.

2 “Analysis of Recent Trends in Wool Textile Imports,” not printed.

3 “Attitude of Foreign Governments to an International Wool Textile Agreement,” not printed.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed signatures.

225. Memorandum From the Department of Commerce and the Department of State to President Johnson 225. Memorandum From the Department of Commerce and the Department of State to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 17, 1964.

The President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee met on June 16 to consider a course of action on the wool textile import problem. These are the principal points made at the meeting: 1. Commitments to leaders of the industry and Congress have been repeatedly made by the Administration to contain the rate of wool textile imports.

2. An international agreement appears to be the only feasible means to implement this commitment.

3. The opposition of governments of the principal exporting countries to an agreement has been strong and consistent.

4. Upon determining this opposition last year, the Administration suggested to our industry that it attempt to change the international climate by talking with its counterparts abroad, after which the Administration would pursue the matter again.

5. The industry has reported success with large segments of the European wool textile industries, who consider the time appropriate for a new effort. However, without solicitation the governments of the U.K., Japan, and Italy have informed us that they have not changed their opposition to an agreement.

6. The Secretary of State sent Wilson Wyatt and Warren Christopher abroad last month to determine the attitudes of the governments concerned. After talks with the GATT secretariat, whose opinion was that an agreement was “completely non-negotiable” and who was proposing new Article XIX procedures for dealing with disruptive imports, the mission returned to Washington to report. They felt that any approach to other governments while the Article XIX proposal, which was in its early formative stages, was under consideration might preempt the decision of our government before full study could be given to it in Washington.

7. The State Department and the Trade Negotiator's Office expressed the view that the prospects for an international wool textile agreement are remote at this time and that for the U.S. to press its desire for such an agreement would seriously interfere with the attainment of our objectives in the Kennedy Round and would interfere with consideration of the Article XIX proposal for dealing with disruptive imports, including wool textiles.

8. The Departments of Commerce, Labor, Agriculture, and Treas-ury thought that because Wyatt and Christopher did not explore the possibility of an agreement with other governments, the Administration had not yet fulfilled its agreement with leaders of the industry and Congress to pursue the matter. In addition they thought the Article XIX proposal inappropriate for wool textiles. Also they believed that a way could be found to carry on explorations of an international wool textile agreement with the countries concerned with a minimum interference to the Kennedy Round negotiations or to the Article XIX proposal and that these explorations must take place promptly to fulfill the Administration's commitment to the leaders of the industry and Congress. The Departments of Commerce, Labor, and Agriculture thought that the U.S. might improve its position in the Kennedy Round and on the Article XIX proposal by discussions of the wool textile problem.

9. The Committee decided to refer to the President the decision on whether discussions on wool textiles with other countries should take place at this time.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles, Wool Advisory Committee. Limited Official Use. Drafted by James S. Love (Commerce), assisted by Stanley Nehmer. (Memorandum from Love to Hodges, June 17; ibid.) Love referred it to Myer Feldman, the President's Deputy Special Counsel, the same day, along with a letter indicating that he was still awaiting Department of State clearance. (Letter from Love to Feldman, June 17; ibid.)

226. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to President Johnson 226. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) and the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 18, 1964.

SUBJECT

Wool Textiles

The issue for decision is whether the United States should now mount an effort to obtain an international wool textile agreement.

1. We recognize that there is substantial Congressional pressure to curtail wool textile imports. We have been living with it. But, in spite of the textile industry's representations, this is not a situation that is jeopardizing an industry or contributing seriously to unemployment. The textile industry as a whole has never been more prosperous. The decrease in production in the wool textile sector has been due significantly to the competition of synthetic fibers. Imports have appreciably increased only in one category of wool textiles—knit outerwear.

2. In spite of this, we have taken careful soundings to determine the feasibility of a wool textile agreement. Over the past year and a half we have explored the problem through bilateral approaches and in international meetings. The results have been uniformly negative. The governments of the three major supplying countries have all indicated their strong opposition. The United Kingdom is “adamantly opposed”. Japan opposes an agreement “of any nature”. The EEC countries would demand terms we could not afford to meet. Wyndham White, Executive Secretary of GATT, whose support was indispensable to us in negotiating the Cotton Textile Arrangement, views a wool textile agreement as being “completely non-negotiable”.

3. We have gone as far as we can prudently go at the present time. Some months ago, in an effort to prepare the ground for a possible agreement, we encouraged the domestic wool textile industry to enlist wool textile producers abroad to soften up their own governments. These efforts did not succeed in changing any government positions.

Nevertheless, in May Secretary Rusk sent Wilson Wyatt and Warren Christopher to Europe to explore once again the feasibility of an international wool textile agreement.

This mission was undertaken with full awareness that such an exploration at this time might have dangerous repercussions on the United States position in the Kennedy Round. For that reason, before proceeding to other countries, Wyatt and Christopher were requested to take soundings in Geneva. There they found that Wyndham White was preparing to launch a major new procedure under the GATT. This new procedure offered the prospect of relief for meritorious cases in which it could be demonstrated to the satisfaction of an international panel that imports produced “market disruption”.

Wyndham White advised Wyatt and Christopher that it would be extremely unwise to approach the governments of the major producing countries (London, Rome, Brussels, Hong Kong and Tokyo) about a wool textile agreement at the present time. Such conversations, he asserted, would seriously prejudice American interests in the Kennedy Round, while destroying the possible chances for the new procedure for disruptive imports.

Upon receipt of this advice, Messrs. Wyatt and Christopher returned to the United States to report their findings.

4. We are now in the most sensitive phase of the Kennedy Round negotiations. We are persuaded that we would seriously impair our bargaining position if we were to push further at this time in an effort to obtain a wool textile agreement. Such an effort would jeopardize understandings reached on the key rules, and in particular the basic agreement to make 50% linear offers with a minimum of exceptions—the heart of the United States position in the Kennedy Round.

At a later point these dangers will not be so acute. Once offers and exceptions have actually been made, the danger to the Kennedy Round will be lessened.

Conclusions

Under these circumstances, we believe that the best chance of achieving effective control of wool textile imports is through the Kennedy Round negotiations. Other countries besides the United States are interested in protecting their wool textile producers. There is, therefore, a good chance that we could work out a special quantitative arrangement for textiles by trading tariff reductions on wool textile items.

We strongly recommend, therefore, that, at this critical time, we do not make a further effort—which would almost certainly prove futile—to negotiate a wool textile agreement. We make this recommendation on the understanding that the problem would be tackled as a part of the Kennedy Round negotiations after exceptions have been tabled toward the end of the year.

We further recommend that the President request the Tariff Commission to make an escape clause finding dealing with the wool textile industry. The industry has so far refused to take this step. However, we believe that the mere fact that such an investigation was underway could be most useful in strengthening our hand during the negotiations.

Christian A. Herter

George W. Ball

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Vol. I [1 of 2], Box 47. Limited Official Use. Attached to another copy of this memorandum is a June 18 note from Bator to Secretary Hodges, indicating that he wanted Hodges' “decision about how to proceed,” and that Herter and Ball “would like to meet with you before the issue goes up to the President.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles—Wool Advisory Committee) Attached to another copy is a handwritten note, June 19, indicating that the original was signed by Ball and handcarried to the White House by E. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4)

227. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Arab Republic 227. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Arab Republic 1

Washington, June 22, 1964, 6 p.m.

5956. Ref: Deptel Cairo 4103, Khartoum 226, Lima 643,2 and Dept A–157 to Cairo.3

Extra-Long Staple Cotton ( ELS )

Dept consulting with Embassies of Peru, Sudan, and UAR today re foreign-grown strategic stockpile (now virtually all Egyptian) and US-grown CCC stocks ELS along following lines. Recipient posts requested make similar representations ASAP and report fully on discussions and reactions.

1. USG has examined at high level questions of disposal from strategic stockpile of foreign-grown ELS and of large accumulation of domestically-grown ELS in CCC inventory. As pointed out at recent meeting of ICAC in Frankfurt, ELS supply situation in world markets continues very tight. We understand Sudan has sold almost all (at least 90 percent) of current crop which reduced from last year. Neither UAR nor Peru has ELS for export this time. ICAC viewed 1964–65 season as one of continued short supply of ELS. It is our view that next several months best time to dispose of ELS stockpile and to provide export opportunity for domestically-produced ELS without adversely affecting interests other producers. Accordingly, USG is planning to take following actions.

2. Stockpile ELS . About 75,000 US bale equivalents sold from stockpile up to present. Remaining balance in stockpile about 100,000 US bale equivalents. Present disposal program expires June 30.

USDA proposes announce later during present week monthly sales quota of 15,000 US bale equivalents each month for period July–December 1964, without carry-over of unsold quantity to succeeding months. Thus, not more than 15,000 US bale equivalent will be sold during any one month.

Recent stockpile sales have not adversely affected world market. Prices realized on stockpile sales have been increasing, reflecting upward trend world market. Minimum acceptable prices by USDA will be in line international prices as in program expiring June 30.

For Cairo. UAR delegation ICAC Plenary Frankfurt suggested that we dispose entire balance of stockpile by September 1964. We do not feel it is in interest UAR or other ELS producing countries to place on market such a large quantity in short period. This could affect prices downward. Consider USDA proposal more advantageous all concerned.

3. American-Grown ELS . Stocks of American-grown ELS in CCC inventory very high, about 140,000 US bales after August 1. USDA planning inaugurate for 1964–65 season (August 1–July 31) sales-for-export program for American-grown ELS by competitive bids. For the period ending December 31, 1964, monthly amount to be offered for sale will be small, not exceeding 5,000 bales. USDA will not accept bids at less than support price but no assurance can be given that this policy will continue for indefinite future. If any change contemplated, i.e., if USG considering accepting bids below support price, USG will consult with three govts concerned before policy change made. Average support price announced by USDA for cotton year beginning August 1 is 49.25 cents. Actual price around average will depend grade and staple length.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON 17 US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by J.A. Harary (E/OR/FTD) and Stanley Nehmer on June 22; cleared by Solomon (ARA), Jean H. Mulliken (ECP), Robert W. Stookey (AF), Enoch S. Duncan (NE), Francis Bator, Under Secretary Murphy (USDA), Charles L. Schultze (Bureau of the Budget), Gardner Ackley (Council of Economic Advisers), and William M. Roth (STR); and approved for transmission by G. Griffith Johnson. Also sent to Khartoum and Lima.

2 Dated April 6. (Ibid.)

3 Dated March 24. (Ibid., INCO–COTTON 17 UAR-US)

228. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 228. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, June 28, 1964.

SUBJECT

Sugar Legislation

Foreign provisions—quotas—of the sugar legislation expire this year. Prospects seem dim for passage of five-year legislation worked out among the agencies. Much more likely is a simple one-year extension of the Sugar Act, a measure harmful to our foreign policy interests.

Background

Domestic farmers and offshore suppliers of sugar—represented by U.S. refiners—have locked horns. The farmers want to increase their share of this market at the expense of offshore suppliers. For the first time in years, the offshore suppliers appear well enough represented in the Congress, particularly in the House, to thwart the farmers. Particularly, Chairman Cooley of the House Agriculture Committee strongly holds the view that domestic farmers are entitled to no greater share of the market in the future than at present. At most, he would grant them a temporary increase in quotas. This would cover the extra production of sugar which the Department of Agriculture encouraged last year during the period of threatened shortage. However, in the Senate, domestic interests are more powerfully represented.

The Administration worked out a compromise package which, in effect, gives a temporarily larger quota to domestic farmers so that their cutback in allowable acreage will not be too great. It recoups this cutback for offshore suppliers by allowing them to enjoy all the growth in this market over the next five years or so. Tactically this package was to have been submitted to the House Agriculture Committee by Secretary Freeman. However, when Chairman Cooley indicated that he would reject the program, Secretary Freeman retreated. He now considers it unwise for the Administration to advance a proposal likely to incur the wrath of both the House and the Senate, of both the refiners and the domestic farmers. Instead, he wants Chairman Cooley to start hearings without the Administration testifying at the outset. Chairman Cooley is opposed and indicates that he will seek a simple one-year extension of existing legislation. The press of time and the desire of many legislators to avoid a major tussle on sugar this year suggest that a one-year extension may, indeed, be likely.

From our point of view there are substantial objections to this: 1) The beet growers next year will have a better case than today for increasing their quota. They will have not only the excess of production over quotas in the current year but in 1965 as well. This would not happen if acreage controls were imposed on the farmers but Secretary Freeman indicates that he will not so order. Chairman Cooley argues, as do some lawyers, that the Secretary must throw on controls but the Secretary feels he can defy them.

2) The greater the certainty in the market the less volatile prices will be. Uncertainty regarding U.S. sugar policies will tend to keep world prices higher than they would otherwise be, benefiting Cuba in particular.

3) Within several years we may move into a glutted world sugar market. Prices would collapse barring an international sugar agreement establishing floor and ceiling prices. So long as U.S. sugar policies are uncertain, it becomes difficult if not meaningless to negotiate such a world agreement. The sooner we establish our policies the sooner we can effectively help to bring about a world-wide sugar agreement.

4) Offshore suppliers look to a revision of the Act so that the global quota—the Cuban quota—can be divided among them. Indeed, many such suppliers committed sugar to the U.S. late last year at prices well below those prevailing in world markets just so as to establish their claims for higher quotas. They will feel let down if the Administration fails to make the effort now to amend the Act.

Tactics

The Administration could seize the initiative in sugar. The President could order Secretary Freeman to take the Administration program up to the Hill. And he could use his persuasive powers to bring about some settlement between the conflicting sugar interests. There would be a bruising battle. For this reason Mr. Feldman at the White House has sided with Secretary Freeman, although he agrees that a simple one-year extension without acreage controls is also undesirable.

I would judge it unlikely that the President would instruct Secretary Freeman to lead an Administration effort on the Hill to bring about hearings and an intense drive for passage of the Administration's program. The chances are still less that such an initiative would be successful. Thus, time and events strongly point to a one-year extension.

While it is regrettable, in terms of our foreign policy, that the Administration's package program is not likely to be acted on this year, I believe that an effort to persuade the President to override Mr. Freeman would be futile, and therefore we are not recommending that you discuss this with the President at this time.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, July 1964, United States. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jacobson on June 25 and cleared by Arthur Wexler (H). A note on the source text reads: “S[ecretary] saw;” another reads: “Superseded by memo of June 29 prepared for lunch w/President.” This memorandum has not been found.

229. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Acting Secretary of State Ball 229. Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Acting Secretary of State Ball 1

Washington, July 7, 1964.

SUBJECT

Sugar

Recommendation

That you stress to the President: (1) That a one-year extension of the Sugar Act—regrettably necessary because of the tight legislative calendar—should not prejudice the foreign share of this market. For this to be avoided, acreage controls called for under law must be applied in 1965.

(2) The problem of surplus domestic production, if any, will not appear before 1965. The problem should be met at that time and not today. There exists no need now, therefore, for the grant of a temporary quota to domestic growers.

(3) Secretary Freeman apparently wants no acreage controls and a bigger domestic quota now. That will prompt strongly adverse reactions abroad, particularly in Latin America. It will leave the impression that the Administration has buckled to domestic interests contrary to our foreign trade policies and the principles of the Alliance for Progress.

Discussion

We are clearly heading for a one-year extension of the present Sugar Act. We don't object provided that in the coming year no measures are taken which prejudice the share of the market assigned to foreign suppliers. The Department of Agriculture, the partisan of domestic farmers, has two such measures in mind: (1) It wants authority from the Congress to grant domestic growers a special quota of up to 500,000 tons of sugar for use this year or next. It argues that the domestic quota this year is less than production, hence the need for extra quotas. (Actually, this year's excess production is not available for marketing until next year.)2

(2) It opposes acreage controls in 1965 on domestic growers. Such controls appear mandatory in the kind of weak market we are likely to face. However, Secretary Freeman says he has a moral commitment to domestic growers to permit them to grow freely in 1965 and excess production in 1965–66 will therefore follow.

The two measures—excess production and the “temporary” quota—will distinctly prejudice foreign suppliers. Quotas once granted domestic farmers are not taken away. Excess production argues for quota relief—at somebody's (foreign suppliers') expense.

Neither action is warranted. Only in mid-1965 will we know the extent to which farmers have over-produced. Then—and not before—temporary quota relief should be granted on a one-shot basis. New legislation should be considered free of any argument that the crop in the ground is way in excess of quota; hence the need for acreage controls.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, July 1964, United States. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jerome Jacobson. A note on the source text reads: “U saw.”

2 A handwritten notation in the margin next to this sentence reads: “NB.”

230. Memorandum of Conversation 230. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, July 10, 1964.

SUBJECT

Wool Textiles

PARTICIPANTS

Ambassador Ryuji Takeuchi, Embassy of Japan

Mr. George W. Ball, Acting Secretary

Mr. Stanley Nehmer, Deputy Director, Office of International Resources

Mr. Robert Anderson, Special Assistant to the Under Secretary

Mr. Richard W. Petree, Acting Officer-in-Charge, EA/J

Ambassador Takeuchi remarked that he had been surprised at the small four-vote margin of Prime Minister Ikeda's victory in the Liberal Democratic Party presidential election on July 10. Although it was gratifying that the Prime Minister had won on the first ballot, the meager margin by which he defeated his factional opponents would significantly affect the strength of his position in forming a new cabinet and establishing the policies of the new administration. The Prime Minister will probably be forced to give more weight to consideration of the views of the other major factional leaders in the party than he has heretofore.

Wool Textiles

Ambassador Takeuchi said the first matter he wished to raise with the Acting Secretary was the wool textile mission the U.S. Government reportedly plans to send to London and Rome.2 The Government of Japan (GOJ) had asked him to obtain more information about the background and purpose of this mission.

The Acting Secretary said that when he had met this spring with a group of Japanese industrialists, he told them that we do not know whether domestic pressure from industry and Congress would force the United States to seek a wool textile agreement. The concern of Congress and domestic industry has made it seem advisable to look into the feasibility of an agreement. The forthcoming mission will be an exploratory one and will not prejudice the U.S. decision concerning an agreement. There have been indications, especially from the British, that such an agreement is not looked upon with favor. We therefore wish to make a sounding of attitudes toward a wool textile agreement in these two capitals in Europe. We do not, of course, know what the U.S. Government's decision on a wool textile agreement will be. If we encounter serious opposition to the idea in London and Rome, this of course will be taken into account in our deliberation of the problem. We hope only that the forthcoming mission will be able to get a better sense of the opposition we have heard exists in London and a clearer idea of the views of the Italians, about which we do not have very much formation.

Ambassador Takeuchi asked if, therefore, the forthcoming wool textile mission to Europe will be different from the 1961 mission of Acting Secretary Ball to Tokyo on cotton textiles. The Acting Secretary said it would be quite different, because in the case of his visit to Tokyo he was acting on the basis of a U.S. Government decision, whereas the mission to London and Rome is exploratory and does not reflect any U.S. Government decision at this time. He suggested to the Ambassador that he report to the GOJ that the mission to London and Rome will be entirely exploratory.

Ambassador Takeuchi asked whether the U.S. Government plans to send a wool textile mission to Japan, emphasizing that the GOJ is not asking for such a mission. The Acting Secretary said that if the exploratory mission to London and Rome found some indication of favor for a conference on wool textiles, the U.S. would probably send a mission to Tokyo. At this stage, however, Japan being farther away, it seemed best to explore the current attitudes toward a wool textile agreement in London and Rome, since British and Italian wool textile imports into the United States are among the top three in volume, along with Japan. If the mission's exploratory discussions in London and Rome make it clear that a conference or agreement on wool textiles is not feasible, the United States would not plan to send a mission to Japan.

Ambassador Takeuchi observed that Mr. Kawada of the Japanese Embassy had told him that Mr. Nehmer had said the U.S. intended to send a mission to Europe now and another one to Japan at a later time. Mr. Nehmer corrected this impression by saying he had informed Mr. Kawada that after the European mission returns with its report on attitudes in London and Rome, the U.S. Government would have to come to a decision about whether a wool textile agreement appears feasible and whether the prospects would justify further exploratory discussions with Japan.

Mr. Takeuchi said it appeared that the United States might very well be approaching Japan with two votes already safely in its pocket. The Acting Secretary said it would not work that way. In the first place, we already know that the British are inclined to oppose a wool textile agreement. If after talking with the British it appears that they might be willing to consider such a position, we might then propose to continue discussions with Japan. The forthcoming European discussions are only exploratory. We will drop any plans for a wool textile agreement if the European discussions show such a plan to be unfeasible. The Acting Secretary said we first thought of sending a mission around the world, including Tokyo as well as the other European capitals, but it finally was decided to proceed along the present lines.

Ambassador Takeuchi said it appeared to him that there are three possible cases that might arise from the result of the European mission: 1) two negative votes from London and Rome; 2) one negative and one favorable vote from Europe, in which case Japan would have the balancing vote; and 3) two favorable responses from Europe, in which case Japan would be in a difficult position.

The Acting Secretary again pointed out to Ambassador Takeuchi that the British do not look with favor on a wool textile agreement. He said the U.S. Government will decide whether to hold discussions with Japan after getting the views of the British and the Italians. The wool textile industry in the U.S. has also been conducting exploratory discussions in Europe. They report views quite different from those received by the U.S. Government. Because of this pressure from industry to press forward with a wool textile agreement, we feel we must explore further the current views in London and Rome.

Ambassador Takeuchi asked whether there was any intention to discuss this matter with France, the Netherlands, and other European countries. The Acting Secretary replied that this mission will not hold discussions outside of London and Rome. It is our present thought that we would talk with Japan, France, and other nations having an interest in this problem if the results of the mission's exploratory discussions in Rome and London appear to warrant the effort.

The Acting Secretary agreed with Ambassador Takeuchi's summation to the effect that the mission bears no specific proposals on its trip to London and Rome and is only sounding views on those capitals. Concerning publicity about the forthcoming mission, the Acting Secretary said we hoped to keep it to a minimum, but observed that there would invariably be some publicity. Mr. Nehmer reported that there have already been some speculative stories in the press. The Acting Secretary said it is impossible to keep such matters confidential for long, but we hope to avoid as much as possible the kind of publicity which will tend to increase the pressure on the U.S. Government from industry and Congress.

Ambassador Takeuchi asked what should the Japanese Government say, and more specifically, what should he say publicly with regard to the wool textile mission. He said he would like to be able to indicate to the press that he had been informed by the Acting Secretary that a mission is going to approach the British and Italian Governments with regard to a wool textile agreement and that the United States will inform the Japanese later of the result of the explorations. The Acting Secretary suggested that it would be appropriate for the Ambassador only to say that he had discussed wool textiles, but not to give any indication that the question of the mission had been discussed. The Acting Secretary said that we want to avoid publicity to the extent possible in order to reduce pressure on the Administration from the domestic industry and from the Congress. Ambassador Takeuchi pressed the Acting Secretary on this point and suggested that it would be very desirable if he were able to say something about the mission to the press. The Acting Secretary pointed out that neither the Department nor the British or Italian Embassies had confirmed the rumors currently appearing in the press and therefore it would be inappropriate for the Japanese Embassy to say something to the press on this subject. The Ambassador suggested that the point be left for the moment until other items could be discussed. After other items (reported separately) had been discussed, the Ambassador returned to the question of publicity regarding the wool textile mission. After further discussion, which repeated the various points previously made, the Ambassador concluded by saying that he would not mention wool textiles at all to the press.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL US–JAPAN. Confidential. Drafted by Richard W. Petree and approved in U on July 29.

2 The membership and itinerary of the U.S. wool textile mission headed by Warren Christopher is in telegram 124 to London, July 6. (Ibid., INCO–WOOL 4)

231. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 231. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 1

Rome, July 20, 1964, 6 p.m.

162. For Under Secretary from Christopher. Wool Textiles. Mission had full and friendly discussion with Mattarella, Minister Foreign Trade and Ferlesch, Senior Foreign Trade Ministry official. Christopher explained US request against background Wool Textile problem being of great concern to US. He emphasized that US is asking Italy and other major Wool Textile trading partners to sit down at conference to discuss problem and is not asking Italy to agree to any solution to problem in advance of conference. Also pointed out growing role in US market of LDC's wool textiles and said present may be time in advance of critical problem from LDC's for developing countries to provide for orderly growth mechanism.

Christopher stressed that problem closely related to Kennedy Round. US ability to continue to play important role in KR and our ability to avoid pressures against long exceptions list would be enhanced by agreement of trading partners to attend conference. Conference would also significantly assist USG in meeting protectionist pressures.

Christopher then referred to interview in Daily News Record previously reported and said he was surprised and disturbed about this premature response to US mission. He pointed out article answers question which was not being asked of GOI, namely, to commit to International Wool Textile Agreement whereas mission was asking only for GOI participation in conference. Full translation to Italian of DNR article prepared by Embassy based on Deptel 1632 was then handed to Mattarella.

Mattarella responded along following lines: 1) New cabinet will be formed tomorrow. He does not know if he will still be Foreign Trade Minister. Therefore, in no position to give authoritative reply to mission's request.

2) Expressed regret and surprise re DNR article because he does not have official spokesman and would be annoyed if anyone in his Ministry would have anticipated present meeting, particularly since US Embassy had requested that meeting be kept confidential.

3) However, article reflects consistent attitude taken by GOI in past against International Wool Textile Agreement.

4) GOI opposition to agreement is based on unwillingness to enter into sector agreements which would only be way of restoring old quota systems in foreign trade field. Since other sectors in Italy have problems, GOI willingness to enter into Wool Textile Agreement would make it difficult for GOI to resist pressure from these sectors.

5) Conference suggested by USG raises delicate problem on eve of KR. GOI has similar pressures as USG re exceptions list. Wool Textile Conference would encourage various sectors to make similar demands on GOI to put their items on exceptions list.

6) Wool textile problem nothing like cotton textile problem which gave rise to long-term cotton textile arrangement. GOI does not view LTA with any enthusiasm because LTA does not meet general principles of broadening trade liberalization.

7) Conference proposed by USG must have possibility of reaching conclusion. Since GOI is opposed to agreement, he questioned usefulness of conference.

Christopher then explained in detail alternatives open to US to meet Wool Textile Industry pressure. Unilateral action as one alternative would represent reversal of US policy and administration has resisted it. If mission has to return home and tell Congressional leaders our major trading partners will not sit down at conference table, this will play into hands of protectionist elements.

Other alternative is multilateral approach which USG suggested. Conference would be exploratory examining problem and various solutions. USG would view possible outcome as liberalizing rather than restricting trade. USG feels strongly preferable for countries to discuss problem multilaterally rather than take unilateral action.

Love and Ruttenberg both joined in dialogue, expressing concern over effect of imports on US industry and urging that conference would assist US in overall trade liberalization.

In closing, Christopher emphasized his hope that Mattarella would recognize relationship of participation in International Conference to ability of US to resist exception list pressures and to overall US leadership in trade liberalization. Mattarella promised to have USG proposal studied carefully within GOI and, whether he or someone else was Foreign Trade Minister after tomorrow, response would be forthcoming in near future. Mission understands Mattarella stands excellent chance continuing as Foreign Trade Minister and, although Mattarella left door open, chances his agreeing to participate in conference based on foregoing report not good at this time.

Meeting with Medici and Mondello to be held late afternoon.

Reinhardt

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Brussels, for USEC, London, Tokyo, and Geneva.

2 Dated July 19. (Ibid., INCO–WOOL 17 US–IT)

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 232. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 1

Rome, July 21, 1964, midnight.

170. For Under Secretary from Christopher. Wool Textiles. Separate meetings held Monday2 evening with Medici, Minister of Industry and Commerce, and with Mondello, Deputy Director Econ Affairs, Foreign Office.

Points made by Christopher were (1) US hoping for GOI agreement to attend conference this fall without commitment as to multilateral agreement or any other specific solution; (2) international conference closely related to KR in that it will enhance our ability to resist pressures for long exceptions list; (3) impact of LDC wool textile trade already being felt by US and now is time to take steps to provide for orderly growth of such trade; (4) political and econ pressures building up in US for unilateral action and same will be difficult to resist if trading partners unwilling even to attend conference. Love and Ruttenberg supported presentation.

Medici repeated line similar to Mattarella's and apparently latter had reported to Medici on Mission's earlier meeting. This later confirmed by Mondello who had received telephone calls from both Mattarella and Ferlesch after Mission's visit.

Medici however gave first positive sign of being willing to cooperate re USG proposal on conference. On probing by Christopher, Medici said: 1. New government will be formed within next few days.

2. Decision to participate would need to be official GOI decision which GOI cannot now take.

3. If USG wishes to avoid unilateral action and invites other countries to participate in examining wool textile problem in framework of KR, GOI will consider problem.

4. But this is sensitive matter and conference should be organized in such manner and at such time as would prevent failure of conference.

5. Therefore, USG would be advised to wait bit longer. Conference could be better promoted in October. At present there are too many people against conference.

Mondello reported that Mattarella is concerned that he will not continue as Minister of Foreign Trade in new Cabinet. Mondello discounts Mattarella's concern and indicated that GOI reply should be forthcoming within week if Mattarella continues. Mondello minimized Medici's role in GOI policy determination re USG proposal. Mondello felt that Minister of Foreign Trade will largely make decision. He suggested that Department speak with Ortona who will be in Washington until end of week and that reply to USG proposal will be held up pending Ortona's return. Mondello felt that Ortona might influence GOI decision. Christopher suggests that Under Secretary Ball or Assistant Secretary Johnson may wish speak with Ortona after briefing by [garble].

Mission was accompanied on all visits by Econ Counselor who hosted luncheon for Mission and advisers Monday. Mission briefed Ambassador on meetings after his return to Rome late Monday. Industry and labor advisers were briefed on all Rome conversations by Mission.

Mission returning to US today.

Reinhardt

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, Geneva, London, and Tokyo.

2 July 20.

233. Report of the Wool Textile Mission 233. Report of the Wool Textile Mission1

Washington, July 28, 1964.

REPORT OF WOOL TEXTILE MISSION

July 15–21, 1964

Purpose.

The instruction to the mission, which was cleared by the President, was to attempt to secure the agreement of the Governments of Italy and the United Kingdom to participate in an international conference this Fall to discuss the wool textile problem and possible solutions, including an international agreement.

Foreign Officials Visited.

The mission met in London with Edward Heath, Secretary of State for Industry, Trade and Regional Development and President of the Board of Trade, and with Sir Richard Powell, Permanent Secretary of the Board of Trade. In Rome the mission met with Bernardo Mattarella, Minister of Foreign Trade; Giuseppe Medici, Minister of Industry and Commerce; and Ambassador Mondello, Deputy Director General for Economic Affairs of the Foreign Office. The mission was briefed by the American Embassies in London and Rome prior to meeting with the foreign government officials. Ambassador Bruce (London) accompanied the mission when it met with Secretary Heath. Ambassador Reinhardt (Rome) met with the mission after its meetings with Ministers Mattarella and Medici. The mission also stopped in Geneva to brief Ambassador Blumenthal and to get his appraisal of the current status of the Kennedy Round negotiations.

Industry and Labor Advisers.

The mission was accompanied by four unofficial advisers from industry and labor. They were Morton Darman, Chairman, Executive Committee, National Association of Wool Manufacturers, and President, the Top Co.; Milton Fried, Research Director, Amalgamated Clothing Workers; Robert Lynn, Vice President, Burlington Industries; and William Sullivan, President, Northern Textile Association. These advisers were thoroughly briefed by the mission both before and after the discussions held with foreign government officials. The advisers also met with Ambassador Blumenthal in Geneva and with Economic Counselor Mellen of the American Embassy in Rome.

Mission's Presentation.

In addition to describing the condition of the U.S. wool textile industry, including the substantial growth in imports and the high rate of unemployment in the industry, the mission made the following points in proposing an international conference on wool textiles: 1. The U.S. proposal that there be an international conference this Fall was not intended to commit the governments in advance to an international wool textile agreement or any other specific solution. The U.S. envisaged that the conference would explore the problem and all possible solutions.

2. An international conference was closely related to the Kennedy Round in that it would enhance our ability to resist pressures for a long exceptions list. If our major trading partners refused to come to a conference, this would jeopardize our ability to have a short list.

3. The impact of wool textile imports from the LDC's was already being felt by the U.S. It would only be a matter of time before other industrialized countries felt the impact of LDC trade in wool textiles. Now was the time, therefore, to take steps to provide for the orderly growth of such trade, as was done a few years ago in the case of cotton textiles through the mechanism of the Long-Term Cotton Textile Arrangement.

4. Political and economic pressures were building up in the U.S. for unilateral action on wool textiles which would be difficult to resist if our trading partners were unwilling even to attend a conference. The U.S. would much prefer to find a multilateral approach to the problem.

Response of Foreign Governments.

The British and Italian Ministers in London and Rome, whose responses were quite similar, replied along the following lines: 1. It was questionable that the U.S. wool textile industry was really being damaged by imports.

2. The U.S. proposal was inconsistent with the objectives of the Kennedy Round.

3. An international agreement on wool textiles, or even a conference to discuss the problem, would result in pressures for similar action by other industries. The shoe industry was mentioned particularly in London.

4. The LDC problem in the field of wool textiles was not a present problem, although it was agreed that this might be a problem in the future. Rather it was felt that the wool textile situation was mainly a problem among industrialized countries.

5. Coming so soon after the conclusion of the UN Conference on Trade and Development, the LDC's could conceivably view an international conference on wool textiles as a threat to their position.

6. The U.S. wool textile industry presently received substantial protection through high tariffs.

7. Restrictions on trade through a multilateral agreement could be as restrictive as unilateral action.

8. Even though segments of the wool textile industry in Italy and the United Kingdom favored an international agreement, the governments concerned did not feel it would be in the national interest of their countries to have an international agreement.

9. Since the governments were opposed to an international agreement, it would be a fruitless exercise to have an international conference.

The British Government gave its response to the U.S. proposal shortly after the conclusion of the meeting with Mr. Heath and Sir Richard Powell. Sir Richard Powell informed Mr. Christopher that the UK Government, on broad grounds of commercial policy, was not willing to participate in an international wool textile conference at this time. He offered little hope as to the possibility of a change in the British view in the foreseeable future.

In Rome, Minister Mattarella, whose Ministry has the prime responsibility for making a decision on the U.S. proposal, was not certain as of the time the mission met with him that he would continue as Minister of Foreign Trade in the new Moro Cabinet. His response during the course of the meeting was negative. Subsequent to the departure of the mission from Rome it was learned that Minister Mattarella will continue as Minister of Foreign Trade. Minister Medici was more encouraging but indications are that he has only a limited responsibility in this field. Ambassador Mondello suggested a meeting with Ambassador Ortona, Director General of Economic Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who was in Washington. (Assistant Secretary of State Johnson met with Ambassador Ortona on July 24.) A response from the Italian Government, which the mission fears will be negative, is expected in the near future.

Conclusions.

The joint State-Commerce-Labor mission did everything it could to secure the agreement of the British and Italian Governments to attend a conference in accordance with the mission's instructions. This was the first direct approach by a special U.S. mission to persuade these governments to participate in a conference on wool textiles. Although the mission was turned down by the United Kingdom Government and may be turned down by the Italian Government, we believe it was helpful in clarifying the position of the United States Government, both to the other governments and also to our Embassies.

If we desire to continue to press for an international conference, further efforts plainly will be necessary to convince these governments of the desirability of attending such a meeting. For example, there will have to be, at an appropriate early time, follow-ups with the British and Italian Governments at a high level, perhaps accompanied by an aide memoire to emphasize the importance of this matter. In addition, it would be necessary to make this same approach through diplomatic channels to the Japanese so that they will be fully familiar with our position.

Beyond these follow-ups, the timing and nature of additional efforts would depend on other developments not known at this point. The first of these is a final response from the new Italian Government, which will probably be confirmed in the near future. Another is the British elections which are expected to be held in mid-October. It might develop that a Labor Government will be elected and its attitude to the U.S. proposal is, of course, not known at this time. A third development is the tabling of the exceptions list in the Kennedy Round, which, according to presently agreed timing, will be in mid-November. If wool textiles are included on the exceptions list by the U.S., this could be an important factor in the attitude of some of the governments concerned.

Ambassador Blumenthal suggested to the mission in Geneva that after the exceptions have been tabled it might be possible to develop a sector approach for wool textiles within the Kennedy Round. This would probably involve reductions in certain wool textile tariffs in exchange for quantitative assurances on the level of wool textile trade. The mission believes that this may be a useful approach and should be considered as progress in the Kennedy Round is made if no other approach has been adopted in the meantime.

References.

Attached to this report are memoranda of conversation with Secretary Heath, Ministers Mattarella and Medici, and Ambassador Mondello.2 In addition, reference should be made to the following telegrams to the Department of State: Embassy London 291 of July 17 and 328 of July 21;3 Embassy Rome 162 of July 20 and 170 of July 21.4

Submitted by: Warren M. Christopher 5
Special Representative of the Secretary of State
Chairman

James S. Love, Jr.
Deputy to the Secretary of Commerce

Stanley H. Ruttenberg
Special Assistant to the Secretary of Labor

Stanley Nehmer
Deputy Director Office of International Resources Department of State

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles, President's Advisory Committee. Limited Official Use. No drafting information appears on the source text. At the top of the source text is a handwritten note indicating a letter of transmittal was sent to the White House on July 31. This letter has not been found.

2 None of these four memoranda is printed.

3 Neither printed. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 3 and INCO–WOOL 17 UK-US, respectively)

4  Documents 231 and 232.

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed signatures.

234. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 234. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, August 4, 1964, 4 p.m.

443. Reference: Department telegram 328.2 Wool Textiles. Pursuant reftel I presented statement on wool textiles to MITI Minister Sakurauchi August 3 during course my initial call on him. I had originally planned use meeting to take up GOJ trade liberalization and aid to Vietnam but felt it inadvisable raise these issues in same breath with wool proposal.

Following usual amenities Sakurauchi assured me of his deep interest in Japanese-American relationships dating back to time he worked on security pact as member of Diet Foreign Affairs Committee with special emphasis on economic cooperation envisaged in pact. He asserted determination try continue improve relations between Japan and US through economic affairs for which he is now responsible.

Sakurauchi thanked us for support in attainment OECD membership and expressed his desire that trade might be still further increased with US and with LDC's. I told Sakurauchi that we believed in lowering trade barriers; that we were glad to see a very great increase in Japan's trade with US, including healthy growth of Japanese exports; that we were still firmly committed to success of Kennedy Round; however, we do believe in the orderly expansion of trade and that made the wool textile problem especially important. Sakurauchi at this point was given text of statement cited reftel with oral translation into Japanese.

He said he could not answer questions raised offhand but he was interested to know what happened to our special mission sent Great Britain and Italy. I replied we would be very glad to inquire for more details from Washington as to their results; additionally, we assumed he would be in touch with UK and Italy directly.

Sakurauchi referred to his predecessor Fukuda's opposition to wool agreement which Fukuda had expressed to Secretary Hodges. He recalled that cotton textile agreement had worked harshly against Japan, as bilateral followed by multilateral agreement covered period when Japan's share of US market dropped from 70 percent of US imports to less than 20 percent. In response I pointed out this experience with cotton textiles showed that multilateral arrangements might be preferable to bilateral; and also that while cotton textiles were by no means the only items which were controlled to insure orderly marketing, total of Japanese exports continued to increase at rapid rate, indicating value of emphasis on orderly marketing.

While Sakurauchi wished to reserve his formal reply to our statement, he presumed that Ikeda Cabinet would still be opposed to an international wool conference.

In view of the importance of presenting statement to the Foreign Office in timely fashion, prior my call on MITI Minister, EconMin called on Nakayama (Director, Econ Affairs Bureau, FonOff) and handed him copy of statement. Nakayama said that he could not comment in detail re substantive issue but his immediate offhand reaction was to question seriously whether proposal for conference was consistent with spirit of Kennedy Round and principles of GATT. He asked whether similar paper had been given to other govts. EconMin said he thought that paper was being given only to GOJ but that it reflected discussion which special mission had had with UK and Italian officials and was in effect a substitute for such visit to Japan. In response to Nakayama's question, EconMin said initial UK Govt request to US approach had been negative and that Italians had taken the proposal under consideration.

Nakayama said he was sure substance of US approach would become known to press immediately after Ambassador's approach to MITI. EconMin requested, and Nakayama agreed, that text of US statement, which designated as talking paper, would be considered confidential.

Embassy expects strong reaction from press.

Reischauer

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 4. Confidential. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, London, Rome, and Geneva.

2 Dated July 31. (Ibid.)

235. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 235. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, September 22, 1964.

SUBJECT

Sugar Legislation

The President advised the leadership this morning that he would like to see a simple six-months' extension of the foreign provisions of the sugar law. No marketing relief for domestic growers nor acreage controls would be provided.

In your memorandum to the President of September 18,2 you indicated that the Department would be prepared for a simple one-year extension without marketing relief for domestic growers. We and Under Secretary Murphy agreed to a suggestion by Mr. Feldman that we settle for a six-months' extension. Even though this will most probably prove unacceptable to domestic beet growers, a one-year extension would have been even more unacceptable.

The mechanics of proposing the six-months' extension have not been worked out. The White House is to discuss the matter with Chairman Cooley. The Chairman may yet decide to have no part of this sugar legislation if the domestic growers adamantly oppose it. We cannot yet, therefore, safely say that there will be sugar legislation this year.

The Administration's position—legislation with no marketing relief now—is a setback to domestic growers. It may help when sugar legislation is considered again next year. It will make them more willing to accept sharp acreage cutbacks in exchange for marketing relief which by then they will genuinely need. The domestic growers may be more tractable in the future because of their failure to have their way this year.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, 1964 Aug/Sept, United States. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jacobson on September 22.

2 A copy is ibid.

236. Editorial Note 236. Editorial Note

President Johnson released a statement outlining his administration's attention to the concerns of the New England textile industry on September 28, 1964. After describing measures taken to protect the cotton and wool textile industries, he said that he shared President Kennedy's view that imports of wool textiles and apparel “must be kept at reasonable levels.” He concluded by saying, “I can assure you that we shall work hard at this problem. I consider it essential that the wool textile industry be restored to good health.” For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson , 1963–64, Book II, pages 1143–1144.

237. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 237. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, September 29, 1964.

SUBJECT

Sugar Legislation

Bitter words were exchanged among members of Mr. Cooley's Committee this morning. But the outcome was no agreement on the Administration's proposal for a simple extension of the Sugar Act and the Committee did not proceed to a vote on the bill. Any action was blocked by the beet growers who insist upon marketing relief as the price for support of the legislation.

In these circumstances, Mr. Cooley had no occasion to direct attention to his own version of the Administration bill—that calling for a reduction in the import fee. However, he has privately acknowledged that there is merit in dropping this issue now and letting it carry over for consideration in next year's legislation.

Present prospects are very dim for any sugar legislation to pass during the present session of Congress, but at the last moment the beet producers might capitulate and accept a simple six months' extension.

Failing legislation, we shall have to decide what to do in order to prevent a sharp decline in U.S. prices and to assure continued access of foreigners to this market. We are asking the Bureau of the Budget to form an inter-agency group to settle this question quickly. Decisions will have to be taken as soon after the election as possible if we are to prevent real weakness in the market early next year.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, 1964 Aug/Sept, United States. No classification marking. Drafted by Jerome Jacobson on September 29 and cleared by Robert E. Lee (H). A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Secretary saw.”

238. Minutes of Meeting of the Trade Executive Committee 238. Minutes of Meeting of the Trade Executive Committee1

Washington, October 7, 1964.

TEC M–13/64

Cotton Textiles (continued)

At the outset of the meeting, Mr. Rehm submitted a draft proposal for the United States position on its offer of cotton textiles in the negotiations. Mr. Love also submitted a paper which he proposed as a revision of point 3 in the draft Mr. Rehm put forward.2 Mr. Rehm suggested that the essential difference between the two texts was that Mr. Love's would establish a condition on the offer of a 50% cut on cotton textiles, whereas the text he had presented would not. Therefore, under Mr. Love's position, cotton textiles would be an exception while under the other formulation they would not be.

Mr. Auchincloss asked whether under the Commerce draft the United States would have the right to withdraw its concessions on cotton textiles without being obliged to pay compensation. Mr. Love said that this was his intention.

Vote on Commerce Draft of U.S. Position on Cotton Textiles

Agriculture and Commerce in favor;

Defense, Interior, Labor, State and the Treasury opposed.

Mr. Shooshan felt strongly that we should face up clearly to the nature of the concessions that we are offering. He had thought that the Commerce draft was perhaps too strong, but in his judgment Mr. Rehm's draft did not seem to go far enough. To him, Mr. Rehm's draft would call for the United States to make an offer “under false pretenses", whereas the Commerce draft was completely clear.

The Chairman urged that the discussion not revolve around points of language, but rather center on the main issue: whether cotton textiles were to be on the exceptions list or not. If a condition were attached to our offer that would have to appear on the exceptions list, then our negotiating partners would probably find our offer not to be very meaningful.

Mr. Ruttenberg contended that the important point was to ensure that cotton textiles not be on the exceptions list in order to strengthen the U.S. position in trying to have the LTA extended. He felt that Mr. Rehm's draft was an adequate bargaining tool for this purpose. It made clear that the cotton textile offer would be withdrawn if the LTA were terminated prior to the end of the Kennedy Round and that the United States intends to pursue the LTA and will have to take drastic action if it is not renewed.

Vote on Whether Cotton Textiles Should Be on Exceptions List

Agriculture and Commerce in favor;

Defense, Labor, State, and Treasury opposed;

Interior not voting.

Mr. Love then presented an alternative draft under which the United States would reserve the right to withdraw the concession on cotton textiles if it were found that imports were causing serious injury to the domestic industry. Mr. Rehm argued that the United States had this right anyway under Article XIX of the GATT. If we were to attach this explicit condition to our offer it would have to go on the exceptions list, but it would be silly to do so since it is unnecessary. Mr. Love, on the other hand, contended that this would put our position clearly in the open, and that Mr. Rehm's draft was deficient in that it gave only discretionary authority to our negotiators to make clear the link between our offer and the continuation of the LTA.

Mr. Friedman felt that if Commerce's concern were valid, it was a problem that could be faced when the issue arises in the negotiations. Mr. Weiss believed that under Mr. Rehm's draft the negotiators may exercise their “discretion” so as never to make the point that our offer takes into consideration the continuation of the LTA. He felt that that point must be made. He suggested that the draft be amended to remove the discretionary authority. With his amendment, the position would read as follows: (Bracketed words omitted and replaced by underlined portion.)3

"(1) The United States should exclude all cotton textiles from its exceptions list, thereby subjecting cotton textiles to a 50% tariff reduction.

"(2) Within the United States Government, it should be agreed that: "(a) In the event the Long-Term Arrangement (LTA) is terminated prior to the conclusion of the Kennedy Round, the United States would withdraw cotton textiles from its offer of a 50% tariff reduction and would put forward alternative proposals; and

"(b) In the event the LTA is terminated subsequent to the conclusion of the Kennedy Round, the Executive agencies would consider steps which might need to be taken in those circumstances.

"(3) The United States negotiators at the Kennedy Round should be [authorized, at their discretion] instructed, at the appropriate time and in the light of consultations or negotiations which may be taking place within the framework of the LTA, to inform other governments that the United States offer of a 50% tariff reduction on cotton textiles takes into consideration the [probable continuation] existence of satisfactory arrangements for the orderly marketing of cotton textiles.”

Mr. Johnson contended that all negotiating countries know that the U.S. offer would be different if there were no LTA. He thought that the threat contained in section 3 would not help the U.S. cause, whether in the Kennedy Round or in the attempt to extend the LTA. It is true, he granted, that if the LTA is terminated we will have a problem with cotton textiles, but restoration of the pre-Kennedy Round tariff rates would probably not be the solution. If it were, we would not have had an LTA in the first place. He was willing to accept paragraph 3 if it solved problems for others, but personally he saw no reason to go beyond paragraph 2.

Mr. Love reiterated the point that many countries would not be clear on what our position would be if the LTA ends unless we stated explicitly in the Kennedy Round. The Chairman asked Mr. Rehm whether Mr. Weiss' amendment would require that cotton textiles be an exception. Mr. Rehm believed it would not in view of the fact that it does not say that our offer is conditional on the continuance of the LTA. If we wanted to withdraw our cotton textiles concession, we would have to go through all the relevant GATT procedures.

Mr. Bator asked whether the position that we were adopting on cotton textiles would set a precedent for other items on which there are also forms of protection other than tariffs.

Mr. Ioanes noted that there may be similar items in the agriculture field, but it was agreed that this would not present a general problem.

Mr. Friedman wanted it made clear that the language of Mr. Weiss' amendment required that the U.S. delegates state the point in paragraph 3 explicitly sometime during the course of the negotiations.

Vote on Mr. Weiss' Amendment to Mr. Rehm's Draft Position

Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Interior, Labor, and the Treasury in favor;

State opposed.

The amendment therefore was adopted.

Vote on Mr. Rehm's Draft Position, as Amended

Agriculture, Defense, Interior, Labor, and the Treasury in favor; Commerce and State opposed.

TEC Recommendation: No exception for cotton textiles, but U.S. offer to be subject to the requirements set forth in the text of the position above.

Wool Textiles

Mr. Love held that the STR paper (TEC D–27/64) made two arguments for cutting tariffs on wool textiles.

(1) That tariff cuts would help speed modernization of the industry.

(2) Tariff cuts would help liquidate the industry.

In fact, he said, the present tariff levels are too low to help speed modernization. With imports already high, there is not sufficient confidence in the industry to bring about re-investment in new equipment, and big companies were already liquidating their plants.

He also disagreed with the paper's comments on man-made fibers. Competition from synthetics have not reduced the output of wool textile plants. If anything, they have helped the industry. His own figures took production of man-made fibers into account, but even so, they indicated that imports have hurt domestic production.

Finally, he alluded to President Johnson's recent statement on the importance of maintaining a healthy wool textile industry,4 and he doubted that the U.S. Government should do anything at this point to harm the industry's competitive strength.

Mr. Krause pointed out that the wool textile industry is in the process of change and adjustment. For one thing, consumer's tastes had changed, and wool textiles had become less fashionable. The closing of textile mills did not necessarily reflect a reduction in capacity, since the parent company often relocates mills elsewhere in the country. In many cases, the adjustment process takes the form of vertical and horizontal integration due to the need for greater resources and to the advantage of greater control over inventory. The tariff structure in fact promotes vertical integration since each stage in the production process enjoys high tariff protection.

In general, Mr. Krause went on, the integrated firms are booming. Sales and profits have greatly expanded. As for the small firms, some of them are holding on, and some are declining. Employment is going up for the textile industry as a whole, though this may not be true for wool, mainly due to the competition with synthetics.

The STR staff proposal, Mr. Krause emphasized, would maintain protection for the industry. He also suggested further adjustments in the tariff that would help the industry, in particular, that part of the industry which had the greatest employment. Most of the employment, he pointed out, was in the manufacture of finished products. He offered the following figures as a rough guide to the breakdown of total employment.

Apparel-making—55 to 60%

Weave and finishing—25%

Spinning—10 to 15%

One of his major concerns, he stressed, was that we should not penalize that part of the industry responsible for most of the labor force in order to help that part with less employment.

He had no intention, he concluded, of speeding liquidation of the industry. But under the TSC proposal, protection would in fact be increased, and this he felt will dissuade the industry from making the adjustments in which lie its only hope of salvation.

Mr. Love took issue with Mr. Krause's analysis on a number of points: (1) Mr. Love concluded that the total capacity of the industry has in fact been declining as far as products made on the wool textile system are concerned. He granted that production of wool and synthetics together has gone up, but contended that many synthetics are not in competition with wool products. Mr. Krause noted that he and Mr. Love disagreed on this point, but it would be futile to pursue it here.

(2) Mr. Love argued that to pass on the 50% reduction on raw wool to the compensatory element in the tariffs on wool textiles would reduce protection for the textile industry and would not, as Mr. Krause claimed, maintain protection at the same relative level. His argument was that since much apparel is now made from a wool-synthetic blend, the manufacturer would be able to take advantage of the lower cost of wool only to the fractional extent that he used wool in his blend; whereas the compensatory duty on competitive imports would be cut on the assumption that his product was 100% wool.

Mr. Krause replied that on the other hand this would benefit producers of all-wool goods and strengthen their position in competition with synthetic blends. Mr. Love felt, however, that the main reason for the competitive strength of blends is not their lower price, but their durability and lightness.

Even if we could find some areas where tariff reduction was possible, Mr. Love argued, we would be smart to except those areas as an incentive to the countries which are now resisting our efforts to hold an international conference on wool. As things now stood, it appeared that we would need every incentive we can get.

Mr. Krause turned to the problem of funding the supports to wool growers which come from the duties collected on wool and wool textiles. It is inconceivable, he said, that tariff reductions on wool and wool textiles would affect this fund during the life of the current Wool Act, which expires in March 1966. Even if the act were extended in its present form, he believed that it was highly unlikely that the funds would be exhausted under the tariff-cutting recommendations of the STR staff. However, in the event of unforeseen difficulties, we could presumably get Congressional action to correct any short fall, but he emphasized that he saw no need for this to be done.

Mr. Ioanes said that he did not entirely agree with Mr. Krause's conclusions about the fund, mainly because the Agriculture Department's experts believe that the present level of wool prices is abnormally high and will not continue. He also emphasized that the Agriculture Department's recommendation to cut the tariff on raw wool was contingent on the extension of the Wool Act with the payment program intact.

Mr. Love made clear that the Commerce Department wanted to maintain the compensatory duty, though he admitted that the U.S. may find itself obliged to cut it. Mr. Johnson noted that we have a clear GATT obligation to reduce the compensatory duty on textiles if the raw wool duty is cut.

Mr. Weiss observed that Labor would vote against cutting the compensatory duty largely in order to preserve U.S. bargaining power for an international arrangement on wool textiles. The Chairman raised the question as to whether this would in fact help our bargaining position. It might well do the exact opposite.

Mr. Norwood made clear the TSC position: To offer a cut on raw wool, provided that the U.S. can negotiate its way out of the commitment on wool textiles. Mr. Krause and Mr. Johnson reiterated the point that not to pass on the compensatory cut to wool textiles would be to increase protection for the wool textile industry, particularly large integrated firms.

Mr. Ioanes was prepared to grant Mr. Krause's point that cutting the compensatory duty would in fact help the industry. However, he felt that with the industry in its present delicate condition, the Government should not be in the position of reducing tariffs, even to a moderate extent. Mr. Pollack interjected that not to cut the compensation duty would be to use the Kennedy Round to increase protection.

Returning to the question of U.S. bargaining leverage, Mr. Krause made the point that our bargaining position internationally would actually be improved by cutting the compensatory duty, since our foreign competitors profit from the high domestic prices on yarns and tops that result from the high duty. Mr. Blackman, on the other hand, felt that if we except wool textiles, the other importers will do the same and this will induce the exporters to agree to an international wool conference. He granted, however, that we would have to give some sort of compensation for not honoring our GATT obligation connecting the duties on raw wool with those on wool textiles. Mr. Nehmer argued that for the United States to increase its wool textile protection at this point would be a major factor increasing hostility against us on the international conference question.

Vote on 50% Reduction of the Compensatory Element in Wool Textile Tariffs

Defense, State, and the Treasury in favor;

Agriculture, Commerce, Interior, and Labor opposed.

The Chairman was anxious to get the views of the agencies on the economic consequences of cutting the compensatory duty. Leaving aside the tactical question, would such a tariff reduction cause serious damage to the domestic industry?

Mr. Love felt it would contribute to the damage now taking place, particularly, Mr. Garland added, in the low price field. Other agencies contended that they had answered this question by their vote. The Interior representative felt there would be injury on some wool textile items, but not on others.

The Chairman asked Mr. Krause to continue discussion of individual wool textiles.

Wool Tops

Mr. Krause explained that this is an intermediate wool product used by the wool apparel makers in their production process. If the tariff is not reduced, he believed, this would mean the death of the independent worsted spinner because integrated plants would be able to get their wool far more cheaply than the small firms that have to pay the market price. The compensatory part of the tariff, he said, is 25%. If the tariff is not cut in half, this would be a windfall of 12–1/2% to the integrated mills. Producers of wool tops, he emphasized, are a very small part of the entire wool textile industry. The argument for making a duty cut at this intermediate stage of production was to pass on the advantage of the reduction on raw wool to the more important higher level of production where most of the employment in the industry was concentrated.

Mr. Johnson asked whether it was true that the foreign price for tops sets the price in the domestic market. Mr. Pollack replied that imports were a substantial enough percentage of domestic consumption to assume that this was the case.

Mr. Blackman felt that we would greatly undermine and confuse our bargaining position if we were to offer to cut the compensatory duty on some products or not on others. He felt that we should treat the compensatory duty on all wool textiles in the same manner.

Mr. Love felt that the effects of a tariff cut on raw wool would be passed on to the spinners regardless of whether we cut the duty on tops and yarns, and that the independent spinners would either survive or die without the tariff on tops having much effect. Mr. Krause noted that if a tariff cut would have no effect, there seemed little reason to add this product to the exceptions list.

Mr. Ioanes believed that Mr. Krause's economic analysis has raised a valid point, and he would appreciate the opportunity to check into it further with his staff. He wondered whether the decision on this issue could be put off until the following day. The Chairman agreed that in view of the importance of this matter, we would return to it at the next meeting.

Kenneth Auchincloss 5
Executive Secretary

ATTENDANCE

Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations Hon. William M. Roth, Chairman

Mr. Bernard Norwood

Mr. John B. Rehm

Mr. Gerald Pollack

Mr. Theodore Gates

Mr. Lawrence Krause

Mr. Kenneth Auchincloss

Department of Agriculture Mr. Raymond Ioanes

Mr. Richard DeFelice

Department of Commerce Mr. Robert McNeill

Mr. Allen Garland

Mr. James Love

Mr. Raymond Dickinson

Mr. Arthur Tendler

Department of Defense Mr. Alvin Friedman

Department of the Interior Mr. John M. Kelly

Mr. Harry Shooshan

Mr. Morton Pomeranz

Department of Labor Mr. Harry Weiss

Mr. Herbert Blackman

Mr. Murray Ryss

Mr. Stanley Ruttenberg

Department of State Hon. G. Griffith Johnson

Mr. Joseph Greenwald

Mr. Stanley Nehmer

Mr. James Lewis

Department of the Treasury Mr. Ralph Hirschtritt

Tariff Commission Mr. Thos. W. Hart

National Security Agency [Council] Mr. Francis Bator

1 Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Kennedy Round (GATT) May 4, 1964 [2 of 2], Box 11. Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Executive Secretary Kenneth Auchincloss.

2 Neither paper has been found.

3 Printed here as italics in paragraphs (1)-(3) below. Brackets in these paragraphs are in the source text.

4 For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book II, pp. 1143–1144.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

239. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 239. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 16, 1964.

SUBJECT

Sugar

Agriculture, State and B.O.B. came to terms this morning on an interim regime for sugar. It is not too bad—in fact, marginally better than the straight 6-months extension compromise which died on the Hill. Better, in that Agriculture will impose a 5–1/2% cutback in acreage without raising the domestics' marketing allowance—at least not now. Straight extension would have involved neither acreage cutback nor marketing relief. (There is one other change, which Budget dislikes but the Latinos will love. There appears to be no legal basis for continuing to levy an import fee. Foreign sellers of cane who get a share of the import quota will now pocket the entire difference between the protected U.S. price and the world price.)

Relative to what we were ready to settle for three weeks ago, this looks and is pretty good: no cut in the absolute level of imports and a cut in next year's acreage. But in relation to next year's fight over a new bill it is nothing to cheer about. The acreage cut is much too small to avoid a piling up of excess inventories (it would take a 15–20% cut to hold inventories in line). Also whereas the restriction appears to freeze the foreign/domestic ratio, it does so only pro tem. Any increase in '65 consumption over the '64 level will be up for grabs next spring, at the pleasure of the Congress. (The old formula will only apply to Agriculture's “consumption estimate". Murphy proposes to “estimate” no increase over '64—in fact, a small, insignificant decrease.) However by late next spring it will be evident that actual consumption will exceed the “estimate” by a good margin and Agriculture will then announce a revised estimate. By then, however, Murphy hopes to have legislation which will have changed the formula in favor of the domestics—specifically, the parameter which governs relative shares at the margin. [His excuse for announcing a low consumption estimate now is that the near term market is in need of support. A low estimate will boost the support price, because it is not really an estimate of demand but a marketing allowance, i.e., a ruling about maximum supply, which speculators will compare with their own predictions about demand.])2

B.O.B. and State tried to get Murphy to agree to a larger acreage cut, but Charlie really dug in. (He has a point. Freeman promised the beet producers that he would not restrict acreage unless the beets themselves want restriction. They are prepared to ask for 5%.) At any rate, Murphy told State to go ahead and fight it up to the President, but that he would reply to contrary orders from the White House by sending his resignation by return mail. Schultze tried to finesse by suggesting that no decision and announcement be made until, say, Nov. 10. Murphy insisted that an announcement be made now, to keep the sugar market from going to pot. (It is a little soft: the support price is ȼ 6.2/lb. as against the “estimate” of ȼ 6.5. However, the forward price is higher than the spot: evidently the market expects a good package from Murphy soon. If he doesn't come through, there may be a slide.)

FMB 3

Feldman has Murphy memo & State & BOB concurrence. I said, O.K.4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Trade—General, Volume II [2 of 2], Box 47. No classification marking. An attached handwritten note from Bator to Buddy reads: “You need not read all this. 1st paragraph enough. Dictated just before leaving.”

2 Brackets in the source text.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

4 The postscript is handwritten.

240. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon) to President Johnson 240. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon) to President Johnson 1

Washington, October 26, 1964.

SUBJECT

NSC review of strategic stockpile objectives and post-nuclear attack planning

Background

1. The U.S. Government currently owns $8 billion of materials, mainly minerals, in its various strategic stockpiles.

2. Current stockpile objectives have been calculated on the assumption of a three-year all-out conventional war.

3. In the case of most materials, however, our stockpiles are substantially in excess of these relatively large strategic objectives.

4. The OEP is currently engaged in a post-nuclear attack planning exercise to determine supply requirements for post-attack rehabilitation, including stockpile requirements.

5. As you know, proposals to dispose of surplus copper during the current tight market situation have encountered objections because of the possibility that the post-attack planning exercise may result in raising the current copper stockpile objective.

6. Overall, the volume of disposals of surplus materials has been increasing in recent years. Receipts from these disposals reduce the budget deficit. Senator Symington introduced legislation in the 88th Congress to facilitate disposal operations. With such legislation, the major deterrent to disposals would be the limits imposed by our desire not to disrupt commercial markets. However, we ought also to make sure that disposals are not held up by unnecessarily high estimates of wartime requirements.

Discussion

Secretary McNamara and I believe that an overall review of both the conventional war stockpile objectives and the current post-nuclear attack planning exercise is called for.

—The conventional war objectives are based on the assumption of a three-year all-out war in which it is assumed that the U.S. will have no access to foreign supplies, except in nearby areas. This and other similar assumptions should be reexamined.

—The whole concept of developing a stockpile of materials for post-nuclear attack needs a careful review. By its very nature a nuclear attack would reduce the labor force and processing facilities relative to mineral capacity and mineral inventories. Raw materials are most likely therefore to be in surplus.

—This consideration, in turn, raises the possibility of stockpiling items in fabricated form. But here we face the danger that the items in the stockpile may soon become obsolete.

—Given scarce budget resources, we must also consider the relative merits of stockpiling items for immediate human consumption—food, clothing, medicine, etc.—against the merits of stockpiling items for economic rehabilitation. And these in turn must be weighed in the light of resources devoted to a shelter program.

In summary, these questions raise substantial issues of national security, and should be considered by the National Security Council.

Recommendation

I recommend that: 1. You direct the NSC to establish a subcommittee to review stockpile policy.

2. This subcommittee be composed of Messrs. McNamara, McDermott, Buddy, Heller, and Gordon.

3. The subcommittee should: first, reexamine the major assumptions used in calculating existing conventional war stockpile objectives; second, review the assumptions, techniques, and goals stipulated in the post-nuclear attack supply requirements study currently being conducted by the Office of Emergency Planning; and third, consider the relationship of economic rehabilitation requirements to other post-nuclear attack supply requirements, such as food, shelter, medicine, etc.

4. The subcommittee should report to you its findings and recommendations by April 1, 1965.

Secretary McNamara concurs in these recommendations.

I am attaching a draft note from you to McGeorge Bundy, asking him to draw up an appropriate National Security Action Memorandum.2

Kermit Gordon

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. No classification marking.

2 Not printed. There is no indication whether President Johnson approved or disapproved the recommendation.

241. Memorandum From Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi of the Foodstuffs Division, Office of International Resources to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Jacobson) 241. Memorandum From Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi of the Foodstuffs Division, Office of International Resources to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Jacobson)1

Washington, October 27, 1964.

SUBJECT

Mr. Mann's Meeting With Central American Ambassadors on Friday, October 23

The main issue discussed was the Ambassadors' request to increase their countries' announced 1965 quota out of the 233,000 ton reserve without regard to the formula on which the 90% quotas were based. They claimed their countries are in a very unusual political situation and they need this increase more than other suppliers.

Mr. Mann told them without mincing his words that the issue is a “phoney” one. Other countries have political and economic problems as well and he does not see any way to alter the formula which was designed to serve everyone with equal justice.

At the end the Ambassadors admitted that they are quite happy with the 1965 regulations and all that they really were trying to do is to improve on it. Mr. Mann called their attention to the major fight which might develop during the next Session of Congress concerning market sharing as between domestic and foreign producers. He told them that they should concentrate on this issue and try to forget about a disproportionate participation in the 233,000 ton reserve.

The Ambassadors also asked about the possibility of the reimposition of the import fee before the end of 1965. We told them the Administration does not contemplate such a move because we would not want to disturb the orderly flow of supplies in mid-year.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Inco-Sugar, 1964 Oct-Nov, United States. No classification marking. Cleared by Fred H. Sanderson, Chief of the Foodstuffs Division.

242. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to President Johnson 242. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Hodges to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 6, 1964.

Dear Mr. President:

Governor Herter shortly will be sending you his recommendations for items to be placed on the United States exceptions list of products to be reserved from the forthcoming tariff negotiations at Geneva. I understand you agreed last Sunday that the exceptions list for industrial products is to be deposited with the Executive Secretary of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) on November 16.

At a meeting of the Cabinet members of the Trade Expansion Act Advisory Committee yesterday, Governor Herter reviewed the exceptions list he will recommend to you. I want to call to your attention that not all textiles are included on the list, in view of special situations in textiles. During the passage of the Trade Expansion Act, interested Congressional leaders understood that President Kennedy assured them that textiles would not be negotiated under this Act. As you know, he began a special textile program and you have recently reaffirmed it.

To avoid swelling the size of the United States exceptions list, it was agreed to offer 50 percent duty reductions on all textiles except certain wool textiles.

However, in making the offer on cotton textiles, for which imports are about $250 million annually, the U. S. negotiators shall be instructed to inform our trading partners that the offer takes into account the exist-ence of the current Long Term Arrangement (LTA). This provides for quantitative controls on cotton textile imports into participating countries.

It has further been agreed that if the LTA expires prior to conclusion of the GATT tariff negotiations, cotton textile duty reduction offers will be withdrawn. In case the LTA expires subsequent to conclusion of the GATT negotiations, it was agreed that the Executive branch will take whatever steps are necessary in the interests of the domestic cotton textile industry. I believe these decisions, along with effective administration of the LTA, will make the offer of cotton textile duties—though not popular—at least acceptable.

On wool textiles, it has been agreed to place the statutory duties on $161 million of imports on the exceptions list. This covers practically all of the competitive imports.

However, there is also another duty on wool textiles, a compensatory duty to offset the duty paid on raw wool, which is not on the exceptions list. In 1947, the United States committed itself in a special GATT arrangement that if the U.S. duty on raw wool were to be reduced so would these compensatory duties. It is generally agreed, however, that lowering the compensatory duties will worsen the ability of most domestic wool textile producers to compete with imports.

The basic problem with wool textiles is that even with the present high duties, imports are coming in at alarming rates. The only practical solution to the wool import problem is through negotiation of an international agreement that will regulate the quantity of wool textile imports along the lines of the present arrangement for cotton textiles. I believe it essential that we continue to make every effort to secure conclusion of such an arrangement. Maintenance of wool textile duties should help in our attempts to negotiate a wool textile agreement since we could later hold out the prospect of lowering duties as an inducement to conclude an arrangement. Even though an arrangement would regulate the import volume, duty reductions would increase the profitability of exporting to this country.

Textile imports of man-made, silk, and other fibers have not been placed on the exceptions list. The economic arguments for including them on the list are not persuasive. For man-made fibers, for example, the U.S. is still in a favorable net export position.

While I would have preferred to have all wool textiles on our exceptions list, and while it would be easier to deal with the industry if cotton and other textiles were also, in light of the considerations of concern to Governor Herter, particularly his need to keep the exceptions to a minimum, I am not appealing his textile recommendations. But since textiles are very sensitive politically as well as economically, I did want you to have full knowledge of the background to the tariff treatment that Governor Herter will recommend for textiles in the forthcoming tariff negotiations at Geneva.

Meyer Feldman is fully aware of the textile problem. Either he or I, or both of us, would be pleased to discuss the recommendations for treatment of textiles in the Geneva Tariff negotiations with you.

Respectfully yours,

Luther H. Hodges

1 Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Kennedy Round (GATT), May 4, 1964 [2 of 2], Box 11. Secret. Copies were sent to Herter and Feldman. The letter is an attachment to a November 9 memorandum from Buddy to the President. Another attachment is a November 6 memorandum from Feldman to the President.

243. Memorandum From the Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Roth) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) 243. Memorandum From the Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Roth) to the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator)1

Washington, November 13, 1964.

SUBJECT

Arguments Supporting Reduction in Compensatory Duties on Wool Textiles

As you requested, I am setting out below the economic and legal reasons why a reduction in the compensatory duties on wool textiles should be made if a reduction in the duty on raw wool is made. I am also including that portion of the minutes of the Trade Executive Committee which deals with the question.

Economic Arguments for a Cut in Compensatory Duties on Wool Textiles

Because of the duty imposed on raw wool to protect domestic wool raisers, tariffs on woolen manufactures have been raised by an appropriate amount to compensate for the resulting rise in the domestic cost of raw materials. This “compensatory duty” is intended to maintain the competitive position of the wool processing industry relatively to the costs of its raw materials.

The compensatory duty was originally calculated on the then correct assumption that the industry used 100 percent wool in its products. Since that time there has been a limited substitution of synthetic fibers for wool in the production of wool textiles. The wool textiles industry now turns out a small but significant portion of its product in the form of blends of wool and synthetics.

As a result of the change in the mix of raw materials, a portion of what was originally compensatory protection is now bonus protection. Blended fabrics which are imported are in many cases treated as if they were pure wool for tariff purposes, raising the protection accordingly. Also, the use of blends has meant that costs of production are somewhat lower than if pure wool had been used, and therefore the compensatory tariff barrier is relatively higher than originally intended.

Secretary Hodges' point is that the proposal to cut the compensatory duty by an amount equivalent to the proposed cut in raw wool duty would reduce the bonus protection and therefore worsen the existing competitive position of some parts of the industry. If wool compensatory duties were cut, producers of blended textiles would gain only to the extent that they used wool in their products. Their total costs of production would not fall as much as the cut in wool duties because they are no longer using only wool.

This is a valid argument. But four points should be considered in weighing the argument: First, this increase in protection in the last decade or so was a wholly unintended bonus to the industry. The “water” added to the compensatory protection by the change in the industry's raw materials mix is in violation of the spirit of the compensatory principle.

Second, this argument applies only to the users of synthetics whose costs would not fall by the same proportion as the tariff cut. In other words, it applies only to a limited portion of the wool textile industry. It does not apply to producers of wool tops and most yarns, for example. We do not know precisely what proportion of total production of each of the wool products involves synthetics. We do know that synthetics only represent about 15 percent of the raw materials in woolen spinning and worsted combing.

The argument applies only to the extent that synthetics are used. The mix of raw materials may change after a cut in raw wool tariffs. As wool became cheaper relatively to synthetics, there would be a tendency for more wool to be used. An estimate of the harm done to manufacturers of blends would have to be based on the raw materials mix likely to ensue after the tariff cut, and this mix would probably contain a greater proportion of wool, diminishing the possible harm.

Third, the bonus protection which might be reduced is extremely small. The average rate of duty on wool products specified in our international agreement is 36 percent, taking into account the volume of trade in each item. Of this, 9 percentage points represent the average compensatory part of the duty. We have agreed not to cut the whole tariff; only a portion of the compensatory duty will be cut if raw wool tariffs are lowered. If we should cut raw wool by 50 percent, for example, and cut the compensatory duty correspondingly, only 4.5 percentage points of protection are at stake.

But all of the compensatory duty is not “bonus protection"—only a small part of it is, since only a fraction of wool textile production involves synthetics. Suppose that as much as 1/4 of the compensatory duty represents bonus protection, on the average. Of the 4.5 percentage points at stake, this is only a little more than one percentage point. Thus, the bonus protection involved is really miniscule, especially when compared to the international complications which a failure to cut compensatory duties would entail.

Fourth, if there were no cut in the compensatory duty in line with a possible reduction in the raw wool duty there would be certain special effects within the industry. Some of the major integrated producers purchase raw wool and then process the wool through several stages. A cut in raw wool duty alone would mean the costs of their raw materials would fall. But processed textiles would still be protected at the old level. The independent producers, on the other hand, buy processed wool as their raw materials, and would not gain the benefits of the cut in the raw wool. The large, integrated firms would be able to earn a higher margin, or sell more cheaply than the independent firms. In other words, failure to cut the compensatory duty would particularly hurt the competitive position of the many independent producers spread across the country who use semi-processed materials compared to the large, integrated producers of textiles.

There would also be no guarantee and little likelihood that all of the benefits of lower raw materials costs would be passed on to apparel manufacturers, and other users of the more highly processed textiles. These later stages of production are where the preponderant share of employment in the wool textile industry lies.

Cutting the compensatory duty would ensure that the benefits of cheaper raw wool would be passed on to the independent producers and the later stages of production where employment is most at stake.

Legal Arguments for a Cut in Compensatory Duties on Wool Textiles

If the United States should cut the duty on raw wool, it would be under an international obligation to make an equivalent cut in the compensatory part of the duties on wool textiles. For purposes of this memorandum, it is assumed that sheep wool is in question.

In 1947, the United States granted tariff concessions both on several kinds of raw wool and on a number of wool textiles. At the same time, the United States granted an additional concession by agreeing that the relationship between the duties applicable to raw wool and wool textiles would remain constant. The United States did so in a note to that part of its Schedule XX to the GATT which contained the concessions granted on raw wool.

These concessions covered the following four specific kinds of the most prevalent type of raw wool, accounting for over 90% of all raw wool imports: On the skin TSUS 306.30

In the grease or washed; not sorted TSUS 306.31

In the grease or washed; sorted TSUS 306.32

Scoured TSUS 306.33

In 1947, the kind of raw wool which is now classified under TSUS 306.31 accounted for over 95% of all the imports of raw wool; at the present time, it still accounts for over 75% of such imports. Accordingly, the note was attached only to the concession on raw wool now classified under TSUS 306.31. In substance, this note provides that, if the duty on TSUS 306.31 is modified, then the specific part of the duty on specified wool textiles shall be adjusted to an amount having the same ratio to the original specific duty as the ratio of the new duty on TSUS 306.31 to the original duty.

While the duty on the kind of raw wool now classified under TSUS 306.31 has remained unchanged since 1947, the number of wool textiles covered by the note has been increased in subsequent trade negotiations. Accordingly, at the present time, if the United States should reduce the duty on TSUS 306.31, it would be obliged to make a similar reduction in the specific or compensatory duty applicable to wool textiles accounting for over 90% of all wool textile imports.

It might be argued that, if the United States reduced the duty on raw wool other than the kind classified under TSUS 306.31, it would not be required to reduce the specific or compensatory duties on the wool textiles which are covered by the note. While this would be a correct literal reading of the note, it would violate the clear purpose of the note. The major exporters of wool textiles to this country were interested in maintaining a constant relationship between the rates of duty on raw wool and on wool textiles. In order to provide for this relationship, it was reasonable that the note be attached to the concession on that kind of raw wool which at the time accounted for virtually all of the raw wool imports. Accordingly, the major exporters of wool textiles would be on strong grounds in challenging any unilateral attempt by the United States to avoid a reduction in compensatory duties on wool textiles by reducing the duty on any of the kinds of raw wool other than that classified under TSUS 306.31.

It is important to note that any such challenge would be made under the pertinent provisions of the GATT and with respect to an amount of trade valued at about $250 million. Accordingly, in trade negotiations, such as the Kennedy Round, under Article XXVIII bis, the major exporters could demand substantial tariff concessions for the failure of the United States to reduce the compensatory duties on wool textiles. They could also withdraw substantial offers which might have been offered to the United States. Alternatively, under Article XXIII, they would be on strong grounds in claiming the nullification or impairment of a concession granted by the United States and in seeking authorization from the members of the GATT to take retaliatory action.

In other words, recognizing that the GATT governs the manner in which the United States treats the obligation contained in the note, any attempt to distinguish between the specific kinds of raw wool in order to avoid that obligation would, in all likelihood, substantially impair our trade and commercial relationship with the major exporters of wool textiles.

William Roth

1 Source: Johnson Library, Bator Papers, Kennedy Round (GATT) May 4, 1964 [2 of 2], Box 11. Secret.

244. Memorandum From Charles E. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 244. Memorandum From Charles E. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, November 27, 1964.

Mac—

The McNamara-Gordon recommendation to the President contained in their memorandum of October 26 on stockpiling policy2 has been reviewed with these results: (1) There is agreement that a recommendation should be made to the President that he appoint a study group with you as the chairman, to review and report to him on stockpile policy. It would be the President's decision if he at some later time wanted to place the report formally before the National Security Council for its comments.

(2) In addition to the members proposed by McNamara and Gordon, there should be added the Secretary of Commerce and Special Assistant for Science and Technology.

(3) Ed McDermott suggested that the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers and the Budget Director be observers rather than members of the Committee. He does not feel strongly on this matter and the others involved strongly recommend that they be kept as full members.

(4) The placing of the chairmanship in your office is generally agreed to be a key element in this operation because this study is deliberately being thought of as having very important national security aspects which must predominate over the domestic political considerations which have figured too largely in determining stockpile policy up to now. This, however, means that there must be a balanced and sophisticated political and military judgment exercised rather than the heavy-handed military logistics premises that have been used in the past to establish the military premises for stockpile planning.

(5) The NSAM for the President's signature has been prepared with a view to White House release. It is agreed that there is so much Congressional interest in national stockpile policy and so many strong economic interests involved in the Government's determinations in this field that it would be virtually impossible to keep the fact of this study secret. On the contrary, it would be in the Government's interest to announce the study and to pre-empt this field in anticipation of possible Congressional initiatives.

(6) I have talked this over with Francis Bator and we both urge you to recommend that the President sign the NSAM.

CEJ

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. No classification marking.

2  Document 240.

245. Letter From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon) 245. Letter From the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Gordon)1

Washington, November 30, 1964.

Dear Mr. Gordon:

I am enclosing for appropriate action an amendment to Executive Order No. 11052, entitled “Cotton Textiles and Cotton Textile Products".2

As a result of this amendment, this Office would be represented on both the President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee and the Interagency Textile Administrative Committee. In addition, a representative of this Office would serve on the United States Delegation to the Cotton Textiles Committee of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

I believe that the proposed amendment is appropriate for the following reasons. First, it is clear that international trade in cotton and other textiles will have a considerable bearing upon the conduct of the Kennedy Round in Geneva. Second, Executive Order No. 11075, as amended, establishing this Office provides that the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations shall advise the President with respect to international commodity agreements, such as the Long-Term Arrangement on cotton textiles.

I would appreciate whatever can be done to expedite consideration of this proposed executive order.

Most sincerely yours,

Christian A. Herter 3

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 40, Secretary of Commerce Files: FRC 69 A 6828, Textiles, President's Advisory Committee. No classification marking.

2 Not printed. The amendment to Executive Order 11052 was issued on April 7, 1965, as Executive Order 11214. For text, see Federal Register, April 8, 1965, p. 4527.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Herter signed the original.

246. National Security Action Memorandum No. 321 246. National Security Action Memorandum No. 3211

Washington, December 1, 1964.

TO

The Secretary of Defense

The Secretary of Commerce

The Director, Bureau of the Budget

The Director of Emergency Planning

Special Assistant for National Security Affairs

Special Assistant for Science and Technology

The Chairman, Council of Economic Advisers

SUBJECT

Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives

I approve the recommendation of the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, which was concurred in by the Director of Emergency Planning and the Secretary of Defense, that a review be undertaken on national stockpile policy.

Specifically I direct that a study, in light of the current military judgment of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, be made of how the Government can best determine on a continually current basis: a) the material resources which would be required to win such conventional wars as seems most likely that we might have to fight, b) those resources that would be required to rehabilitate the economy and social organization of the country following a major nuclear exchange, should the U. S. be forced to deal with either of these contingencies, c) the alternative means available to provide these resources, and d) the policy implications (including fiscal and national security) of alternative courses of action.

The study will devote particular attention to: (1) The major military and economic assumptions used in calculating existing conventional war stockpile objectives.

(2) The assumptions, techniques, and goals used in the establishment of post-nuclear attack supply requirements.

(3) The relationship of economic rehabilitation requirements to other post-nuclear requirements, such as those for food, shelter, medicine, and other resources required for the survival of the remaining population in the period of extreme emergency.

To organize and coordinate this study, I hereby establish a Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives with my Special Assistant for National Security Affairs as its chairman. The other members will be the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Commerce, my Special Assistant for Science and Technology, the Director of Emergency Planning, the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget. In conducting this study, this Committee will draw on the resources of all departments and agencies as appropriate.

I request that the Committee report its initial findings and recommendations to me by April 1, 1965.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Confidential. A November 30 memorandum from Buddy to the President reads: “This is the directive relating to a review of the strategic stockpile objectives that you discussed with Kermit Gordon the other day. I add my endorsement to that which you have already received from Kermit Gordon, and also recommend that you sign the directive.” (Ibid.)

247. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 247. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, January 13, 1965, 7:23 p.m.

4309. UK Grains Agreement. Embassy requested deliver note along following lines to appropriate officials of UK Government.

Begin text: The Government of the US views most seriously the anticipation that UK imports of cereals in the crop year 1964–65 will be only 8,200 thousand tons. This anticipated level of imports is significantly less than 9,038 thousand tons, the average volume of UK imports during the three years preceding July 1, 1964. As indicated in paragraph 11 of the Exchange of Letters, under such conditions the Government of the United Kingdom has agreed to take effective corrective action at the earliest practicable time to remedy the situation if this decline has taken place or threatens to take place because the policy changes have failed to be effective in maintaining this volume.

The USG believes that it is now apparent that the standard quantities as presently constructed cannot be expected to act as a significant disincentive to production and therefore their effects on imports will be minimal. It considers, therefore, that prompt and effective remedial action is in order.

The US must face the possibility that its grain exports to the UK will become subject to levies from time to time during the coming years. Consequently it is all the more important that effect be given to the provisions of the agreement which are designed to compensate for the trade restrictive effects of such levies.

The US shares the United Kingdom's hope that the agreement should facilitate broader cooperation among cereal exporting and importing countries, in the GATT and elsewhere. However, this expectation will be valid only to the extent to which the participants demonstrate their determination and ability to make the agreement work.

The US Government also takes this opportunity to reemphasize the importance which it attaches to the UK making known to the US as early as possible the adjustments which the UK Government proposes to make in its domestic programs for the coming crop years. End text.

Canadian, Australian and Argentine Embassies have been informed.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by L. Schertz (USDA/FAS); cleared by I.R. Hedges (STR), Stanley Nehmer (OR), Sidney Weintraub (OT/GCP), and Frank M. Tucker (EUR/BNA); and approved by Fred H. Sanderson. Repeated to Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Geneva for GATT.

248. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 248. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, January 26, 1965.

SUBJECT

Department of State Representation on the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives

There has come to my attention a copy of NSAM no. 321, establishing a Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives.2 The interests of the Department of State are very much affected by developments in this field. The fixing of stockpile objectives has implications both for procurement for stockpiling and disposal of surpluses which, in turn, can importantly affect the supply and prices of the strategic commodities involved. Many of these are highly important to economies of friendly, developing countries in sensitive areas of the world. The Department of State has membership in the regular interagency committees which deal with these matters. Although the Department is not an addressee on NSAM no. 321, I will greatly appreciate it if arrangements can be made to include the Department of State in the membership of the important, new committee which is being established in this field.3

J.W. Davis 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Confidential.

2  Document 246.2

3 In a January 27 memorandum to Read, Buddy requested that the Department of State designate a representative to the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives. (Department of State, S/PC Files: Lot 70 D 199, National Security Action Memoranda (NSAM)) On February 13, Read replied in a memorandum to Buddy that Assistant Secretary of State G. Griffith Johnson would represent the Department. (Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review)

4  Davis signed for Read above Read's typed signature.

249. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 249. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 1

Washington, January 29, 1965, 6:31 p.m.

1378. USDA officials met Thursday afternoon, January 28 with representatives Argentine, Australian and Canadian Embassies to review reasons for price changes in wheat which occurred earlier in week and to advise changes to be made in U.S. wheat prices later the same day.

USDA officials explained that weight of world wheat surpluses and aggressive competition for markets was one of the major points discussed at Ministerial meeting in December and that pressure to reduce prices was probably inevitable. Since that time aggressive competition has continued on the part of the other exporters and it was probably this competition that led to Canadian announcement early this week of substantially reduced price for No 5 wheat in order make sales to Red China.

U.S. responded to this new situation on Monday and Tuesday of this week with certain price adjustments which brought our prices more nearly into line with Canadians but still left us short of meeting continuing aggressive Southern Hemisphere price competition.

We then described additional changes in U.S. hard winters and soft wheat to bring U.S. prices more nearly in line with Southern Hemisphere quotations. Told Embassy representatives that so far as the U.S. is concerned, process of adjustment to current situation now completed provided that other exporting countries not cut their prices below current levels. Said U.S. prepared to hold prices at current levels with the hope that our competitive situation would improve. Stated U.S. willing to lead upward price movement when justified but stressed that for time being we should attempt encourage buyer confidence that lowest plateau prices reached and thus encourage purchases.

We also offered to reconsider our quotations if they could be shown to undercut foreign quotations for comparable qualities.

Understandably, Embassy representatives not in position to make any substantive comments about action and advised they would communicate contents general discussion and specific price actions taken to their home governments.

Canada, Friday morning, made substantial reductions all grades of Manitoba wheats. In response, U.S. increased Northern Spring subsidy 13 cents per bushel Friday afternoon. We anticipated Canadian and U.S. prices will stabilize at approximately the relationship resulting from Friday's changes.

Cumulative net price reductions per bushel during week though 1/29 are as follows: Canada at Vancouver at Fort William-Churchill-Lakehead

#1 -12 -12

#2 -15 -12

#3 -19 -16

#4 -20 1/2 -18

#5 -17 -14

#6 -18 -12

Feed -18 -12

U.S. Wheats West Coast Atlantic-Gulf-Lakes

Hard Red Winter -20 -20

Western White -8 —

Soft Red Winter — -18

U.S. Wheats West Coast Atlantic-Gulf-Lakes

Soft Eastern White — -18

Hard Northern Spring -19 -19

Will advise any further significant developments.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT US. Unclassified. Drafted by Raymond A. Ioanes and W. N. Starkey (USDA) on January 29, cleared by Jerome Jacobson (E), and approved by Fred H. Sanderson (OR/FD). Sent to Bonn, Brussels, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Hamburg, London, Geneva for GATT, Manila, New Delhi, Ottawa, Paris, Rome, and Tokyo.

250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 250. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 1

Washington, February 2, 1965, 8:21 p.m.

1911. Wool Textiles. Deptel 1822.2 Embassy is requested to clarify with GOJ discussion between President and Sato on wool textile issue. President said he would like to consider asking group of Govt (possibly including members of Congress) and industry reps to discuss wool textile problem with their Japanese counterparts. President did not propose meeting limited to industry reps as GOJ has indicated, nor would this be acceptable approach in view (a) need of two Govts to come to grips with problem, and (b) possible effect of US anti-trust laws.

Purpose of meeting would be to have candid and thorough discussion on wool textiles which two govts have not had to date. Presence of industry reps at some sessions could prove mutually beneficial in learning of each other's problems. USG has not changed its view of need for multilateral meeting of govts on wool textiles and also wishes to explore this possibility with GOJ.

US would be willing to have proposed meeting in Washington but would not object to holding meeting in Tokyo.

At final session between President and Sato at which wool textiles were discussed in some detail, President charged Ambassador Reischauer with working through plans for such meeting.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN, Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer (E/OR) on January 29; cleared by Robert W. Barnett (FE), James S. Love (Commerce), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), Thomson and Feldman (White House), Harald B. Malmgren (STR), John J. deMartino (S/S), and Francis Bator; and approved by G. Griffith Johnson.

2 In telegraph 1822 to Tokyo, January 23, the Department of State denied that there were plans to follow up on Japan's willingness to hold industry-to-industry talks on the wool textile trade. President Johnson had suggested instead “an exchange of views” between a cross-section of government and industry representatives on both sides during the January 12–13 official visit of Prime Minister Sato. (Ibid.)

251. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 251. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, February 11, 1965, 5 p.m.

2515. Reference: Embtel 2424.2 Wool Textiles. In response to FonOff and MITI request for further discussion and clarification of President's proposal for a bilateral wool textile meeting prior to Ambassador's raising issue at higher levels, EconMin met with Nakayama (Director EAB FonOff) and Yoshioka (Chief Textile Export Section, MITI) February 10.

Nakayama said GOJ record this portion of discussion between President and Prime Minister somewhat unclear but GOJ had understood that Sato had proposed US and Japan wool textile industry meeting only, without involvement govt reps, had further understood that purpose of meeting was to permit frank exchange of views between two industries which might contribute to reasonable solution this difficult problem.

Nakayama explained that clarification of US proposal given Yasukawa by DCM last week (reftel) added new complications for Japanese side, particularly since DCM had indicated that USG would want to explore possibility of multilateral meeting of govts on wool textiles at such meeting. Nakayama emphasized that GOJ remains as in past adamantly opposed to international arrangements on products as well as to any multilateral conferences which would aim toward such arrangements. Therefore discussion either possibility would be useless and lead only to embarrassment and possibly acrimony. (In “off the record” comment, Nakayama noted that such meeting between govt reps would also create difficulties for GOJ because it has agreed with UK and Italy to hold solid line in opposition to any US attempts aimed toward an international arrangement on wool textiles. He said that, as result of Sakarauchi announcement of new USG approach on wool textiles, UK has already asked GOJ whether it is softening its position on this issue—protect source.)

EconMin noted that GOJ agreement to meet would not imply any prior commitments by either side to methods of resolving problem but merely provide opportunity for discussion various possibilities. Added that meeting solely of industry reps would be difficult for US side because of US anti-trust laws, in addition to not satisfying necessity of two govts coming to grips with problem.

Nakayama and MITI rep acknowledged potential USG problem if GOJ insisted on meeting of industry reps only and, after MITI rep cleared by phone with his ministry, made following counter-proposal: 1. GOJ would greatly prefer meeting of industry reps only and would be able to obtain Japanese industry agreement to such meeting without difficulty.

2. However, if USG insists on joint meeting with govt and industry reps, GOJ “has no reason to refuse” but will have to consult again with industry since latter has as yet no knowledge of this clarification of proposal. GOJ cannot assure industry agreement but believes it probable.

3. In either case, GOJ must insist on prior agreement that possibilities of a multilateral conference and/or an international arrangement on wool textiles not be raised or discussed at the meeting.

4. Provided the USG agrees to this condition, GOJ wishes meeting be held in Tokyo.

Nakayama and MITI rep said that while awaiting USG response to GOJ counter-proposal, MITI would make preliminary soundings of industry on its attitude toward joint meeting with govt reps.

Instructions requested.

Reischauer

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Confidential.

2 Telegram 2424 from Tokyo, February 5, described a meeting on February 4 between Charge Emmerson and the Director of the American Affairs Bureau of the Japanese Foreign Office, at which Emmerson was asked whether the United States would insist on a meeting. (Ibid.)

252. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 252. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 1

London, February 17, 1965, noon.

3960. Department pass STR for Hedges and Agriculture. U.S.-U.K. Cereals Agreement.

1. British Embassy Washington will be transmitting to Department today note in reply to U.S. note on cereals arrangements.2 Engholm asked Embassy officer to pass personal message to Hedges giving a little more background and explanation for vague language of note.

2. Engholm said in light of his statements in December he had argued strongly for greater degree of commitment at this time to foreign suppliers. His position, however, was turned down by his Minister on grounds that possible leak of such assurances might cause serious difficulty with farmers and in House of Commons. Fact that reply had to be given to all four principal suppliers and belief that reply would certainly be leaked by Argentines, as in case of agreement last year, led Minister to be very careful.

3. Engholm wished to stress point on personal basis, however, that our views as expressed in note will be firmly in mind of MinAg officials as they proceed with price review. Key question will be adjustment of standard quantities. After discussion with farmers, Ministers will have to make their decision on this point. Engholm hoped that we would understand that lack of assurance at this time, while review with farmers still in process, should not be taken by us as sign that U.K. will not fulfill its responsibilities under agreement. He added that he personally thought result would satisfy US.

Comment:

Embassy believes that civil servants were indeed anxious to put specific assurances in reply to our note in order help gain Ministerial commitment which would give them additional support in their dealings with farmers. We do not believe Minister's refusal should be taken as sign of reluctance to stand up to farm pressures but rather as genuine fear that leak might occur. Embassy believes we still may, however, have differences of view with government about what constitutes satisfactory adjustment of standard quantity. Labor government with small majority will be under great pressure from farmers and we have heard already that they are telling government that farmers could affect election outcome in twenty marginal seats now held by Labor. Therefore, between end of price review and final Ministerial decision, we may have to create opportunity for further statement of our views in order support civil servants with strong counter pressures to those they have been facing for past month.

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use; Priority; Limdis; Noforn. Repeated to Geneva for GATT and passed to the White House.

2 These notes have not been found. A commentary on the British note is in telegraph 4009 from London, February 18. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US)

253. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 253. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 1

Washington, February 18, 1965, 3:50 p.m.

2078. Ref. Embtel 2515,2 Deptel 1911.3 Wool Textiles. Dept and other agencies following wool textile problem gratified that GOJ apparently willing, subject to consultations with its industry, to participate in joint US-Japanese meeting with govt and industry reps; but at the same time agencies are concerned over restrictive condition attached by GOJ to scope of such bilateral discussions.

Condition proposed by GOJ eliminating possibility of discussing multilateral and/or international arrangement on wool textiles at meeting would create major difficulty for USG and undoubtedly prevent USG from participating in proposed meeting.

USG opposed to condition proposed by GOJ for following reasons: 1. Meetings with UK and Italian Govts in July 1964 discussed not only problem faced by US wool textile industry but also question of multilateral conference for consideration of various solutions, including but not limited to, international wool textile arrangement.4 Thus GOJ condition would mean more restrictive bilateral conversations than was the case with July 1964 conversations in London and Rome. Only difference is that industry reps not present in meetings with UKG and Italian Govt.

2. Meeting limited to discussing problem without discussing possible solutions would not meet USG need. Discussion of multilateral conference and/or international arrangement does not in any way commit Japanese Govt to any course of action.

3. GOJ may also wish to consider precedential aspect of GOJ placing restrictive condition on scope of bilateral exploration of problems between US and Japan.

4. US proposal for meeting (Deptel 1911) indicated that industry reps would be present at some session. Although USG would prefer to avoid limiting participation in meetings, USG would be prepared to discuss multilateral conference and/or international arrangement solution at meeting limited to Govt reps on both sides, if GOJ feels unable to discuss these issues in presence of industry advisors.

Embassy requested to use foregoing points in continuing to press GOJ for favorable response to USG proposal.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Confidential. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer on February 17; cleared by Thelma E. Vettel (FE), James S. Love (Commerce), Edgar I. Eaton (Labor), Harald B. Malmgren (STR), George R. Jacobs (OR), Thomson and Bator (White House); and approved by G. Griffith Johnson.

2 Dated February 11. (Ibid.)

3 Dated February 2. (Ibid.)

4 See Document 233.

254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 254. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, February 24, 1965, 7:02 p.m.

5320. Ref: Embtel 4009.2 The following letter from Governor Herter to Minister of Agriculture Peart was delivered by Ambassador Roth to Minister of Economic Affairs John Chadwick of the British Embassy. You may wish to follow up with representation at appropriate Government levels with the U.K. Government in London.

My dear Mr. Minister:

As you know, the United States attaches great importance to the Exchange of Letters of April 15, 1964 between the United States Government and the Government of the United Kingdom regarding United Kingdom production and trade policies relating to cereals.3 We believe, as you do, that the agreement establishes an important precedent for cooperation among cereal exporting and importing countries in that it links the objective of promoting greater stability in the United Kingdom cereals market with that of maintaining a fair and reasonable balance between home production and imports. We attach special importance to those provisions of the agreement by which the United Kingdom has undertaken to enter into regular consultations with its major grain suppliers and to take effective corrective action at the earliest practicable time if total imports of cereals show or threaten to show an appreciable decline below the average volume of such imports during the three years preceding July 1, 1964.

The United States shares your Government's hope that the agreement will facilitate progress in the far-reaching negotiations which the major grain exporting and importing countries are about to begin in the GATT Cereals Group. However, these expectations will be fulfilled only if it can be shown that the arrangements which we have made are working satisfactorily. We therefore view most seriously the evidence that the balance between home production and imports in the United Kingdom is not being maintained and that United Kingdom imports of cereals this year are even likely to fall substantially short of the minimum level of 9 million tons provided for in the Exchange of Letters.

We are also concerned about the difficulties in implementing the provisions for timely and meaningful consultations contained in paragraphs 4, 6, 10, and 11 of the Exchange of Letters. You will recall that in the meeting held in London last December your representatives agreed that these discussions marked only a beginning of the consultations and that the United Kingdom Government would notify the principal exporting countries of its preliminary thinking concerning further steps to be taken by the United Kingdom authorities as early as possible during the Annual Review so as to give the exporting countries an adequate opportunity to comment. We are disappointed therefore that the United Kingdom Government's Note No. 46 of February 17, 19654 does not contain information concerning your preliminary thinking on standard quantities and guaranteed prices for the coming crop year.

We are gratified, on the other hand, to find confirmation in the Note that your Government intends to ensure that the objectives of the agreement are fulfilled and that it is prepared to take all practical steps to this end. We for our part are anxious to continue our consultations and in particular to review the steps which your Government is planning to take to correct the decline of imports during the current and future years. To this end we request that a meeting be held between representatives of our governments in sufficient time prior to the conclusion of the Annual Review to enable our views to be taken into consideration. End text.

FYI: We have suggested to Chadwick that the meeting should be held at least two weeks prior to conclusion of Annual Review.

Embassies of Argentine, Australia, and Canada have been informed.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Fred H. Sanderson (E/OR/FD) and L. Schertz (USDA/FAS), cleared by Carl W. Schmidt (E/OT/GCP) and I.R. Hedges (STR), and approved by Stanley Nehmer (E/OR). Repeated to Brussels for BUSEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Geneva for GATT.

2 Dated February 18. (Ibid.)

3 See Document 215.

4 See footnote 2, Document 252.

255. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to Secretary of State Rusk 255. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, March 2, 1965.

SUBJECT

Participation in Negotiations for New World Sugar Agreement

In facing up to the question of our participating in negotiation of a world sugar agreement, I find the following considerations pertinent: 1. In the main, sugar is an export crop for LDC's, most of whom are in Latin America. Most cannot produce at under 4 cents per lb. With world sugar prices (apart from sales under preferential arrangements) currently under 2.5 cents per lb. they are facing serious losses of foreign exchange income, and some of them, severe balance-of-payments difficulties. The LDC sugar producers, therefore, are pressing urgently for negotiation of a new world sugar agreement which would provide for export quotas and market access assurances to maintain at least a 4 cents per lb. minimum price.

2. The United Kingdom, although a large importer of sugar, favors a new agreement in the interest of helping Commonwealth LDC sugar producers.

3. Some sugar importers accept the desirability of an agreement, because of their own interest in having stable sugar prices and in order to help the LDC's. However, Canada and Japan, among the largest importers of sugar, are not overly enthusiastic about an agreement. (Canada does not participate in the Commonwealth sugar preference arrangement.) Canada and Japan are likely to reject any agreement ab initio designed to exclude Cuba. Without them there will be no agreement.

4. If at the April meeting of the International Sugar Council, we abstain from or vote against a resolution recommending that the Secretary General of the UN convene a negotiating conference, or if we openly declare we will participate only in an agreement from which Cuba is excluded, there will be no agreement and political opprobrium will rain down upon us from the sugar producers and other LDC's with a stake in commodity stabilization arrangements. On the other hand, the course of the negotiations would give us many opportunities to press for and line up support for features in a new agreement which the Cubans would find unacceptable. This could lead to an agreement without Cuba; one from which the Cubans had excluded themselves. With such a negotiating history, the Japanese and Canadians might be willing to go along with an agreement without Cuba. On the other hand, if we find we are moving toward an agreement which the Cubans will accept, we could still decline to participate and base our decision on dissatisfaction with details of the arrangements rather than on bare-faced objection to an agreement including Cuba. There would be some political blame if our decision meant no agreement, but it would be minimal in relation to the blame that would accrue to us if we torpedo the negotiation before it started.

Accordingly, I recommend approval of the attached action recommendation.2

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar Conference 1965. No classification marking. Drafted by J. A. Silberstein on March 2.

2 Memorandum from Johnson (E) to Secretary Rusk, February 11, not printed. Secretary of State Rusk initialed his approval of the recommendation on March 15.

256. Letter From the British Minister of Agriculture (Peart) to the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter) 256. Letter From the British Minister of Agriculture (Peart) to the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations (Herter)1

London, March 3, 1965.

Dear Governor Herter,2

Thank you for your letter, delivered to me on 26th February,3 referring to the arrangements for consultation under the exchange of letters of 15th April, 1964, relating to United Kingdom production and trade policies for cereals. I entirely agree with you about the importance of this agreement as a precedent for international co-operation and a means of facilitating progress in the Kennedy Round negotiations. I recognise that it is particularly important in this connection to be able to show that the arrangements are working satisfactorily.

I am anxious therefore that the consultations provided for in the agreement should be as full and meaningful as is possible in the circumstances. You will appreciate however that I must at the same time have regard to the requirements of our domestic agricultural legislation. As you know, under the Agriculture Acts of 1947 and 1957, decisions relating to the guarantee arrangements and the level of guaranteed prices must be taken by Ministers in the light of the Annual Review of the economic condition and prospects of the agricultural industry. It is essential that the Review should be held under conditions of strict confidence. There can be no disclosure of the Government's specific intentions until Ministers have taken decisions in the light of the Review and I am in a position to announce those decisions in Parliament.

This necessarily affects the form of the consultations under the agreement. At the consultations which began in December 1964, however, we supplied the representatives of the principal supplying countries with full information about developments in the current crop year, and they were able to make very clear to us their views on the need for remedial action in the light of the present and prospective import situation. At the same time, we undertook to inform the principal exporting countries as early as possible in the Annual Review of our preliminary thinking particularly in regard to the level of the standard quantities and estimated total consumption of cereals in 1965/66. This we have done in the note delivered to your Government on 17th February.4

For the reasons I have explained, we shall not be able to give definite indications of the action to be taken in regard to the adjustment of the standard quantities or the level of guaranteed prices until the Annual Review has been completed. If, however, as I understand from your letter, you wish to have a further opportunity of representing your arguments, I shall be pleased to arrange for my officials to have a meeting later this week or next week with officials from your Embassy here.

I am sure you will appreciate the delicate nature of these consultations and I hope that this arrangement will be agreeable to you. I can assure you that the U.K. Government are most anxious to see the objectives of the agreements fulfilled and intend to give full weight to their obligations under them.

Yours sincerely

Fred Peart

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. No classification marking. The source text is an attachment to airgram A–2211 from London, March 6. The text of the letter was also transmitted in telegram 4219 from London, March 3. (Ibid.)

2 The salutation and complimentary close are handwritten.

3 See Document 254.

4 See footnote 2, Document 252.

257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, March 5, 1965, 7:31 p.m.

5549. Ref: Embtel 4219.2 Embassy is requested deliver following Aide-Memoire to MinAg Peart.

Begin verbatim text: With reference to the letter from the U.K. Minister of Agriculture to Governor Herter delivered on March 33 in reply to Governor Herter's letter regarding the arrangements for consultations as set forth in the Exchange of Letters between the Governments of the UK and US on trade in cereals, the US appreciates the renewed assurance of the intention of the UK Government to meet the obligations it accepted in the agreement so as to fulfill the objectives set forth in that agreement.

At the same time the US regrets that the letter from the Minister of Agriculture does not indicate the ability of the UK to implement the provisions for consultations in a manner which the US considers would make them timely and meaningful. In the US view the provisions for consultations meant that the UK's preliminary thinking on standard quantities and guaranteed prices would be made available to the US as was done in the early part of 1964 prior to the conclusion of that year's Annual Review. The letter from the Minister of Agriculture (1) confirms that the UK undertook, in the consultations with the principal exporting countries which began in December 1964, to inform those countries of the UK's preliminary thinking and (2) states that this was done with respect to standard quantities and consumption in the note delivered to the US Government on February 17. The US wishes to point out that although the note of February 17 included an estimate of consumption, it did not include preliminary thinking on the level of the standard quantities or on guaranteed prices.

The US appreciates that the UK will not be able to give definitive indications of the action to be taken in regard to the adjustment of the standard quantities or the level of guaranteed prices until the Annual Review has been completed. What the US has been requesting is an expression of the UK's preliminary thinking with respect to 1965/66 standard quantities and guaranteed prices for cereals.

In asking for a meeting prior to the conclusion of the UK's Annual Review, the US sought an opportunity to discuss with the UK the probable effect of the planned changes on UK cereal production, and in turn on cereal imports. If the UK is not prepared to give the US preliminary information on these planned changes, the US sees no benefit to be derived from another meeting.

As the UK is aware, the US is most concerned that imports from the third-countries are falling substantially short of the objectives set forth in the Exchange of Letters. While the US recognizes that it is up to the UK to decide on the means of implementing its objectives on imports, in the US view it would appear the minimum corrective action needed would be a reduction in both the guaranteed prices and the standard quantities to the fullest extent permitted by the UK legislation. Even with the maximum adjustments in the guaranteed prices and standard quantities permitted by the UK law, there would appear to be considerable doubt that the changes will be sufficient to correct the decline in imports and additional measures might have to be considered.

If the Government of the UK should find itself able to inform the US of its preliminary views on changes in the standard quantities and guaranteed prices, the US would still welcome the opportunity for represent-atives of our two Governments to consult within the next week on this subject. End text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by G. A. Friedman (E/OR/FD) and L. Schertz (USDA/FAS) on March 5; cleared by I. R. Hedges (STR), Fred H. Sanderson (OR/FD), A. R. De Felice (USDA), Frank M. Tucker (EUR/BNA), and Carl W. Schmidt (OT/GCP); and approved by Stanley Nehmer (OR). Repeated to Ottawa, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Brussels for BUSEC, and Geneva for GATT.

2 See footnote 1, Document 256.

3  Document 256.

258. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) 258. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Johnson) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1

Washington, March 12, 1965.

SUBJECT

The Cocoa Situation

Cocoa is currently selling at 17 cents, which is a 19-year low. The prospect is for some further price decline. Production this year is about 20 percent higher than last year's record crop, and almost 70 percent higher than the 1955–59 average. Manufacturers' stock—already high—are likely to reach 8 months' supply by the end of this crop year. Present low prices will stimulate consumption after a 6–9 month time lag, but it will be some years before demand begins to balance prospective supply. The situation of the cocoa producers (Ghana, Nigeria, Brazil, Ivory Coast, Cameroon), therefore, may be described as bad, and likely to get worse. Despite this, several of them are expanding cocoa plantings.

Since World War II cocoa prices have fluctuated widely. A poor crop in 1953–54 sent prices to 73 cents a lb. When prices plunged thereafter to 30 cents, there was pressure from the Africans and some Western European consumers to organize the market. The FAO created a Cocoa Study Group in 1956, and by 1962 a draft cocoa agreement emerged which seemed to provide an acceptable basis for negotiation. A UN negotiating conference was held in 1963. After seven weeks it collapsed, primarily on the price issue. The producers wanted an international cocoa agreement which would raise prices above the then current level of 25–26 cents. They asked for a price range of 31.25 to 43.75 cents. The consumers advocated a price range of 18 to 28 cents, and the gap was so wide it could not be bridged. The price ideas of the United States were the lowest of any consuming country throughout the negotiation. The U.S. Delegate was never authorized to go above 21 cents as the point at which export quotas would be mandatory, and 20 cents was our last public offer to the producers.

With the collapse of the Conference in 1963, the producers joined forces and their Cocoa Producers Alliance initiated a quota-type agreement in July 1964. Dissatisfied with prices of about 23ȼ, they announced 25.25ȼ as their target and withdrew from the market on October 15, 1964. Dealers and manufacturers were surprised and worried at the strength displayed by the Alliance as they continued withdrawn and supplies began tightening. Finally, however, non-compliance with the Agreement by the Ivory Coast and Cameroon (and questionable actions by Ghana) brought the Agreement down, and it collapsed on February 1, 1965. A race to sell cocoa ensued, and prices plunged to today's level of 17ȼ. The three nearby months on the futures market are even lower, averaging less than 16ȼ for African cocoa. Brazilian cocoa normally sells somewhat lower than African. Although cocoa only provides around 5 percent of Brazil's foreign exchange earnings, the impact of sharply lower prices will be felt in one state—Bahia.

The cocoa merchants, chocolate manufacturers, and confectionery industry in the United States have always strongly opposed an international cocoa agreement as an unwarranted restriction on free trade. Prior to the negotiating conference in 1963, they pooled funds and hired Clark Clifford's firm to lobby in Washington against an international agreement. The present chaotic market and disaster prices have not changed their view—it can be anticipated that they will organize again and fight United States participation in an international cocoa agreement.2

At the time the 1963 negotiating conference broke up, provision was made for the Secretary-General to keep under review any further discussions which might make it desirable to resume the negotiating conference. Later, in June 1964, the FAO Director-General was instructed by the Committee on Commodity Problems to explore attitudes toward new discussions. The FAO in February 1965 found wide agreement among producing countries to a proposal that consultations be arranged at the time of (but outside) a meeting of the FAO Cocoa Statistical Committee. Consumer governments unanimously believed this was desirable, or unavoidable, and agreed to send representatives. Accordingly, a meeting has been scheduled for April 12–14.

The U.S. representative, all concerned have been informed, will be unable to enter into commitments regarding substance or procedure but will report what may be proposed.3

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 78 D 52, Cocoa—Resumption of Negotiations. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Paul E. Callanan (E/OR) and cleared by George R. Jacobs (OR) and Jerome Jacobson (E). A handwritten note on the source text indicates that Mann saw the memorandum. Three attached charts ("Cocoa Beans: 1963 Imports by Major Consuming Countries,” “Cocoa Producer Alliance: Value of Exports of Cocoa Beans and Products by Member Countries, 1958–63,” and “Importance of Cocoa to Developing Countries") are not printed.

2 This paragraph contains several handwritten emendations: brackets around “hired Clark Clifford's firm to"; “lobby” changed to “lobbied"; “It is doubtful that” inserted as a new start to the next sentence; in which “not” has been bracketed; and brackets around the last sentence in the paragraph.

3 Handwritten brackets have been inserted at the beginning and end of this paragraph.

259. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 259. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 1

Washington, March 17, 1965, 4:08 p.m.

2347. Wool Textiles. Wada's present thinking unacceptable as means meeting problem. Nor was suggestion of 6–8 industry reps and two USG reps practical (Embtel 2828).2

What is needed to meet proposal by President to Sato is joint govt-industry meeting. We would expect that govt rep would be chairman of US Del. Discussions when industry and govt reps together would permit participation of industry reps. Meetings limited to govt reps could discuss questions relating to international agreement which GOJ seems reluctant to have discussed with industry reps present.

Exact level of govt representation not considered here as yet although at least three agencies would be represented. Similar talks in London and Rome in July 1964 (without industry reps) had Warren Christopher (Special Rep of Secy State) as Chairman of US Del. Other members included Love (Special Assistant to Secy Commerce), Ruttenberg (then Special Assistant to Secy Labor), and Nehmer (Director, E:OR, State). As indicated in Deptel 1911,3 possibility of including Congressional reps was mentioned by President to Sato.

Pressures here are continuing and we need to know as soon as feasible whether GOJ can agree to terms proposed by USG (as in foregoing and Deptel 2078).4

Accordingly, Ambassador is requested to pursue question with ForMin and, if necessary, MITI Minister on basis of statement made by President to Ambassador during discussion with Sato on January 13, charging Ambassador with working through plans for meeting.5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer; cleared by Robert W. Barnett (FE), Francis Bator, James S. Love (Commerce), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), Harald B. Malmgren (STR), Chadwick Johnson and Wendell W. Woodbury (EA/J); and approved by G. Griffith Johnson.

2 In telegram 2828 from Tokyo, March 11, the Embassy reported that Wada had originally proposed that the United States send an “industry delegation” accompanied by government observers. Industry and government representatives would then meet separately with their counterparts. (Ibid.)

3 See footnote 3, Document 253.

4 Dated February 18. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US– JAPAN)

5 A memorandum of the President's conversation with Prime Minister Sato, January 13, is scheduled for publication in volume XXIX.

260. Editorial Note 260. Editorial Note

On March 24, 1965, Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman signed a Protocol for the Extension of the International Wheat Agreement, 1962. The Protocol provided for the extension of the 1962 Agreement, which would expire on July 31, 1965, until July 31, 1966. The U.S. Senate gave its advice and consent to the Protocol on June 15, which entered into force for the United States on July 16 (Parts I and III–VII) and August 1 (Part II). For text of the Protocol, see 16 UST 1010. Documentation on the ratification of the Protocol is in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT 4.

261. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 261. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, April 2, 1965, 5:39 p.m.

6290. Unless Embassy sees objection, please deliver note along following lines to appropriate officials of the U.K. Government:

Begin text. The U.S. Government acknowledges receipt of the U.K. Government's note of March 16, 19652 which contained the changes in the cereals guarantee arrangements for the 1965 harvest announced on March 17.

The U.S. believes that the decision to reduce the guaranteed prices for wheat and barley by respectively one shilling one pence and one shilling four pence per cwt. was a step in the right direction.

The U.S. Government regrets however the increase in the standard quantity for both wheat and barley. It estimates that the net effect of the changes in the guaranteed prices, standard quantities, and target indicator prices is to reduce producer returns approximately by 3–1/2 to 4–1/2 per cent. British estimates of the response of production to price changes suggests that a decrease of this small magnitude in cereal returns would restrain U.K. cereal production by not more than 200,000 L.T. if yields did not increase. This should be compared with a short fall in imports of at least 0.8 million tons from the minimum level of imports provided in the Agreement and by as much of 1.3 million tons if the balance between imports and domestic production were maintained. Consequently, the U.S. does not believe that the changes made in the guaranteed prices and other arrangements for cereals will be sufficient to restore cereals imports to the levels foreseen in the Agreement, particularly in view of the fact that yields have been increasing and will likely continue to increase in the future. It is the view of the United States Government that additional corrective measures are required in accordance with paragraph 11 of the Agreement. We therefore request that the U.K. Government consider undertaking promptly further steps to restore imports to the levels foreseen in the Agreement.

Our two Governments are agreed that the Agreement constitutes an important precedent for cooperation among cereal exporting and importing countries, particularly at this critical stage in the development of a broader GATT Cereals Arrangement.

We would hope that more effective procedures for conducting consultations provided under the Agreement could be worked out. To be effective for the purposes of the Agreement such consultation must afford the opportunity to discuss with the U.K. the probable effects of planned changes in programs prior to the U.K. Government making final decisions. Without such a procedure there is in effect no consultation but merely the opportunity to make representations. End text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges (STR), cleared by R. A. Ioanes (FAS) and Fred H. Sanderson, and approved by Hedges. Repeated to Canberra, Ottawa, Buenos Aires, and Geneva for GATT.

2 Not found.

262. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 262. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 1

London, April 6, 1965, 1131Z.

4855. Dept pass Agriculture and STR for Hedges. Deptel 6290.2 US–UK cereals agreement. Embassy has studied suggested note to UK Government on operation cereals arrangements and believes that certain changes should be made to make more effective presentation.

Principal changes suggested in draft, which follows below, deal with making more specific our analysis of price review decisions, making more positive our view that UK has made step toward meeting “spirit” of agreement but at same time stressing fact that further action necessary and procedures for consultation inadequate. Main Embassy suggestion is that, rather than present flat position, we immediately call for meeting with UK of principal exporters to discuss both adequacy of decisions taken at this year's annual review and methods to improve effectiveness consultations provided for in agreement. Following is our suggested re-draft:

Begin text

(Para 1—no change.)

(Para 2)

The United States Government believes the reductions in the guaranteed prices for wheat and barley were a positive step forward by the United Kingdom in meeting the spirit of the agreement.

(Para 3)

The United States Government does however regret that the stand-ard quantity increase of 250,000 long tons for barley and 100,000 long tons for wheat were instituted. This increase in the standard quantity will have the effect of increasing wheat prices by 0.5 percent and barley prices by 0.85 percent. The net decline in wheat and barley prices will then be approximately 3.6 percent and 4.2 percent respectively. Estimates of the response in production made by British experts indicate that these price reductions will reduce wheat production by about 50,000 long tons and barley by 155,000 long tons, assuming yields did not increase. This possible decline in domestic production will only maintain import requirements at a level of 800,000 long tons below the minimum level of imports provided for by the agreement and by as much as 1.3 million tons if the balance between imports and domestic production were maintained. Consequently, it does not appear to the United States Government that the changes in guaranteed prices and other arrangements made for cereals will be sufficient to restore cereal imports to the levels foreseen in the agreement. The problem will be further aggravated by the fact that yields have been increasing in the past and will continue to do so in the future. This point was made by a Minister in the recent House of Commons debate when it was indicated that the decline in price for barley could easily be offset by increased yields through the use of more fertilizer and better seeds.

(New paras 4 and 5 replace rest of text)

Para 4. It is the view of the United States Government that additional corrective measures are required in accordance with paragraph 11 of the agreement. In order to present our views and in the spirit of full consultation provided for in the agreement, the Government of the United States wishes to request a meeting with the representatives of the Government of the United Kingdom and representatives of the other major supplying countries. We would hope that such a meeting would discuss not only possible additional corrective action but also the future procedure for conducting consultations. The Government of the United States believes that a procedure must be found which provides for effective consultations on the probable effects of planned changes in programs and not merely an opportunity to make representations.

Para 5. Our two governments are agreed that the agreement constitutes an important precedent for operation among cereal exporting and importing countries, particularly at this critical stage in the development of a broader GATT cereals arrangement. Therefore we believe that the issues raised thus far in the operation of this agreement must be frankly and fully discussed.

End text.

Please comment and instruct.3

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Buenos Aires, Canberra, Brussels for USEC, and Geneva and passed to the White House.

2  Document 261.

3  Telegram 6709 to London, April 22, accepted this Embassy revised text, subject to the following changes: “Para. 3, replace the fifth sentence, beginning ‘;This possible decline’ with original sentence para. 3 ref. A) beginning ‘This should be compared with short fall imports of at least 0.8 million tons, etc.’ Believe this necessary for accuracy.

"Paras. 4 and 5, substitute following: ‘It is the view of the U.S. Government that additional corrective measures are required in accordance with para. 11 of the Agreement. Our two Governments are agreed that the Agreement constitutes an important precedent for operation among cereals exporting and importing countries, particularly in this critical stage in the development of a broader GATT Cereals Agreement. We believe that the issues raised thus far in the operation of this Agreement must be frankly and fully discussed and ways found which ensure effective consultations on the probable effects of planned changes in programs and not merely an opportunity to make representations. To this end we would look forward to further meetings between representatives of our two Governments.’” (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 UK-US)

263. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 263. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, April 6, 1965, 6 p.m.

3159. Ref: Embtel 663.2 Subject: Wool Textiles. On April 5 Nakayama (Director, Econ Affairs Bureau, FonOff) informed EconMin of agreed GOJ response to U.S. request for meeting on wool textiles as follows: (1) GOJ has given careful consideration to U.S. proposal to send mission to Japan for discussion wool textile situation;

(2) GOJ wishes to reiterate that its position against wool textile agreement and against a conference for purpose of concluding such agreement is unchanged;

(3) If, with full knowledge above GOJ position, USG nevertheless wants to send mission, GOJ has no reason to refuse and will receive mission;

(4) GOJ does not consider that U.S. proposal is in conformity with its understanding of discussions carried on at time of Sato-Johnson meeting. GOJ wishes to state for record that in its view Japanese suggestion for meeting of industry representatives would have been most useful approach to question.

In response to Nakayama's question, EconMin said Embassy had no instructions re timing of proposed meeting but assumed U.S. would wish to move quickly. Nakayama said he concerned that, if meeting held while Congress in session, particularly while Congress dealing with Wool Act, and meeting does not produce results satisfactory to U.S., there is danger of unilateral action by Congress. On other hand he recognized that protracted delay in scheduling meeting might have same result. On balance he thought best time for meeting would be during upper house campaign period preceding upper Diet house election when politicians and general public would be distracted by election issues and meeting would attract relatively less notice in Japan. Election expected to be held either June 20 or 27 and official campaign period will begin one month earlier, i.e. May 20 or 27.

Reischauer

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Confidential.

2 This reference is incorrect; it should probably be to telegram 2963, March 23. (Ibid.)

264. Editorial Note 264. Editorial Note

In response to the Government of Japan's willingness to receive a U.S. mission to discuss the wool textile problem (see Document 263), the Department of State proposed that discussions between the United States and Japan on wool textile exports be held in Tokyo during the week of May 17. (Telegram 2604, April 12; Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17, US–JAPAN) The Japanese Government responded by proposing a meeting for the week of June 4 or 14. (Telegram 3314 from Tokyo, April 16; ibid.) Both parties then agreed to schedule the meeting for June 7 and 8. (Telegram 3707 from Tokyo, May 13; ibid.)

The official members of the U.S. mission were: Warren M. Christopher, Consultant to the Department of State; Stanley Nehmer, Director of the Office of International Resources in the Bureau of Economic Affairs; Laurence C. Vass, Minister Counselor for Economic and Commercial Affairs; James S. Love, Jr., Special Assistant to the Secretary of Commerce; Herbert N. Blackman, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary of Labor for International Affairs; and Harald B. Malmgren, senior economist in the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations. (Telegram 3011 to Tokyo, May 18; ibid.)

265. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 265. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 1

Washington, April 14, 1965.

CA-10897

SUBJECT

International Sugar Agreement (ISA)

Background:

The economic provisions of the ISA of 1958 have been inoperative since 1961. The present protocol extending the framework of the Agreement expires at the end of 1965. The next session of the International Sugar Council (ISC), which opens in London on April 26, 1965, will have to decide whether a conference to negotiate a new agreement should be called for the fall of 1965, or whether the protocol should be extended for another year. During the last two months the USG has conducted consultations with a number of countries on the subject. Memoranda of these conversations were pouched to interested posts. In March 1965 we submitted our comments on the Preparatory Committee's Report on the Bases and Framework of a new Agreement to the ISC Secretariat (Attachment I).2 The Executive Director of the ISC has visited a large number of Governments since January. His report and conclusions have been submitted to member governments (Attachment II).3 The members of the Organization of American States will meet during the week of April 19 in Washington to discuss Latin American participation in a new International Sugar Agreement. They hope to coordinate their positions for the Council session one week later.

Action Requested

If no objection is perceived, posts are requested to discuss the following US views with host governments and/or sugar industry officials and obtain reactions. Posts need not go into detail but should focus on general attitudes.

Present US Views

1. The US has not yet determined whether it should support the calling of a negotiating conference. We will be greatly influenced by other Council members' desires and their views regarding the feasibility and timeliness of a negotiating conference.

2. The US has no selfish interest to pursue in a sugar agreement. Consistent with our general foreign economic policy, we are willing to cooperate in the stabilization of commodity prices for the benefit of those exporting and importing countries whose sugar economy is more closely linked to world market conditions than that of the United States.

3. The United States is not, in any sense, taking the lead in pressing for negotiations. Rather we feel it is for the principal exporting countries to decide on the timing and substance of negotiations. We would only caution all countries that it would be unwise to proceed to formal negotiations until it is clear that there is a sufficient consensus to assure a satisfactory outcome. A negotiation which ends in failure would not only be a waste of time but would risk a serious setback for international cooperation in this field.

4. The basic questions to which the participants will have to address themselves are listed in the report of the Executive Director of the ISC (Attachment II).

5. If any of the posts questioned whether the Kennedy Round would not be a better forum to work for an ISA, post should reply that USG already agreed to the formation of a sugar group in connection with KR negotiations. The Agenda and the term of reference of this group is not yet established and USG would like first to exhaust the possibilities of the International Sugar Council before shifting the main responsibility of establishing a workable system to any other forum.

FYI. We believe some producing countries are not prepared for negotiations this year, but find it convenient to hide their own hesitations behind the excuse that it is the US who is holding back negotiations because we have not yet enacted our long-term domestic sugar legislation. If this question is raised, posts should note that US domestic producers and refiners reached an agreement on long-term legislative plans two weeks ago. The Administration is now working on its own recommendations and hopes that legislation will be enacted during this session of Congress, i.e., before the Conference, if it is called. End FYI.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–SUGAR 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Fred H. Sanderson and Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi on April 12; cleared by Stanley Nehmer (OR), William Kling (AFI), Howard R. Brandon (EUR/BNA), Jean H. Mulliken (ARA), Thomas O. Enders (EUR/RPE), Harry B. Glazer (EUR/BNA), Thomas O. Murphy (USDA), Arthur C. Bauman (NEA/SOA), Francis G. Jarvis (FE/SPA), and William W. Thomas (FE/EA); and approved by Jerome Jacobson (E). Sent to 38 posts.

2 Not printed.

3 Not found.

266. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 266. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 1

Washington, April 21, 1965, 2:35 p.m.

GATT 2728. From Roth for Blumenthal and Tuthill. Second grains exporters meeting concluded today with wide divergence of views between U.S. and other grains exporters regarding proposals exporters would submit to GATT Cereals Group in World Grains Arrangement. Other exporters virtually served notice on U.S. it not worth their while to proceed to GATT Cereals Group until U.S. accepted other exporters' objectives of minimum price for wheat higher than present IWA minimum. U.S. on its part finds a great unbalance between what other exporters desire in terms of minimum price objectives in WGA and what they are willing to indicate they will undertake in way of specific commitments on domestic production and marketing policies to achieve price objectives. It was agreed that we would make further effort to resolve these differences, recognizing this might not be possible to achieve between now and May 17.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Confidential; Limdis. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges (STR) on April 20 and approved by William M. Roth (STR). Also sent to Brussels for USEC.

267. Note From the Government of the United States to the Government of the United Kingdom 267. Note From the Government of the United States to the Government of the United Kingdom 1

London, April 26, 1965.

No. 54

The Ambassador of the United States of America presents his compliments to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary for Foreign Affairs and has the honor to state that the Government of the United States acknowledges receipt of the Government of the United Kingdom's note of March 16, 19652 which contained the changes in the Cereals Guarantee Arrangements for the 1965 harvest announced on March 17, 1965.

The Government of the United States believes the reductions in the Guaranteed Prices for wheat and barley were a positive step forward by the United Kingdom in meeting the spirit of the Agreement.

The United States Government does, however, regret that the stand-ard quantity increase of 250,000 long tons for barley and 100,000 long tons for wheat was instituted. This increase in the standard quantity will have the effect of increasing wheat prices by 0.5 percent and barley prices by 0.85 percent. The net decline in wheat and barley prices will then be 3.6 percent and 4.2 percent respectively. Estimates of the response in production made by British experts indicate that these price reductions will reduce wheat production by about 50,000 long tons and barley by 155,000 long tons, assuming yields do not increase. This should be compared with a short fall in imports of at least 0.8 million long tons from the minimum level of imports provided in the Agreement and by as much as 1.3 million long tons if the balance between imports and domestic production were maintained. Consequently, it does not appear to the Government of the United States that the changes in Guaranteed Prices and other arrangements made for cereal will be sufficient to restore cereal imports to the levels foreseen in the Agreement. The problem will be further aggravated by the fact that yields have been increasing in the past and will continue to do so in the future. This point was made by a Minister in the recent House of Commons debate when it was indicated that the decline in price for barley could easily be offset by increased yields through the use of more fertilizer and better seeds.

It is the view of the Government of the United States that additional corrective measures are required in accordance with paragraph 11 of the Agreement. Our two governments are agreed that the Agreement constitutes an important precedent for cooperation among cereals exporting and importing countries, particularly in this critical stage in the development of a broader GATT cereals arrangement. The Government of the United States believes that the issues raised thus far in the operation of this Agreement must be frankly and fully discussed and ways found which ensure effective consultations on the probable effects of planned changes in programs and not merely an opportunity to make representations. To this end the Government of the United States would look forward to further meetings between representatives of our two governments.

The Ambassador avails himself of this opportunity to convey to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs the assurances of his highest consideration.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS UK. Limited Official Use. The source text is enclosure 1 to airgram A-2684 from London, April 28, which was repeated to Brussels, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, Paris, and Geneva.

2 See footnote 2, Document 261.

268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 268. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 1

Washington, May 14, 1965, 4:46 p.m.

GATT 2802. Reference: Deptel GATT 2790.2 Canadian Charge Kidd called at his request on Under Secretary Mann May 12 and presented note suggesting amendments to U. S. draft paper GATT Cereals Group given to Embassy May 10. (See reftel) Note states that “passages with respect to international prices fail to take account of the crucial importance attached by Canada and the other two exporting countries to the inclusion of price objectives consistent with the basic needs of their producers for improved returns.” Note adds that “Moreover, the passages concerning production and marketing adjustments do not appear to be flexible enough to permit the major participants, including the exporting countries, to play their part in securing the desired improved balance between supply and demand in ways appropriate to their various systems of production and marketing, and within their political possibilities.” Amendments suggested reflect these comments.

Note concluded with expression of hope U.S. could accept proposed changes and thus enable Canada and other exporters table proposals on opening date cereals negotiations. Otherwise Canada would request meeting four exporting countries at political level, point which Kidd emphasized in his presentation.

Australia and Argentina made similar oral and written presentation, emphasizing other exporters prepared to postpone if necessary opening date cereals negotiations and ask for meeting four exporters at political level to coordinate exporters' position on issues raised in notes.

On Thursday, May 13, Ambassador Roth, STR replied to representatives of three governments. U.S. reply as follows: 1. The United States has sympathetically considered the changes proposed in the U.S. draft cereals paper, and has accordingly modified the paper as indicated.

2. These changes have been made in the expectation that the other cereals exporters would as a result find it possible to proceed to the Geneva meeting of the Cereals Group.

3. Because of the pressure of time and the possibility we may be required to present the cereals proposals in Geneva on May 17, we are not at this time responding to a number of comments contained in the exporters' notes of transmittal. In due time we may reply, but these replies will not affect the draft we present in Geneva, nor, we assume, the response of the other exporters to our latest draft.

4. Noted United States had received draft of Australian and hoped Canadian and Argentine papers likewise would be available for comment before opening cereals negotiations Geneva. Reminded Australia that at the exporters' meeting we expressed reservations about the proposal to denature excess production. Said we should like to see this deleted before paper presented in Geneva.

5. In accepting the changes proposed by the other exporters in Section 2, we interpret the present wording as committing exporters to limit production as appropriate.

FYI. Changes in U. S. paper in no way compromise basic U.S. position. Price range must be determined in light of provisions of cereals arrangement, particularly provisions relating to production and marketing restraints.

Changes in U.S. paper follow by separate cable.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Buenos Aires, Brussels for USEC, Canberra, The Hague, London, Ottawa, Paris, Rome, and Tokyo. Drafted by Sharon E. Erdkamp (EUR/BNA) and Irwin R. Hedges (STR) on May 14; cleared by Erdkamp, R. A. Ioanes (USDA/FAS), Joseph A. Greenwald (E/OT), and Fred H. Sanderson; and approved by William M. Roth.

2 Dated May 10. (Ibid.)

269. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 269. Circular Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, May 21, 1965, 6:58 p.m.

CA-12491

SUBJECT

UK Grain Imports

Unless Embassy sees objection, please deliver an Aide-Memoire along following lines to appropriate UK officials:

The United States Government on April 26 expressed its concern over the level of UK grain imports and the corrective measures taken by the United Kingdom Government.2 At that time we suggested further meetings between representatives of our two governments. The 1965 program provided for increased standard quantities for both wheat and barley. We now have information that the 1965 acreages of wheat and barley are expected to increase by 14 and 4 percent, respectively. These increases even with average yields could produce crops approaching last year's level. There are strong indications therefore, that the UK grain imports may again fall far short of the levels provided in the exchange of letters.

The exchange of letters of April 1964, in paragraph 9, provides that “the Government of the United Kingdom shall review the minimum import price arrangement before the beginning of each crop year commencing on the first of July or on request during the crop year, in consultation with the Government of the United States and other cooperating Governments.” It will be recalled at the December 1964 review the United States indicated its concern about the price floors, but deferred discussion on the understanding that a meeting would be held at a later date. We now find problems have arisen that require attention. One area where adjustments are necessary is in the price floors of US hard winter and dark hard winter 14% protein. Also changes should be made in the flour arrangement so that US flour prices can be adjusted downward if internal UK prices fall below the minimum.

The United States Government would like an opportunity to discuss these problems with the United Kingdom Government at an early date.

FYI. We would suggest June 7 if this is agreeable to the United Kingdom.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 17 US–UK. Unclassified; Priority. Drafted by G. H. Lloyd (FAS); cleared by A. R. DeFelice, C. R. Donovan, and D. M. Rubel (USDA), Fred H. Sanderson, and Irwin R. Hedges; and approved by James P. Burke (OPR/RM). Repeated to Ottawa, Canberra, Buenos Aires, Brussels for USEC, and Geneva for GATT.

2  Document 267.

270. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 270. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 1

Washington, June 4, 1965, 6:20 p.m.

GATT 2861. Cereals Group Meeting June 10–19. This meeting of the Cereals Group should be used to ask searching questions and elicit more detailed explanations of several grains proposals submitted by members. To that end, summary statements of the proposals are being prepared. (Papers will be hand-carried Geneva by USDel members, together with list of questions to be asked.) Similarly, supplemental information to aid in answering anticipated questions on U. S. proposals has been prepared. Proceeding in this manner, the negotiating countries will be in better position to start intensive grains negotiation at next meeting.

Interrogation of other exporters should be objective and friendly with effort to avoid dialogue on basic differences. As in other agricultural negotiations attitude EEC will be crucial. U.K not likely to be too helpful in way of positive proposals. On other hand, neither is it likely reject measures which EEC can be persuaded to accept. Will be desirable, therefore, to focus discussions in first instance largely on EEC proposals. Following will provide delegation with additional guidance on specific points.

Access

U. S. efforts should be directed toward focusing discussions initially on measures to achieve objective of satisfactory access arrangements into importers' markets. Unless positive and meaningful offers can be induced from major importers a basis for negotiating a grains arrangement will not exist. While not prejudging final results, neither EEC nor U.K. proposal in present form requires such basis.

World Base Price

As delegation aware some elements of U.S. position—particularly proposal for world base price—put forth for tactical reasons having in mind likely form and content EEC proposals. Delegation should try avoid this device being exploited by EEC as endorsement of reference price and MdS system. U.S. proposal put forward strictly for tactical reasons to highlight high EEC price supports and unacceptability EEC proposal limited to freezing existing disparate levels domestic price supports. Its purpose limited to being yardstick for measuring reduction in protection high price support countries should undertake.

Supply/Demand Balance

Present EEC paper implies responsibility of exporters correct imbalance supply/demand. U.S. delegation interventions should be directed to establishing point exporters and importers jointly responsible present unsatisfactory situation, and hence must jointly contribute solution. Should emphasize effective supply restraints by importers and exporters major U.S. objective on which other essential features—i.e. prices, depend.

International Prices

Delegation should avoid at this meeting being drawn into discussion of desirable level international prices or price range. Unlike Australia, the U.S. is not seeking higher international prices as an essential objective of the Arrangement. As pointed out in meetings with exporters, U.S. accepts desirability of establishing an international price range for wheat which is both realistic and remunerative for efficient producers. This price range cannot be determined independently of the supply/demand balance created by a grains arrangement. There can be no meaningful discussion of realistic minimum prices until we have indication regarding (1) assurances on improved access which the importers are willing to offer and (2) the improvement in supply/demand balance that would result from collective efforts of both exporters and importers.

Exporters' Shares and Quality Differentials

An exporter share principle will cause serious presentational problems domestically. As to fixed quality differentials, our experience under U.K. Grains Arrangement and IWA convinces us application of fixed quality differentials may adversely affect competitive position U.S. wheat. Difficult to see how fixed quality differential could be considered independently of market shares among exporters. This issue will require detailed and searching examination and U.S. could only finally determine position in light of measurable benefits to be derived from WGA. Market sharing arrangement for feed grains in any case likely against U.S. long run interests. If other provisions of arrangement justify, however, U.S. might consider market shares for wheat.

Food Aid

Delegation should keep in mind U.S. food aid proposals are integral part of measures to improve supply/demand balance, and provide access to importers' markets. U.K. apparently will be extremely critical U.S. proposals (see GATT 2839)2 and some of our friends in Community have indicated they regard U.S. food aid proposals as unhelpful and loaded in favor of French position. If other critical of our food aid ideas, our effort at this time should be to press them for meaningful alternatives to improve supply/demand balance. Delegation should avoid food aid being regarded as panacea and alternative to responsible production policies. Obvious there are limits to possible expansion present overall levels food aid.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Buenos Aires, Brussels for the Embassy and USEC, Canberra, The Hague, London, Ottawa, Paris, Rome for the Embassy and USOECD, and Tokyo. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges (STR) on June 4; cleared by Carl W. Schmidt (OT/GCP), Barbara F. Thomson (EUR/RPE), and Gerald A. Friedman (OR/FD) (all in draft); and approved by William M. Roth.

2 Dated May 28. (Ibid., POL 7 UK)

271. Memorandum of Conversation 271. Memorandum of Conversation1

Tokyo, June 7, 1965.

SUBJECT

Wool Textiles

PARTICIPANTS

Japan Foreign Minister Shiina

Yoshihiro Nakayama, Director, Economic Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Kiyoaki Kikuchi, Chief, U.S.-Canada Section, Economic Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

United States Ambassador Reischauer

Warren Christopher, Special Representative of the Secretary of State and Chairman, U.S. Wool Textile Mission

Stanley Nehmer, Director, Office of International Resources, Department of State

(N.B. This meeting took place prior to the opening of the U.S.-Japan wool textile talks.)

Mr. Christopher told the Foreign Minister that he brought greetings from the Secretary of State. He also extended congratulations to the Foreign Minister on the latter joining the new Cabinet of Prime Minister Sato. He expressed appreciation to the Foreign Minister for arranging the wool textile conference. He told the Minister that the United States delegation was seeking a constructive solution to the wool textile problem but that this was not a problem which the U.S. Administration could “blink away". He said he was not going to make a detailed presentation of the U.S. position but wanted to point out to the Foreign Minister that the wool textile problem has economic, political and human aspects.

With regard to the economic aspects, the United States was almost the only unprotected market for wool textiles in the world. Japan is the largest supplier of wool textiles to the United States, and the U.S. is Japan's largest customer. The impact of wool textile imports on the United States market was substantial in some items as, for example, men's and boys' worsteds where imports from Japan were equal to 42 percent of U.S. production.

Mr. Christopher said he needed to emphasize the human problem in that unemployment in the textile industry was up and was higher than unemployment in other sectors of the U. S. economy. He also pointed out that employment in the wool textile industry was down over the last decade.

From the point of view of the political aspects of the problem, Mr. Christopher noted that the wool textile industry has a strong base of support. The industry was wide-spread, being located from the South northward to New England. Furthermore, the raw wool producing industry in the western part of the United States was cooperating with the wool textile industry on this problem because the raw wool growers had no other market for their product. It was certainly the desire of the Administration to avoid unilateral measures. He said, however, that pressures were building up in Congress for taking unilateral action. He referred to the legislation proposed by Senator Muskie, namely the Orderly Marketing Act of 1965, as an example of legislative proposals for unilateral action. Mr. Christopher pointed out that President Johnson was committed to attempt to secure international action or some other means to solve the wool textile problem, and in this regard the United States delegation was in Japan to try to find some way to minimize the risk of unilateral action.

Specifically, Mr. Christopher said, we are asking the Japanese Government to agree to attend a conference to discuss the wool textile problem. He pointed out that agreeing to attend was not agreeing to agree. The conference would be free to explore the whole range of problems. He urged the Foreign Minister to have an open mind regarding the outcome of the U. S.-Japanese talks and expressed the hope that the Foreign Minister would open the door to such a conference.

Foreign Minister Shiina said that he could understand the hopes of the United States. He understood that the U. S. had approached the British and Italian Governments and that the latter expressed opposition to the idea of an international conference. The Japanese wool textile industry, he said, knows this and is against such a conference and against any international wool textile arrangement. He pointed out that many “vigorous” questions had been raised in the Diet not only by representatives of the opposition, but also by the Government party. As a result, the Japanese Government had to take a negative view of the situation. Mr. Shiina said that in view of the past record, Japan is in a very difficult position to agree to such a meeting, but the Japanese Government was willing to consider and to study the question again.

Mr. Christopher said he understood from the press and from the Japanese Embassy in Washington that the Japanese Government was opposed to an international agreement such as the Long-Term Cotton Textile Arrangement, but he said he wanted to distinguish between an international conference and a commitment with regard to an international agreement. We find it difficult to understand why a country with as much at stake as Japan has in the United States wool textile market would not be willing to attend an international conference to discuss the problem, particularly since such participation would be without commitment.

Foreign Minister Shiina said he understood that these are separate questions but the Japanese industry's attitude is so negative that this was an extremely difficult problem for the Japanese Government. He concluded the meeting by expressing the hope that the U.S. delegation would explore the problem thoroughly with the Japanese Government and industry representatives.

At this point Messrs. Nakayama, Kikuchi, Christopher and Nehmer excused themselves from the meeting and adjourned to Mr. Nakayama's office for further discussion. They were joined there by Mr. Fujii of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Mr. Ready of the Embassy. Mr. Christopher said he would have added in his discussion with Mr. Shiina if time had not run out that the United States had no fixed ideas as to the solution to the wool textile problem and that we genuinely meant that attendance at the conference would be without commitment on the part of any of the participants. Mr. Nakayama said that the wool textile problem had a political nuance in Japan as it had in the United States. He said that the U.S. side should know that MITI and the wool textile industry were both opposed to an international conference and an international agreement. He pointed out that since the U.S.-Japan meeting that was to begin later in the day was not considered to be a negotiating conference, the Foreign Office was not chairing it. He said that he would attend the opening session and would keep in close touch with the discussions. He volunteered to act as a bridge between the United States and Japanese delegations if and when problems developed.

Mr. Nakayama referred to the Long-Term Cotton Textile Arrangement, which he described as an unpopular agreement in Japan. The wool textile people say that Japan should not make the same mistake on wool textiles as was made on cotton textiles. The wool textile industry also says that the U.S. industry is in prosperous condition. He read from a report in English which indicated that Burlington Industries, J. P. Stevens and Company, and Deering-Milliken were the major producers of wool textiles in the United States and were all doing very well.

It was pointed out to Mr. Nakayama that although these companies may be doing well on an overall basis, their wool textile divisions were not doing so well and that in any event the wool textile industry includes a vast number of much smaller firms than the three which he had mentioned.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer.

272. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 272. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, June 8, 1965, 1127Z.

4111. Wool Textiles. From Christopher. Ref: Embtel 4083.2 Wool textiles discussions concluded Tuesday.3 Following are highlights: 1. Japanese made presentation indicating its wool textile industry in not too healthy position with substantial excess productive capacity despite decline of spindles in 1964 imports wool textiles from European countries increased 35 percent in 1964. Also recognize that exports have increased but insisted this not at cost to producers elsewhere.

2. GOJ reps pointed to difficult balance of payment situation now faced by Japan and unfavorable trade balance especially with US. In light of this situation, Japan not in position to go along with any move to set up barrier to Japanese export trade. Such barrier would nullify efforts of Kennedy Round negotiations.

3. Arai then gave official reply of GOJ to USG request of yesterday. He said Japan's position on participation in wool conference and wool textile agreement not altered since August, 1964, when GOJ replied to similar proposal made by AmEmbassy Tokyo on behalf USG. Several developments since last August have hardened Japan's position. These include Japan's disappointment over outcome of request to modify US-Japanese cotton textile bilateral, which has led to mounting resentment in Japan against LTA; difficulties faced by Japanese wool textile industry; and general slackening economic activities in Japan. Arai emphasized growing concern with LTA and quoted Article I which in Japanese view clearly limited LTA approach to cotton textile problem. Most important reason for Japan's opposition to international action on wool textiles is that it would represent new trade barrier which would run counter to US trade policy. If Japan agreed to wool textile agreement, exception which LTA represented, would make this kind of agreement rule not an exception.

4. Japanese also insisted facts available in Japan do not corroborate US position that US wool textile industry in bad shape. Profit and sales picture of major US textile companies cited to support this view.

5. Izaki speaking on behalf Japanese industry said he was shocked at US presentation on economic matters. If US had made objective analysis of US situation, US would agree that Japanese exports have not impaired US industry. This included worsted situation. He suggested position of US industry be studied by impartial 3rd party and challenged us to put facts to US Tariff Commission or impartial committee of GATT. Should US refuse such investigation Japan would be bound to conclude that US case inadequate. Izaki also expressed shock at US political presentation and said frankly surprised and disappointed to hear political threats. Japan not easily frightened and did not like political threats. “We are not North Vietnam.” He said he hoped make distinction between friend and enemy, especially in these days of trial and tribulation.

After recess during which Christopher consulted with Ambassador and US Government and industry dels, Christopher stated that speaking more in sorrow than in anger, we feel we have received answer to our request in such terms and in such way as to rule out usefulness of any further discussion. Although there were many factual matters which might have been clarified or corrected, it would not be useful to do so in atmosphere established at session. He thanked Arai for time and attention given to US problem and for Arai's personal consideration of situation. Arai then adjourned meeting after apologizing for tone of remarks made by Izaki, and after specifically withdrawing North Vietnam reference.

Christopher, Economic Minister and Nehmer called on Nakayama who had not been present at morning session but who had been briefed on what transpired prior to meeting with Christopher, et al. Nakayama also apologized for emotional comments regarding political problem and expressed regret over Izaki's remarks. He said he would call this to MITI's attention as well as to attention of Japanese industries concerned. Christopher expressed appreciation at Nakayama's remarks and assured Nakayama that US side realized Nakayama would not have wanted meeting to go as it did. Nakayama insisted that neither Foreign Office or MITI were aware in advance as to what Izaki would say.

Nakayama expressed opinion US would not view unsatisfactory meeting as last word in matter and indicated there might be reconsideration of problem on Japanese side. To this end he would convene meeting with MITI and industry as soon as “dust settled.” He apparently convinced that GOJ must take some action to ameliorate problem and that GOJ could not accept position of Japanese industry which refused to recognize existence of any problem. He intimated solution might be along bilateral lines in view of great opposition to international approach by Japanese industry stemming primarily from experience of LTA. Naka-yama said Japanese feel if they agree to action on wool textiles, Japan will then be forced to agree to control trade on other items after that. Christopher commented that Japan had to recognize that when it took over a large part of the foreign market in any item whose production is widely dispersed there would be pressures to take action to avoid disruption. Nakayama assured Christopher that he would give problem serious attention in near future.

In speaking with press (Fairchild), Christopher stated US still hopes that a remedy to wool textile problem will be found, that although Japan particularly adverse to international arrangement, it may be that some other approach might be found to solve problem. US industry and labor reps releasing statement to press indicating great disappointment over refusal of Japanese to agree to attend international conference on wool textile problem. US industry and labor reps feel that US has now made every effort to seek international agreement and other solution must now be found. US industry and labor may have in mind pushing for unilateral action now that Japan has declined US proposal for multilateral conference, and in absence concrete evidence as yet of Japanese willingness to negotiate solution bilaterally.

Reischauer

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Repeated to London, Rome, and Geneva.

2 Telegram 4083 from Tokyo, June 7, summarized the meeting of heads of delegations prior to the opening of the wool textile talks and the morning session, which was largely devoted to opening statements by members of the U.S. delegation. Christopher's statement urged the Japanese Government to attend a multilateral conference without preconditions. (Ibid.) For another record of the meeting prior to the opening session, see Document 271.

3 June 8.

273. Memorandum of Conversation 273. Memorandum of Conversation1

Tokyo, June 8, 1965.

SUBJECT

Wool Textiles

PARTICIPANTS

Japan Yoshihiro Nakayama, Director, Economic Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Kiyoaki Kikuchi, Chief, U.S.-Canada Section, Economic Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Mr. Fujii, U.S.-Canada Section, Economic Affairs Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

United States Warren Christopher, Special Representative of the Secretary of State and Chairman, U. S. Wool Textile Mission

Stanley Nehmer, Director, Office of International Resources, Department of State

Laurence C. Vass, Minister-Counselor for Economic Affairs, American Embassy, Tokyo

(This meeting took place after the adjournment of the U.S.-Japanese wool textile talks.)

Mr. Nakayama, speaking in somber terms through an interpreter (Mr. Fujii) so that he would not be misinterpreted, said that he would like to apologize to the United States delegation that there had been people on the Japanese side in the meeting who had made emotional comments regarding political issues which had no place in the meeting. He regretted that very much. He said that he planned to call the attention of MITI to this fact and will also call this to the attention of the Japanese industry concerned, especially in view of the significance of the remarks that had been made by Mr. Izaki. Now that the meeting is closed it was practically impossible for the Foreign Office to discuss the problem with the Japanese industry. However, the wool textile problem should be looked at from a long-range point of view. The meeting may not have been satisfactory from the U.S. point of view, but he hoped that the United States would not take away from this meeting the feeling that the U.S. was in a worse position than before the meeting began. He said he wanted to hear from Mr. Christopher what he had in mind, particularly when he returned to Washington.

Mr. Christopher expressed appreciation for the comments made by Mr. Nakayama. He said he realized that Mr. Nakayama would not have wanted the meeting to go the way it did. What we expect to do, he said, depends somewhat on the present conversation. We are dealing with a condition, not a theory. There is a situation of a rapidly rising increase in wool textile imports, particularly worsteds. There is a need for action towards the amelioration of this problem. It may be that this can be accomplished in various other ways besides an international approach. He asked Mr. Nakayama if Japan would agree to come to an international conference if the United Kingdom and Italy agreed. Mr. Nakayama said that the latter was a difficult query. His personal view was that the United States was the better off trying to persuade the United Kingdom and Italy first.

Mr. Christopher asked if it were clear that there was a difference between a request for an international conference and a request for an international agreement. Mr. Nakayama asked, speaking off the record, what did Mr. Christopher really expect to come out of the meeting. Mr. Christopher replied that he hoped the Japanese side would be helpful to the United States in the solution of the problem. He repeated his question, did the Japanese clearly understand that we were not asking for a commitment regarding an international agreement? Mr. Nakayama said that he at least understood this, but that we must understand that the Long-Term Cotton Textile Arrangement was very unpopular in Japan and there is fear that if Japan agreed to international action on wool textiles, Japan would have to agree to controls on other items as well. Mr. Christopher commented that the Japanese had to recognize that when they took over a large part of a market, as they have done in the case of worsteds in the U.S. market, there wold be pressures to control such imports.

Mr. Nakayama said he personally felt strongly that if the U. S. industry approached the Japanese industry, this could be fruitful. A bilateral approach was very important to Japan. The Japanese business community had an instinctive fear of an international agreement. The bilateral way, Mr. Nakayama said, carried greater possibilities.

Mr. Christopher asked if Mr. Nakayama had any suggestions. Mr. Nakayama said that it was very difficult for him to say anything. He was sure Mr. Christopher realized how the business interests had become very emotional and how they got out of control. However, he hoped that with the lapse of time the Japanese side would consider carefully what the United States had said. He indicated that as soon as the dust had settled he hoped to have a meeting with MITI and the Foreign Office to discuss the problem. Mr. Christopher commented that there might well now be pressure to put wool textiles on the agenda for discussion at the July Cabinet Ministers meeting.

The meeting concluded with a discussion of what would be said to the press in case of inquiries. It was agreed that Mr. Christopher would say that the United States presented its case at the opening meeting on Monday, that even though we received a negative response from the Japanese side on Tuesday, we still had hopes that the situation would be remedied. He could say that although Japan is particularly adverse to an international agreement, there may be some other approach to solve the problem.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Stanley Nehmer.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 274. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, June 16, 1965, 0857Z.

4251. Ref: Deptel 3365.2 From our conversations with responsible GOJ officials it is clear that they are concerned at complete failure of recent wool talks and are casting about for some more positive approach. In private discussion with Ambassador June 14 PriMin Sato made passing reference to wool talks, indicated he personally aware of problem, and realized some understanding might be necessary. We have been told informally that Yoshioka (Deputy Director, MITI Textile Bureau) plans dinner meeting with Japanese industry reps this week to explore possibilities for some shift in Japanese position. To best of our knowledge nothing specific has developed yet, however.

MITI planning series of major personnel changes in near future. Shinichi Arai, Director of Textile Bureau (and leader Japanese del at wool talks) will retire from MITI and become Secretary General of international exhibition. He will be replaced in Textile Bureau by Kenzo Ototake, now Deputy Director of Enterprise Bureau (who we understand has had previous experience in one of Textile Bureau sections). Shigenobu Yamamoto, Director of International Trade Bureau, will become head of medium and small enterprise agency. Yaegi Watanabe, Director of Trade Promotion Bureau, will move into Yamamoto's position and in turn be replaced in Trade Promotion Bureau by Setsuo Takashima, now with Coordination Bureau of Economic Planning Agency. No direct connection between personnel changes and wool issue but officials will undoubtedly require some time to settle into their new jobs before coming to grips with wool textile policy.

Reischauer

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Geneva.

2 In telegram 3365 to Tokyo, June 15, the Department inquired whether “there have been any developments on wool textile problem since departure of Mission last week.” (Ibid.)

275. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 275. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, June 16, 1965, 9:28 p.m.

7945. For Ambassador from Secretary. Please pass following message to Australian Prime Minister Menzies.

Begin verbatim text

I enjoyed very much the opportunity on June 7 to discuss with you once more a whole range of issues of interest to our two countries.2

I have now looked into the matter of the price issue in the grains negotiations which you raised during our talk. I am happy to assure you that the United States is fully sensitive to the Australian position that grain-trading prices should be remunerative for efficient producers. We certainly hope to see a grain-trading arrangement come out of the Kennedy Round negotiations that will be advantageous to both Australia and the United States.

For our part, we too are concerned to assure remunerative returns to efficient producers. But we also believe strengthened prices must of necessity depend on an improved supply/demand balance which we hope to see come out of the negotiations. We should want importers to improve access for imported grains rather than have to see the import share decline as it now threatens to do. We should expect exporters to take effective measures to restrain supply and marketings as appropriate to their own systems, since we believe higher prices that brought forth more production would only be a step in the wrong direction. A greater share of international surpluses should also be disposed of through agreed international food aid programs instead of weighing heavily on commercial markets. In summary, we consider it necessary to emphasize the need for expanded international markets and internationally agreed supply restraints by all participating grain producers. These arrangements could certainly make higher prices possible.

Despite some difference in the emphases of our countries' approaches to this grain problem, I am pleased to note the record of continuing dialogue and coordination between our representatives. I am certain that the Australian and United States negotiators in Geneva will continue to work together to seek results in the best interests of both our countries.

End verbatim text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by G. A. Friedman (E/OR/FD) on June 15; cleared by William N. Roth, John A. Schnittker (USDA), Jerome Jacobson (E), Jack B. Button (E/OR/FD), Robert W. Barnett (FE), Francis G. Jarvis (FE/SPA), and Don T. Christensen (S/S); and approved by Secretary Rusk. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, Tokyo, and Geneva for GATT.

2 Australian Prime Minister Menzies made an informal visit to Washington June 6–9, while on his way to the 14th Conference of Commonwealth Prime Ministers in London. Secretary Rusk met with Prime Minister Menzies and President Johnson at the White House on June 7 at 12:30 p.m., followed by a White House luncheon. He also met with Menzies later that afternoon from 3 to 3:40 p.m. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Books) No record of these meetings has been found.

276. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 276. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, June 25, 1965, 1739Z.

TAGG 3210. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. Subject: Evaluation of Cereals Group Meeting, June 10–18.

Meeting of Cereals Group adjourned late Friday, June 18 with agreement as reported in reftel2 to resume July 5 at technical level to prepare factual reports considered essential by group to expedite its work. Following are summary conclusions about results first round of discussions: 1. On whole, meeting was constructive and some progress was made. There was genuine effort on part of importing and exporting countries to identify areas of agreement and disagreement and explore existing degree of flexibility for resolution of central issues.

2. Session marked definite change in group's orientation. Beginning of negotiation distinct from previous sessions characterized merely by discussions was evident.

3. Nevertheless, progress during this first round of talks limited because timing of talks awkward for several major participants, i.e. EEC because of tense situation in Brussels, US because of uncertainty with legislation up before Congress.

4. In spite of rather shaky start in Washington exporters' discussions, relations between exporters moved to considerably more satisfactory plane as specific negotiating issues had to be faced in Geneva. By common consent issue of international price remained in background. There seemed to be at least tacit acceptance of US argument that international price issue best dealt with in light progress rest of negotiation at somewhat later stage. Exporters thus able maintain relatively solid common front vis-a-vis importers and collaborated in pressing a list of desiderata for improvement in importers' offers.

5. Position of EEC somewhat better than expected. While making expected defense of Montant de Soutien bindings, there was little emphasis on theory of Mds approach and, instead, some indications that EEC not insisting on Mds bindings, from others, as long as basic principle of including commitments on domestic policies is achieved. Secondly, while EEC delegates, Rabot and Malve, made expected effort argue that URP at DM 425 not excessive, they accepted in good graces strong doubts expressed by exporters as well as their suggestions for addition within EEC of some other control device on excess production. EEC promised study possibilities and ideas put forward. In our view, EEC statement that EEC grain policies, including device of UGP level guided, inter alia, by desire maintain imports at present ratio between production and consumption was important step forward. It obvious that this statement not made accidentally. Might provide opening which, if exploited adroitly, could result in basics for EEC agreement to specifically stated trade objective as one element in grains arrangement. On surpluses, EEC also seemed make conscientious effort to show flexibility. Most important development was their acknowledgment that EEC as importer and other importers share responsibility for the creation of world surpluses and, hence, for possible disposal and food aid measures to be included in an agreement.

6. Least flexible approach was that of UK. Position that UK contribution to grains arrangement fulfilled by subsuming present bilaterals with major exporters in broader arrangement was not satisfactory. While being more forthcoming as regards willingness accept clear statement of international trade objectives in context of an agreement, UK delegation showed no movement on possibility making any commitments regarding internal policies or on precise means by which UK would amend internal policies, if trade objectives not met. Exporters, therefore, forced to adopt position clearly recognizing flexibility of EEC proposals while at same time deploring lack of any apparent disposition for movement on part of UK. UK also declined to follow EEC's recognition of importing countries' sharing responsibility for surpluses and adopted quite negative attitude to any idea of participation in joining program for food aid and financing of surplus disposal. We will need do much work with UK on these points.

7. Position of Japan mainly reflected fear of being put under pressure for commitments on internal policies similar to those being asked of UK and EEC. While there was general recognition that assurances on domestic policies not as important for Japan because of limits on possibility major internal production increases and while Japanese were not directly criticized on this point, Japan generally supported UK simply as defensive measure. This includes rather negative attitude to idea of contribution to surplus disposal. On balance, would seem that Japan will follow UK and accept any arrangement acceptable to former.

8. On exporters' side, Australia, which maintained an air of suspense up to the opening of the meeting regarding its participation, was cooperative and made no further issue over US unwillingness to express a position as to level of international minimum price for wheat. Contrary to earlier indications, Westerman represented Australia throughout the session. On the whole, Australia played constructive role, although obviously its objectives in a cereals arrangement tend to coincide more closely than other exporters with those of EEC. Australia's main interest is to obtain a higher international minimum price for wheat and reduce competition Australia faces from EEC wheat in third markets.

Canada was cooperative and its position and presentation on major issues essentially parallel to that of US. There were no particular surprises from Argentine delegation.

We believe, therefore, that Cereals Group negotiations off to reasonably good start. In weeks and months ahead, we will have to work closely with UK and press them to review their position with view to taking more flexible attitude on question of commitments on internal policies going beyond present bilateral arrangements. We will also have to seek push EEC toward agreement to specific statement of trade objectives, following up their statement on general intentions made at first meeting.

Much will depend on degree to which EEC willing add additional control measures to present internal price system. Also important that exporters continue common front now established here and that facing issue of international prices avoided until later stage when specific commitments re other parts of arrangement have emerged more clearly.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bern, Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Copenhagen, The Hague, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris for USOECD, Rome, Stockholm, Tokyo, Vienna, and Wellington and passed to the White House.

2 Not further identified.

277. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) 277. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1

Washington, June 29, 1965.

SUBJECT

Cocoa Discussions at the United Nations

The cocoa producing countries went away reasonably satisfied from last week's UN cocoa meeting. Although the meeting had been called by the UNCTAD Trade and Development Board in an atmosphere of crisis and urgency, and Prebisch repeatedly called it a test of new machinery, the meeting resulted only in a confirmation of the work program and schedule adopted by the same countries at an April FAO meeting.

The flexible schedule for the future envisages: a) completion of FAO's studies by the end of the year,

b) another meeting in early 1966 to review the studies and discuss whether conditions exist which might make the negotiation of a cocoa agreement successful,

c) a possible negotiating conference in spring 1966.

The failure of the producing countries to press for immediate negotiations arises from their inability to agree among themselves on what kind of agreement they want or whether they should start negotiations when prices are as low as 11 cents, compared with 23 cents at the time of the last unsuccessful negotiation. So long as these differences among producers exist, the consuming countries may easily stand by, expressing concern at present conditions and willingness to resume negotiations when a successful outcome seems likely.

Producing countries at the UN meeting agreed that their basic problem was over-production and that action in this regard must be taken in any international agreement.

Only one proposal for immediate action by consumers was advanced: abolition of trade barriers. The EEC countries refused to contemplate immediate steps and merely referred to the possibility of reducing duties through the Kennedy Round.

Producing countries expressed the hope that some arrangements might be made for the World Ford Program to buy up and distribute margarine made from the surplus cocoa beans. This is probably a non-starter, although the producers themselves might agree to sell the surplus to normal margarine processors and thereby induce a rise in the price of cocoa beans for the chocolate industry.

The U.S. industry group is happy with the outcome of the meeting.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 78 D 52, Cocoa Meeting, New York June 21–25, 1965. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jack B. Button (E/ICD/TRP) and Paul E. Callanan (E/ICD/TRP) on June 28, and cleared by Stanley Nehmer and Edward R. Fried.

278. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 278. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, July 17, 1965, 1200Z.

TAGG 3275. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. Subject: GATT Cereals Meeting—July 5 to July 16.

Wyndham White opened meeting and appointed Lucq to chair. US and others had objected to pre-meeting suggestion that Roger Moore (IWC) chair technical sessions, and Moore continued as advisor to chairman.

First day's discussion absorbed with matters purpose and procedure. EEC suggested purpose of the technical meetings should be to establish amount of support which each country gives its producers and to determine what would be an appropriate level of prices on the international market if support not given. All of EEC's subsequent questioning bore in this direction. We directed our attention principally to concept of price as incentive to production, since this notion had to be differentiated clearly from the notion of price as a producer of income to establish validity of US loan rate as “US base price at farm level"—definitions set out in item one of US proposal to Cereals Group. Also price is one of the key variables underlying the projection of production in the EEC and we wished to establish that EEC is understating change in return to French producer to result from grains cap.

After considerable discussion it was agreed that meeting should begin with first agenda item dealing with producer returns since this was an integral part of the projections that would be discussed under second item. Remaining discussion would follow order of the agenda. No time limit was set on discussion of returns and it turned out entire two weeks taken up with this item. Because of the upcoming IWC meetings, July 19–22, and the European vacation in August, it was decided to terminate session on July 16.

To facilitate presentation and discussion each delegation submitted a working paper summarizing producer returns in its own country and showing how these were interrelated with other prices reported in each system. Secretariat also distributed summaries of published data on prices. (Copies of the respective submissions and papers are being carried to Washington by hand.)2

Each delegation was subjected to a cross-examination of its submission. Most of the questioning was designed to clarify working of systems, to identify components of returns given or to seek additional items which might increase return to producers above level identified by country in initial submission. For example, the EEC was interested in all forms of subsidies as a basis for MDS and we were asked to provide government costs of storage. We asked for figures on French quantum system.

The two issues that stood apart from the usual line of questioning related to the concepts introduced by the US delegation. These issues were the validity of (1) US contention that production which producer foregoes in order to receive certificates should be subtracted from the returns which he gets for the grain he sells in arriving at average return to producer (US income concept); and (2) that marginal return is the important return to look at when considering producer production adjustments. This concept applies directly to the United States and its loan rates, and to French producer returns for production in excess of 15 tons.

Most others had difficulty with US income idea, but were interested in and to degree sympathetic to it. EEC, however, would not accept it at all. Australia and Canada suggested that there might be something to marginal concept and it should therefore be considered, especially in the case of France. We had calculated a 29.1 percent increase in marginal returns to French producers between 1964–65 and 1967–68, which met with some approval among exporters. The EEC, however, claimed its producers did not consider the marginal principle in making their production decisions, and disputed that our producers did.

Before the end of the session there was considerable discussion on (1) need and format for summarizing results of the current meeting and (2) format to be considered in preparing submissions on projections at the September meetings.

With respect to summary, Australia suggested a table which compared respective producer returns, but this table took no account of divergence between systems—especially between that of US and others. Tried to fit all into same mold designed to show Australia is low cost producer. We objected most seriously to fact that the data and concepts, such as guaranteed prices, actual producer returns and indirect subsidies presented in the Australian summary did not fit our or French case. EEC supported Australia clearly seeking to establish negotiating document which would support its MDS approach. Wanted to put points of agreement and disagreement on what returns were in document. For example, would dispute US loan rate as guaranteed price, entering straight average return to producer instead. Compromise US suggestion that each delegation revise its initial submission in the light of the discussions was accepted; these to be submitted at next meeting along with whatever comments anyone wished to make about others' papers.

Australia also made proposal regarding an outline for submission on projection. There was substantial agreement that production consumption, import and export data and projections be included in these and discussed in the light of offers made. Projections were to be as specific as possible, allowing for generalization where this necessary. An Australian suggestion of 30 years back and 10 years forward met with some disagreement and a compromise proposal to include a pre-World War II average was accepted. It was also agreed that any projections made would be to 1970 only.

The meeting concluded on Friday, July 16, with a presentation by Roger Moore on the technical aspects of establishing international basing points for pricing grains and on the problems of establishing quality differentials. At the request of Canada, Moore will prepare additional papers on these points and circulate these before the next meeting.

Next meeting to begin on September 20 (we suggested earlier date but no one agreed) and to continue until agenda completed.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, The Hague, London, Luxembourg, Ottawa, Paris for USOECD, and Rome.

2 These papers have not been found.

279. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Connor to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) 279. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Connor to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1

Washington, July 23, 1965.

Dear Tom:

Thank you for your letter of July 162 requesting a meeting of the President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee to consider the wool textile import problem.

In light of the attitude of the major wool textile exporting countries, and in particular that expressed by the Japanese Government over the last two months, toward a multilateral approach to the problem, I agree that we need to reexamine what possibilities are available to the United States for a solution to this problem in present circumstances. We can certainly anticipate that the Legislative Branch as well as the industry group will continue to press the Administration for action.

I understand that the State Department has some thoughts on how the United States might proceed with the wool textile import problem in view of the present international climate and is in the process of preparing some material for the Committee. Meanwhile, we will try to put down some thoughts of our own. This would provide us with the framework for a full discussion of the various alternatives at a meeting of the Cabinet Committee, which could then be held as soon as is convenient for the members.

Sincerely yours,

Jack

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 3. No classification marking. A handwritten note on the source text reads: “Answered August 12, 1965.” This reply has not been found.

2 Not found.

280. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Westerfield) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) 280. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Westerfield) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon)1

Washington, July 26, 1965.

SUBJECT

Strengthening LDC Commodity Trade—Your Memo of July 20, 19652

We certainly welcome your initiative in seeking to reinforce the commodity trade program. This is of major importance in Africa.

In principle, the measures that you suggest are sound, particularly a shift of resources away from production of commodities in oversupply. When diversification is possible, this could do much to alleviate the problem. On the other hand, in much of Africa there may be few alternatives to coffee and cocoa; this is indicated by recent reports from the field. Moreover, smallholders produce most of these crops which are about the only source of cash. The lack of organized extension or field services in many countries to direct a diversification program is also a problem. Nonetheless the possibilities should be explored and I hope that an alleviation of the problem is possible along these lines.

A related approach to the problem could be greater emphasis on research in the possibilities for developing alternative crops or use of resources. (Note that research on diversification in some countries has not held out many, if any possibilities.) In this connection, alternatives should not only be in other crops but may also be considered in terms of economic development generally, as in industrialization. The FAO and other organizations could accelerate their research programs.

The proposed solution to the problems of natural raw materials that compete with synthetics by improving efficiency and quality may do no more than allow the raw materials to hold their own with synthetics. Improved methods of producing synthetics may be expected so that their cost and quality would also be improved over time and represent an increasing challenge to natural raw materials. Obviously if producers of natural raw materials are to maintain their position, they must also improve their efficiency. However, this would not necessarily remedy their situation but could merely leave them in a relatively unchanged position. In some cases lower incomes could result if production is raised because of more efficient methods and this reduces prices.

As we have additional thoughts we will keep you informed.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Solomon Papers, “Commodity Trade,” Box 1. Confidential. Drafted by William Kling (AF/AFI) on July 26. The source text bears a handwritten note reading: “Tony: These are some preliminary reactions. We certainly look forward to constructive approaches to this major problem. Sam.”

2 Not found.

281. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 281. Telegram From the Embassy in Japan to the Department of State 1

Tokyo, July 27, 1965, 0547Z.

301. Subject: Wool Textiles. Ref: Deptel 234, info Geneva GATT 2998.2 EconMin raised status of GOJ's review of wool textile question with Nakayama (Director, Econ Affairs Bureau, FonOff) July 26. Nakayama said question had been discussed within GOJ and MITI had been in touch with industry but indicated no real progress had yet been made. He said that, as follow up to Joint Econ Committee discussions, he intended to take matter up again with MITI.

Nakayama said, although international conference unacceptable to Japanese, he recognized need for Japanese exporters to avoid disrupting U.S. market. He implied some thought might have been given to possibility of controlling prices or volume of Japanese exports. Off record, he indicated he had taken rather strong line with MITI insisting description problem must be faced. Nakayama asked whether Embassy could provide him with list of specific items where some action by Japanese might help to overcome problem. He mentioned that Japanese exports to U.S. of mixed wool-silk suitings had grown very rapidly and suggested this might be item on which restraint called for.

EconMin said he would seek guidance but had doubts that U.S. would wish to provide such a list. U.S. industry fears that if agreement were reached on orderly marketing of selected items Japanese would concentrate export efforts on other items and merely shift rather than resolve industry problem. Industry prefers, therefore, to talk in terms of across-the-board arrangements.

Comment: 1. We believe that Nakayama's remarks re recognition of need to avoid market disruption and his request for list of items where some action might be helpful should be viewed as personal reactions of senior policy level official seeking way out of present impasse and not as firm indication that MITI and Japanese industry now prepared to move in direction suggested.

2. Dept may wish to consider whether U.S. should give more explicit encouragement to idea of Japanese voluntary restraints on wool textile exports. Emb is convinced very little point continue pushing for international conference. In time, a bilateral understanding may be feasible. For the near term, voluntary restraints, with beginning of dialogue at industry level, could bring some relief.

3. Embassy aware from conversations with U.S. delegation to Tokyo wool textile talks that men's and boy's suitings, particularly sharkskin, constitute special problem for U.S. industry but had assumed this was in area of all-wool, not mixed wool-silk fabrics. Would appreciate Department's comment on this point.

Emmerson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Geneva.

2 Dated July 23. (Ibid.)

282. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) 282. Information Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1

Washington, July 27, 1965.

SUJBECT

Pressure for Increased Quotas Expected at Coffee Council Meetings

In contrast to past Coffee Council meetings where controversies were mostly between producing and consuming countries, the August 2–20 session will center around several producing countries' demands for larger basic export quotas. Since Brazil and Colombia have the votes to veto any requests, we anticipate that many countries will be approaching us to intercede in their behalf with Brazil.

We have made clear to everyone that, as the President stated when he signed the implementing legislation on May 24, we intended to use the authority granted in the Act to assure that the purpose of the Agreement is achieved. This means that we will be agreeing to a realistic level for annual quotas which will help stabilize prices, that we will be ready to impose restrictions on imports from non-Members, and that we will support other measures to discourage violations of the Agreement and assure compliance with its terms.

Several countries are particularly unhappy with the basic export quotas they negotiated for themselves in 1962 and will be pressing us to assist them in obtaining larger quotas. We intend to take the line that shares of the market must be worked out among the producing countries and that we cannot usefully intervene. We expect the most pressure to be generated by the Ivory Coast, El Salvador, Guatemala, Dominican Republic, Trinidad-Tobago, Honduras and Peru. These countries have real internal pressures for larger quotas, but Brazil fears that if any request is honored, others will also have to be granted; Brazil is not prepared to countenance a continuation of other countries eroding her share of the market.

We hope that Brazil's new initiative to set up a Coffee Diversification Fund, which we will promptly support, will help to deflect some of the pressure for larger quotas. United States interest in the Fund, buttressed by the IBRD's favorable stand, will introduce a new element which may make it possible for many of the delegations to explain at home why they should be content with their existing quotas.

Brazil's representatives have indicated they are prepared to withstand the pressure from other exporters for increases in quotas. Should it, however, develop that the pressure for larger quotas becomes too great to contain and the future of the Agreement is imperiled, Ed Fried might find at the last minute that he would want to urge Brazil to make some compromises. We have some ideas we could bring out if necessary, but we felt you should be informed at this time that the United States will be subject to considerable pressure to assist other countries at the expense of Brazil and we will be responding negatively to these pressures.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Solomon Papers, Coffee, Box 1. Confidential. Drafted by Jack B. Button (E/ICD/TRP) and cleared by William Kling (AF/AFI), Joseph A. Silberstein (ARA/ECP), George R. Jacobs (OR/ICD), and Edward R. Fried (E/OR). The date is the drafting date.

283. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 283. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Japan 1

Washington, August 2, 1965, 5 p.m.

327. Ref: Embtel 301.2 Subject: Wool Textiles. We agree EconMin's negative response to Nakayama's suggestion that U.S. provide list of specific wool textiles which U.S. considered problem categories. We do not wish to submit such list, even informally to GOJ at this time.

Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee is expected to review status of wool textile import problem. We believe no further approaches should be made to GOJ until after Cabinet Committee completes its review and has reached decision on course of action.

For Emb's own information, we are now trying to obtain breakdown of imports of Japanese woolen and worsted fabrics to determine whether wool-silk blended fabrics account for significant portion of growth in fabric imports from Japan. There may be difficulty in obtaining this data but we will transmit findings as soon as possible.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US–JAPAN. Limited Official Use. Drafted by C.W. Ruser (E/OR/ICD/FTD) on August 2; cleared by Tendler (Commerce), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), Harald B. Malmgren (STR), all in substance, Wendell W. Woodbury (EA), and Paul K. Stahnke (EA/J), both in draft, and Philip M. Davenport (FTD); and approved by George R. Jacobs (ICD). Repeated to Geneva for GATT.

2  Document 281.

284. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) 284. Briefing Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1

Washington, September 13, 1965.

SUBJECT

Your Meeting with Latin American Ambassadors, Tuesday, September 14, 5:00 p.m. on Sugar Agreement

We have asked the Latin American Ambassadors interested in sugar to come in for a preliminary explanation of what the United States hopes to accomplish at the September 20–October 15 negotiations for a new international sugar agreement.

The four major Latin American countries which supply sugar to the United States (Brazil, Peru, Mexico, Dominican Republic) plus Nicaragua and Costa Rica have been invited to the meeting.

You can take the occasion to introduce members of the United States Delegation: Horace Godfrey, Administrator, Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service, Chairman of the U.S. Delegation, Edward P. Fried, Vice-Chairman, Tom Murphy, and Paul Callanan, Alternates.2

The following talking points may be useful to you: 1. Our purpose at the UN Sugar Conference in Geneva September 20 will be to help OAS and other friendly sugar producing countries (British Commonwealth, China, etc.) to work out an agreement as helpful to them as possible.

2. We will not compromise our sugar program and their special position in our market.

3. Our view of the best obtainable agreement is one with effective controls on exports, with stock holding requirements and with prompt, automatic sanctions on those who violate the Agreement.

4. The desire of Cuba and the Soviet Bloc to have generous quotas and freedom of action, e.g., to re-export each other's sugar and to trade unfilled export quotas among themselves will be crucial in the Conference. Cuba has already threatened a long-term sugar war. We consider that there is a direct conflict of interest between the Soviet Bloc and Cuba on the one hand and the OAS and other sugar producers on the other regarding the size of quotas and the effectiveness of the agreement's mechanism and institution.

5. So long as the OAS sugar producers stand up for their own interests in the face of Cuban threats and blandishments, we believe we can support them fully. We think the United Kingdom and most of the Commonwealth will do the same and hope such participants as the EEC countries, Canada and Japan will also do so although we expect some initial hesitation.

6. Our Delegation will try to work very closely with the OAS group and will always be available to it.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, INCO–Sugar, UN Sugar Conference, Sept. 1965. No classification marking. Drafted by Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi and Jack B. Button on September 13 and cleared by Edward R. Fried (OR), George R. Jacobs (ICD), and Jean H. Mulliken (ARA).

2 In the margin next to this paragraph is a handwritten note: “may be here.”

285. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 285. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, September 13, 1965.

SUBJECT

International Sugar Conference

The United States will participate in the International Sugar Conference beginning in Geneva on September 20. The Conference has been in preparation for over a year. A sugar agreement is ardently desired by sugar producing countries in Latin America, the British Commonwealth, and Asia since sugar prices have been and are today very low. The need to do something about depressed sugar prices is now a major theme of the new United Nations Trade and Development Board.

The purpose of United States participation will be to help draft an agreement which restricts Cuban sugar exports to the free world and subjects Cuba to effective controls on her sugar production, stocks, and trade and market practices. In the absence of such restrictions Cuba could, if her Soviet aided production program is successful, engage in economic warfare designed to force other sugar producers to the wall. The most vulnerable producers include some in Latin America and Taiwan. We would make sure, as in the past, that the agreement did not affect the provisions and operations of the U.S. sugar program.

In 1961 Cuba refused to accept the agreement and quotas offered her and the conference broke up. This may well occur again. If the conference breaks up and Cuba is held responsible, a basis will have been established to negotiate an agreement without Cuba, which denies her access to the most profitable markets.

If Cuba proves unwilling to accept the onus of breaking up this conference and decides to participate in the kind of agreement we plan to negotiate, we believe this would be to our advantage. Nevertheless, our final position will be reserved since we will still have to decide, after careful review of the provisions, whether to sign the agreement and submit it for Senate advice and consent.

We have consulted with the U.S. sugar industry and on the Hill with Senators Fulbright and Hickenlooper and Representative Poage. They agree that we should participate in the Conference and keep open the decision as to what action to take regarding any agreement which may emerge from the Conference. Senator Carlson did not take a position on participating in the Conference but said he thought he would oppose a sugar agreement as he had opposed all other international agreements.

Thomas C. Mann

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Sugar Legislation, Vol. 2, Box 45. Confidential.

286. Memorandum for the Record 286. Memorandum for the Record1

Washington, September 21, 1965.

SUBJ

Meeting of the Cabinet Committee on Wool Textiles Tuesday, September 21, 1965

ATTENDANCE

For the Administration—Messrs. Connor, Mann, Roth, Weiss, and Wallace

For the Industry—(Principal spokesmen): Mr. Morton Darman, Wool Textile Assn.; Mr. Milton Fried, Amalgamated Clothing Workers; Dr. Lazare Teper, International Ladies Garment Workers Union; and about 15 others

Connor opened with a short statement stressing that no decisions had yet been made, that the Administration was anxious to engage in the fullest and frankest consultation with the industry, and that the briefing paper (attached)2 had been distributed for discussion purposes only. (Mann stated several times during the discussion that he had never before seen the briefing paper—that “we are all here looking at the paper for the first time.”)

Darman replied with a prepared statement, indicating that he was speaking for both labor and management. He characterized the industry's current situation as that of a house with a leaky roof on a sunny day, with clouds building on the horizon. (This analogy obviously displeased the specialists in worsted fabric and knitted outerwear, who later suggested that they were undergoing a cloudburst.) His theme was that the sun could be expected to disappear soon and that immediate preparations for rain were necessary. On a less allegorical plane, he said that: —Quantitative restriction is the only real answer, and it is unfortunate that the Administration still doesn't recognize this.

—The study proposal is a diversion. All of the relevant information is now available, though the industry stands ready to cooperate in collecting any additional data really necessary.

—It is too bad that the multilateral approach is being substantially abandoned, but the industry has no objection to a shift in emphasis in favor of bilateral discussions.

—The industry will not agree to any “piece-meal” program; any acceptable approach must be on an industry-wide basis.

—Attempts to convince foreign exporters that we are serious in seeking relief are badly hampered by the general confidence abroad that the U.S. will not take unilateral action under any circumstances. The industry did not favor unilateral action, but thought that the threat of it should be used as a negotiating tool.

—It was disturbing to note the lack of any discussion in the paper of a possible U.S. quid for any foreign quo. It seemed highly unlikely that we could get any concession without paying a price.

—The paper did not outline a satisfactory “program” to “get the job done” in wool textiles.

Threat of Unilateral Action:

Connor, Roth, and a couple of the industry people carried on a short, desultory discussion on this point in which it was agreed that the threat of Congressional action had been used with the Japanese last June. Darman acknowledged that fact, but argued that few of the knowledgeable people abroad believed we would follow through. Mann ended this exchange rather summarily by commenting that his negotiating experience suggested that this kind of threat was not very useful, and that, in any event, we Americans try to use it too often. His summation was that “deeds speak louder than words.”

Efforts Toward a Multilateral Agreement:

Mann expressed surprise at Darman's implication that the Government was giving up its quest for a multilateral agreement. He said that he knew of no such decision. The industry people expressed regret that they had misunderstood.

Bargaining Price:

Weiss inquired what price for voluntary restrictions on wool the industry had in mind. Darman answered that he couldn't make specific suggestions because he wasn't familiar enough with the various currencies available to the Government for this purpose. Connor asked whether such a price would have to be stated in terms of concessions on other commodities. Fried (a former Foreign Service officer) replied with an ambiguous indication that “the price needn't be money.” The discussion then bogged down when Roth suggested that the GATT-type compensation price would be of the order of $250 million, implying that we would stop wool textile imports altogether. The industry fell all over itself assuring everyone that it had no thoughts of complete stoppage, but wanted only to hold imports to “a reasonable level.” When pressed for a quantitative statement of that level, some industry representatives suggested that it should be the percentage of the market served by imports in the Spring of 1962, but this was not established by consensus as the industry objective.

Study Proposal:

The fundamentals of the industry position on the study which evolved in discussion were as follows: —Its purpose is unclear. The Kennedy-Johnson commitment and the much-cited effort to convene an international wool textile conference suggested that the Administration recognizes the industry's problems and is moving to solve them. The study proposal suggests some chance of reversing this judgment (enter some political saber rattling).

—All relevant statistical data are available; no “inexperienced student” will come up with any new facts or conclusions.

—In any case, the problems of the wool textile industry are not susceptible to the usual statistical demonstration because two assumptions basic to the free trade model are not applicable to the industry. Specifically, (1) no foreign competition is needed in this area to keep domestic producers honest and innovative, and (2) rises and falls occur so quickly in the textile business that one cannot responsibly wait until domestic producers are “limping or crawling” before helping them (veiled implications that the industry's support of the TEA and any future trade legislation was conditional on the understanding that it would get help without being subjected to an injury test).

—Most of the facts the Administration seeks (i.e., cost data for foreign producers) will not be available from foreign governments, would not be reliable even if supplied, and are essentially irrelevant to both the prices of imports and the willingness of exporting nations to agree to voluntary restrictions.

—If facts are relevant, we have all we need. It is clear that, except for the “freakish” 1964 situation, imports are rising while the total market is virtually constant. This alone should be a convincing case for import damage. (The industry people were thrown off stride during this discussion when a representative of the clothing manufacturers, their customers, rather stuffily announced that all of the remarks thus far were beside the point, which was that he and his associates would buy all the Japanese fabric they could get because “it is better and it is cheaper.”)

The critical point in this discussion was the question of the purpose of the study. The industry's strategy was to implicitly dare the Administration representatives to say that the President's commitment to help the industry was conditional on a statistical demonstration of need. It became clear very quickly that Roth was the only Administration speaker willing to say that the facts were needed for intra-governmental decision-making as well as for building a strong negotiating position. Roth made several manful attempts to establish that the Administration's proposal was motivated by both needs, but eventually gave up when it was utterly obvious that neither Connor nor Mann was going to support him.

After Roth subsided, Mann, adopting a “no-nonsense” tone, suggested that the meeting stop “beating around the mulberry bush and get down to cases.” He emphasized that government and industry were “on the same team,” that the Government has no desire to wait until the industry was limping or crawling before helping it, and that progress could only be made in an atmosphere of mutual trust. Personally, he believed “95%” of the industry's claims of injury and he was sure that a close examination of the facts would result in government-industry agreement on what the problems were and what it was reasonable to try to do about them. He agreed that cost data for foreign producers are probably irrelevant to their export pricing, and that such data, no matter how accurate, would not ensure our negotiating success.

But Mann maintained that a strong factual case was the necessary minimum for any negotiation. No matter how firmly he believed the industry's general case, he could not go to the negotiating table without specifics (he slipped at one point and said that he also needed the facts to convince the President, but retreated quickly when asked whether that was another indication that the President remains unconvinced). What the Administration was proposing was that the Government and the industry agree upon an impartial, knowledgeable fact-finding agent who could develop a brief for the industry's case.

Connor agreed with Mann's remarks, and suggested establishment of a joint Government-industry working group to do the fact-finding, brief-writing job. After another long diatribe by the union economists against the concept and necessity of further fact-finding, and some table-pounding by the worsted and knitted outerwear people, Darman agreed to supply a list of names from which the industry representatives on the working group could be chosen. In doing so he remarked, however, that this represented no commitment that any firm would open its books to the working group.

Ed K. Hamilton 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Bator Memos [2 of 2], Box 1. No classification marking. Drafted on September 24 by Edward K. Hamilton. An attached note from Francis Bator to the President's Special Counsel, Harry C. McPherson, Jr., dated September 24, reads: “Harry: Attached is Ed Hamilton's good summary of Tuesday's wool meeting. Somebody will eventually have to get it across to the industry that the President's commitment is conditional—that they cannot expect him to do all sorts of costly things trying to help them unless help is clearly needed. I suspect that the joint fact-finding operation will bog down, forcing another Cabinet Committee confrontation. If by then the Congress is out of town, the time will be ripe for bringing Connor into line and plotting an Administration strategy which will provide the President with room for maneuver.” Also attached is a note from Bator to McGeorge Bundy, dated September 27, transmitting the minutes of the meeting.

2 Not found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

287. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 287. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 1

Washington, October 8, 1965, 7:01 p.m.

GATT 3130. Ref: TAGG 3435,2 3443.3 Soviet Participation in Grains Discussion. We see no reason to depart from position contained US proposal to Cereals Group of last May. US position envisages eventual extension of negotiations to include all GATT members having interest in cereals. Accession would be open to any member of UN and UN specialized agencies.

Not only is there no present need—as Cereals Group agreed on October 1—to bring Soviets into discussion; we do not foresee any need or advantage to do so during this negotiation. Essential objective of negotiations is to improve access to main commercial markets, and to bring about better balance between world commercial demand and supply. No reason to believe Soviets prepared to make access commitments. On other hand, Soviet presence could add complications to negotiation that is already overcharged with complications. If bargaining results in proposal for new price range or other changes in present IWA arrangements, these could be negotiated separately with all countries participating in IWA.

Suggest you caution WW not to raise expectations that Soviets will be brought into GATT Cereals Group. In addition, while we have no objection Soviets being informed, we do not wish information be given in such detail or comments be invited, so that Soviets would thereby become de facto participants.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Thomas O. Enders (EUR/RPE) and Fred H. Sanderson on October 8; cleared by Irwin R. Hedges (STR), Carl Schmidt (OT), Worthington (USDA), and James L. Colbert (EUR/SOV); and approved by George R. Jacobs (ICD). Repeated to Moscow and Ottawa.

2  TAGG 3435, October 1, reported that Wyndham White had suggested that the Soviet Union should be either invited to take part in GATT negotiations, or else it could be informed of the discussions and be assured of being invited to participate at a later date. (Ibid.)

3  TAGG 3443, October 4, summarized a meeting between Wyndham White and representatives of the Cereals Group on October 1, at which they discussed Soviet participation and agreed that no formal approach to the Soviets was necessary at present. (Ibid.)

288. Information Memorandum From Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi of the Tropical Products Division, Office of International Commodities to the Director of the Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs (Jacobs) 288. Information Memorandum From Miklos Szabo-Pelsoczi of the Tropical Products Division, Office of International Commodities to the Director of the Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs (Jacobs)1

Washington, October 22, 1965.

SUBJECT

The First Session of the 1965 UN Sugar Conference2

1. General

The session got off to a good start: by the end of the first week all major committees were set up and all officers elected. The committees were: Quota and Price, Economic, Administrative, Statistical, and the Officers: Odevall (Sweden) Chairman, Patino (Mexico) First Vice-Chairman, Suma (Japan) Second Vice-Chairman, Jones-Parry (UK) Chairman Quota and Price Committee, Harvey (Canada) Chairman Economic Committee, Sen Gupta (India) Chairman Administrative Committee, and Desbordes (France) Statistical Committee. Baron Kronacker (Belgium), who wanted to be Chairman, and Janton (France), who expected to chair the Economic Committee, were ignored.

The brisk pace of the start was not followed up with comparable action during the rest of the session. Already on the Monday of the second week the conference ran into a major difficulty—the exporters' request to importers that they give specific and uniform access and minimum price guarantees—an issue which remained a stumbling block for the next two weeks.

The importers in general were taken aback by the vehemence of the exporters' assault. Although consultations among the major importers (US, UK, Japan, Canada) started immediately, it was not before the Friday of the third week that the importers were in a position to make a common statement concerning the exporters' request. By that time it was too late to put the exporters under any pressure to tackle the main issue underlying the stabilization of the market, namely export quotas.

Under these conditions the session ended on a low key, without acrimony, but with the realization that none of the old issues (export quotas, especially Cuba's position in an agreement) came any closer to a solution, and that in addition to them a new issue, namely, the exporters-importers controversy, has been created.

2. The “multilateral approach"—and why it was pressed?

The “multilateral approach", as it was called and interpreted at the conference, is easy to define. It is mainly contained in Articles 35, 36, and 53/2 of the draft agreement and it essentially consists of an obligation of importers to import yearly specific quantities based on a fixed and uniform arithmetical formula, at a price not below an agreed upon minimum. If the definition of this technique is easy, it is much less clear why the exporters gave so much support to it that every other progress became impossible during the session.

The truth is probably that the “multilateral approach” meant different things to different people, and that it was the sum total of these private reasons, rather than the genuine belief in the overall therapeutic effect of the method, which made it the star performer of the session.

The multilateral approach had a long history in the Sugar Council. It has been an optional feature of the 1958 Agreement, Art. 22 of which reads in toto as follows:

Article 22

"(1) During the first quota year of this Agreement, the Council shall consider, and make recommendations to interested participating Governments concerning the negotiation of arrangements for multilateral options drawn up in accordance with the provisions of this Article.

(2) Such arrangements shall be designed to secure that, if the prevailing price moves beyond the highest or lowest price of the range set out in Article 21, the Participating Governments concerned will have the right to exercise options for sale or purchase, as the case may be, in respect of such quantities of sugar as may be prescribed in the arrangements.

(3) The options shall be exercisable in accordance with such limits as to time and frequency, or otherwise, as may be prescribed in the arrangement.

(4) The arrangements shall take into account the traditional pattern of trade in sugar.

(5) The Council may establish such Committees as it deems desirable to assist it in the examination of these questions and to formulate the recommendations provided for in paragraph (1) above.”

These ideas have been briefly discussed at the 1961 Sugar Conference without however undergoing any serious change. (See the Economic Committee's Report of 1961 Conference C(63)1.)

Nevertheless, between 1961 and 1964 the Secretariat of the Council and the Preparatory Committee established by the 1963 Protocol, apparently in an effort to come up with “new” ideas, inclined to favor more and more the multilateral approach. (See the Preparatory Committee's Report C(64)4.) Ralph Stedman (Executive Director 1960–64) was of this view. The current Executive Director followed in his footsteps.

What for Sugar Council officials was mainly an interesting academic exercise, for the British became an opportunistic solution. During the years 1962–1965 UK officials expressed repeatedly their interest in lowering the UK Negotiated Price in order to reduce their foreign exchange burden. The prerequisite of this position was the strengthening of the world market. This in itself could be achieved through supply-management alone, but we must assume that the UK government was exposed to heavy pressure from its LDC suppliers (BWI's, India, etc) not to reduce the Negotiated Price without first making absolutely sure that a minimum world price will be guaranteed under an International Agreement. Until Deputy Secretary R. Wall realistically appraised the program in Geneva, the UK gave cheerful support to the exporters' request.

The US, although [having?] repeatedly expressed its reservations concerning the wisdom of the multilateral approach (see Deptel 37 (?) of July 1 (?) 1965 to London3 ), was perhaps counted upon to acquiesce in it, since it does not involve direct US interests. The support of the USSR and of the African countries was certain.

Viewing the situation in this light, it is perhaps not surprising that Brazil, wanting to establish the principle in order to create precedence for other commodity agreements rather then to fight for a realistic sugar agreement on this occasion, came out strongly in favor of the multilateral approach. Mexico and the other OAS countries followed the lead, especially since they might have felt that their pressure is not directed at the US, but at other, non-preferential importers.

Cuba of course needed no encouragement. It is pretty obvious now that Cuba did not want to have an international agreement at this juncture. The multilateral approach served Cuba's interests well, covering up for a lack of Cuban cooperation which nevertheless became more-and-more apparent as the conference proceeded. Furthermore, the multilateral approach gave an opportunity to Cuba to say that really there is no overproduction in the developing countries since the surplus could be easily absorbed a) if the developed countries, especially the US reduced their own production, and b) if the developed countries subsidized exports of developing countries through a minimum price guarantee and through special sales to low income countries.

But it is exactly at this point where all calculations (UK, Commonwealth, Brazil, OAS, etc) went wrong. Even if there were no practical difficulties with respect to the application of the multilateral approach, the US could not have agreed under the present political circumstances to a system which would entrust the maintenance of the minimum price to importers, while exporters would be more or less free to overproduce. (The whole argument that exporters, by themselves, are unable to restrict exports to the extent necessary for the maintenance of a stable price, implies that exporters will overshoot their production targets regularly and will expect that the developed countries will subsidize their surplus sales to new markets.) This system would reduce the pressure on Cuba to stay within its quota, would weaken the benefits of a stable price to free world exporters and thus would eliminate the justification of US participation in an agreement.

In short, free world countries which supported the multilateral approach gravely miscalculated the US position on the issue. It will be the task of the US to convince its friends during the intersessional period to abandon the multilateral approach.

3. The Outlook of New ISA

The sugar problem will not go away. As prices decline (during the week following the Conference they declined by about .5ȼ lb.) the pressure to do something about it will increase. The ISC will want to have at least one preparatory meeting of exporters and importers before the end of the year, followed up by further meetings in January and February. The Commonwealth sugar producers will start their yearly review session on October 25th, lasting several weeks in London. It would not be surprising if the OAS Sugar Group, which met several times in Washington during the past two years were to get together in the near future. The question is what the US should do during the coming months of preparation and uncertainty?

Publicly, the US probably could not do better than to maintain its current position of active interest in a realistic agreement helpful to our friends. The US should emphasize that such an agreement might emerge from the second session of the Conference only if preparatory work in the Council indicates that all the major issues, namely, the exporters'/importers' controversy and the separation of the preferential markets from the world market has been solved and virtually agreed upon by all the major participants. The US should resist the calling of the second session without being assured of such virtual agreement.

Privately, the US might want to work very closely with the UK, Japan and Canada on the importers' side, and with Australia, Peru and Taiwan on the exporters' side. If these six countries firmly supported the US on the multilateral issue and on the separation of the preferential and non-preferential markets, one of three possibilities might result: a) The second session will not be called in the foreseeable future;

b) If called, Cuba might be forced into accepting an agreement favorable to US policies;

c) A Cuba-less agreement might emerge.

In view of the urgency of the matter, the US could perhaps get in touch with the Australians in the near future, so that they could influence the Commonwealth Sugar Talks starting before the end of October in the direction desirable from the US point of view.

4. An Agreement without Cuba

Preparations for such an agreement should start now, parallel with the preparations suggested under the previous paragraph. The difficulties of such an agreement should not be underestimated, and the nature of such an agreement should be clearly understood.

With respect to member importers, the same rules of import restrictions from non-members should apply as in a normal agreement. Export quotas to the markets of member importers should be based on historic averages. The technique would be supply-management, and the price probably could be maintained at the Agreement minimum.

With respect to non-member importers, the Agreement should operate essentially as a cartel, or international sugar marketing cooperative, without maintaining an inflexible floor price which would only allow Cuba to undersell it. The Agreement would need to set up a marketing board (as suggested in the US Position Paper re Art. 46) to coordinate the sales of members to the market on which they will have to compete with Cuba and presumably the other Soviet Bloc exporters.

Inasmuch as Agreement members would need to meet Cuban competition, their returns will not necessarily be much better than without joining the Agreement. Nevertheless, there are obvious differences between a duopolistic situation (Cuba and Agreement) and a free market situation (Cuba and 30 exporters), which would argue in favor of an Agreement. Agreement members could help each other to hold the Agreement line (quotas, financially strong members like Australia providing temporary help to weak members, etc.) and would eliminate competition among each other. On the other hand, they would prevent unchecked Cuban expansion, as they would try to meet Cuban competition whenever they could. Cuba, faced with the inability to expand, would be compelled to call off her price war. At this point a sort of co-existence between the duopolistic structures could develop, implying tacit agreement as to prices, and to each other's markets, and leading eventually back to an international agreement along the lines the US would be willing to support.

It is obvious that the legal, economic and political ramifications of an eventual agreement without Cuba are far-reaching. Therefore, the need for an early and detailed study of the question—possibly in consultation with the Six (UK, Japan, Canada, Australia, Peru, Taiwan)—cannot be overemphasized.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 75 D 462, Sugar Conference 1965. No classification marking.

2 For additional commentary on and sources relating to the conference, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1965, p. 1090, footnote 16.

3 Not further identified.

289. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 289. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, October 22, 1965, 1142Z.

TAGG 3506. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. Subject: Cotton Textile: Text WW Proposal. Ref: TAGG 3507.2

Note by the Director-General.

It has been generally considered that the current trade negotiations—which are broader than strictly tariff negotiations—afford an opportunity to deal constructively with a variety of international trading problems. Accordingly, it is considered that an attempt should be made within the framework of the Kennedy Round to arrive at a mutually satisfactory overall arrangement on cotton textiles. (In this connexion it will be recalled that the Long-Term Arrangement is to be the subject of a major review later this year.)

It is suggested that the following points would be an appropriate basis for the negotiation of an overall arrangement: (I) Negotiations should take place in a group composed of those countries which are both participants in the trade negotiations and are also signatories of the Long-Term Arrangement.

(II) Negotiations might take place under the following three headings, which for a number of participants are plainly interrelated: (A) The greatest possible reduction of tariffs on cotton textiles by the importing countries;

(B) An understanding that the Long-Term Arrangement would be renewed in its present form for a further period;

(C) An understanding that the importing countries would apply the arrangement with greater flexibility and with full regard for the necessity to provide expanded access to their markets for the exporting countries.

(III) The first step in the negotiations might be the circulation by the secretariat of a paper which: (A) Sets out the offers which have been made on tariffs in the Kennedy Round;

(B) Invites exporting countries to communicate any requests they wish to make for improvements in these offers;

(C) Invites proposals as to the length of the period for which the Long-Term Arrangement should be renewed;

(D) Invites exporting countries to submit proposals on how the importing countries should give effect to the principle referred to in (II) (C) above.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels, for USEC, Cairo, Hong Kong, Karachi, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, New Delhi, Ottawa, Rome, Stockholm, The Hague, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter.

2  Document 290.

290. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 290. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, October 22, 1965, 1142Z.

TAGG 3507. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. Subject: Cotton Textile Sector Meeting, October 19–20. Ref: TAGG 3506.2 Meeting attended by dels from US, UK, EEC, Canada, Sweden, Japan, Hong Kong, India, Pakistan, and UAR. Discussion opened with Wyndham White's explanation of three elements of package deal as outlined in his proposal (reftel). Most discussion centered around lengthy interventions by Amb. Lall (India) criticizing conception of package deal which precludes changes in LTA and involves liberalization LTA administration instead. Importing countries indicated readiness begin negotiations on basis WW's suggestions, making clear this does not constitute commitment on any one part of package unless satisfactory agreement reached on all parts of package.

On exporters' side, Japan indicated it prepared to accept WW paper and urged sustained pace of meetings so that negotiations could pro-gress rapidly. Hong Kong (Haddon-Cove) at first seemed support India in opposing basic concept of no change in LTA language, but after US, supported by other importers (and notably EEC), clearly emphasized unwillingness renegotiate language LTA, Hong Kong joined Japan in indicating readiness start package deal discussions on basis WW proposal. HK asked, however, that specific reference to extension of LTA “in its present form” be deleted (para II (B) reftel) primarily for presentational reasons. While recognizing that no essential change in LTA text acceptable to importing countries, HK argued that small changes might be indicated later and insistence on precluding change of even a comma of present LTA seemed a bit rough at outset. HK also supported Japan in urging rapid progress of talks.

Pakistan made only one short intervention seemingly supporting Indian arguments that basic concepts of cotton textile trade need restudy. Added, however, had no instructions permitting acceptance of WW's proposal at present meeting.

UAR remained silent throughout (but WW reports UAR previously informed him they agreeable start discussions on basis package deal). Neither Pakistan nor UAR gave any other support to lenghthy objections and interventions by Lall who was main and essentially only problem at meeting.

Main line of Lall's argument during meeting was that it too early agree on any specific form of negotiations. Whole problem of cotton textile trade should first be debated, including question of whether continuation of LTA needed and, if so, in what form. Did not see need for any particular hurry in all this, and argued that Cotton Textile Committee review of LTA in late 65 would be good occasion begin this debate. KR sector discussions might resume early next year in light outcome LTA review. Lall did not exclude possibility of eventual Indian agreement to package deal, but this would come only much later after other alternatives explored and, in any case, only after exporters had clear idea from each major importer what more liberal administration of LTA might mean.

In private talks Lall further elaborated on this line of argument revealing number of probable reasons for his tactic. (1) It clear that Indians have not done much recent thinking about problems and practical possibilities re cotton textiles trade. Their initial position being taken in absence clear understanding of what is negotiable. (2) Indians still unhappy over turn down by us on suggested changes in LTA (see Delhi's 1038 to Dept).3 (3) Lall claims Indian Minister of Trade and Industry personally involved and very critical of LTA, hence some time needed bring him around. (4) Indians look forward to further bilateral discussions pressing their viewpoint and exploring possibilities with US, EEC, and possibly other importing countries. They unwilling accept package deal negotiations until results these consultation clear to them. (5) Indians are aware limitations their ability expand volume cotton textile exports, and therefore less anxious than other exporters push forward with negotiations focused on increased access to import markets.

Re consultations with US, it evident that Lall anxious handle these personally in Washington. He is hoping have such talks while in US between November 1 and 3. Also intends have discussions with Hijzen next week in Brussels.

In view position expressed by Indians and uninstructed Pakistan delegation, meeting adjourned until November 8 when India may be ready acquiesce start up sector discussions on basis WW proposal.

Comment: We should try use time before Nov 8 to try to bring India and Pakistan around to accepting WW proposal as negotiating guideline. Since Lall anxious have US-Indian bilateral in Washington, do not believe we should insist this be done in Geneva although we should emphasize it important as general rule keep future negotiations re package deal one place. (Except for eventual negotiation of detailed bilaterals, pursuant to package deal agreements; these can of course be done elsewhere.)

In Washington we expect Lall to concentrate on 3 issues: (1) Continue probe USG willingness to open up text of LTA. (2) Failing this, to seek commitments re specifics of more liberal US treatment of India in bilateral agreement. (3) In view limitations on Indian ability expand volume of exports, to focus on improving prices received. In this connection he may float idea of complete tariff elimination on textile items under restraint.

In replying to Lall, and in any discussion in New Delhi, Karachi, and elsewhere, suggest following points be stressed: (1) There is no chance that US or other importing countries willing open up language LTA at this time.

(2) What counts is administration of LTA and not language of LTA. Most if not all importing countries have severe limits on what they can do in cotton textile field. This, however regrettable, is practical fact of life and no UNCTAD-type speeches about needs of LDCs likely make much impact on domestic industries in importing countries. Best and only practical way bring about improvements in cotton textile trade for exporting countries, including reductions of tariffs, is in context KR package deal where renewal of LTA can be exchanged by exporters as quid pro quo for tariff cuts and more liberal administration of LTA.

(3) Postponement package deal discussions, and lengthy debates about fundamentals of world textile trade and LDC needs, will only have practical result of delaying implementation agreement on tariff cuts and more liberalized administration but will not change basic attitudes of importing countries.

(4) WW proposal comprises negotiating desiderata. In accepting this approach countries in no way commit themselves in advance either to renew LTA, or to liberalize its administration, or to make tariff cuts. Countries under no obligation to accept some elements of the package unless satisfactory arrangements negotiated with respect to all aspects of package. Nevertheless, under WW's proposal structure of cotton textile sector negotiations would be based on formula: what amount of liberalized administration plus tariff cuts, on one hand, would justify LTA renewal on other.

(5) Many exporting countries want fast implementation of more liberal LTA administration (as first step, more liberal bilaterals for coming year). Only way to secure this liberalization is through WW “package” approach. Considerable pressure, therefore, on importers, and Lall, to move forward quickly.

(6) We recommend that Washington not get involved in negotiating changes in text WW proposal. This should be discussed before and at Nov 8 meeting in Geneva.

(7) Re specifics of new US-Indian bilateral, suggest Lall be given indication of areas in which to expect improvement (e.g. swing, carryover, growth, possible elimination certain ceilings within groups, etc.). But precise details to be negotiated later.

(8) Re possible Lall request to eliminate tariffs on restricted items, assume we would point out value to India of 50 percent cut and lack of authority to go to zero.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Cairo, Hong Kong, Karachi, London, Luxembourg for USEC, New Delhi, Ottawa, Paris for USOECD, Rome, Stockholm, The Hague, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter at 3:10 p.m.

2  Document 289.

3 Dated October 22. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON 17 US–INDIA)

291. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 291. Telegram From the Embassy in Pakistan to the Department of State 1

Karachi, October 30, 1965.

976. Rawalpindi's tel 472 to Karachi dated October 29 rptd FYI.

"Ref: (A) Geneva's 2 to Karachi. (B) Geneva's 3 to Karachi.2 Subject: Cotton textiles: Wyndham White proposal. GOP reaction to WW package proposal is almost completely negative. In long conversation October 29 with Commerce Deputy Secretary, M.L. Rehman, EmbOff made points outlined Ref B, stressing advantages to GOP from combination of tariff reductions and liberalized administration of LTA as contained in WW proposal. Rehman, who probably will be GOP delegate at LTA review session in late November, said he was “dead against” package proposal. Pakistan wanted no part of extended LTA and had no hope that Kennedy Round would yield any benefit in cotton textile field. Pakistan was not interested in tariff reductions on textiles as long as developed countries continued to use LTA as mechanical to protect own textile industries not to assist LDC's. Quantitative restrictions not tariffs only significant factor in limiting Pakistan's access to foreign markets. Rehman added he did not have any faith in possibility of liberalized administration of LTA. Pakistan's experience with LTA had been bitter and all previous assurances about expanded access to markets had proved ephemeral. He spoke with particular bitterness of UK proposal to freeze Pakistan's quota at present level until 1970, and noted that GOP now considering some kind of overall restriction on UK exports to Pakistan possibly taking form of ceiling on volume UK exports. Rehman argued against EmbOff's suggestion that WW package only way to get domestic industry to accept changes in tariffs and stated unfair interpretation of criteria for market disruption not tariff levels at root of problem. What was needed, he felt, was for government to stop coddling domestic producers and take action to bring about structural changes in textile industries which had been promised at time of signing of LTA.

EmbOff also learned in discussion with Rehman that GOP may attempt to float with USG on bilateral basis [garble] at LTA review session in open forum proposal [garble] global quotas for which all exporting countries would compete. Under such a scheme importing country would set overall levels of imports for particular category at level tolerable to domestic manufacturers and then all or specific part of this quota would be reserved for free competition between exporting countries. Rehman expressed view that at least 50 percent should be set aside in this way with remainder divided on basis of fixed country by country quotas. GOP has proposed such system to UK but has not had favorable response owing to desire of UK to assure special place for Hong Kong and India in British market.

Comment: Basic GOP position on WW proposal fairly inflexible. Virtually certain GOP rep in Geneva will be instructed to oppose proposal on November 8 and little likelihood change this position until LTA review session completed in mid-December. Rehman, whose voice in GOP textile policy discussions often decisive, clearly believed WW proposal a device of developed countries to obtain extension of LTA which in his view is fundamentally prejudicial to Pakistan's interests. Rehman personally would welcome abrogation of LTA but extremely doubtful GOP would go along at this time. However, he will probably be permitted to engage in strong criticism of LTA.

Signed Spielman.”

McConaughy

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Confidential. There is no time of transmission on the source text; the telegram was received at 6:48 a.m. Also sent to Geneva.

2 Reference is to TAGG 3506 and TAGG 3507, Documents 289 and 290.

292. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 292. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, November 3, 1965.

Pursuant to our telephone conversation I am enclosing a draft letter which was prepared by Tony Solomon for my signature.2 I did not receive this until I was in the midst of the Balance of Payments meeting and consequently, have not had time to give it personal attention. I am sending it along to you since it does express the general position which I outlined to you over the telephone.

Our own analysis suggests that requiring defense industries to produce defense items from ingots drawn out of the stockpile would not appreciably affect the level of imports. Ingot users would continue to procure their requirements at the cheapest price and, to the extent that there was a competitive advantage in imported ingots, the users would continue to bring them in from abroad.

Under these circumstances, I would strongly urge that in announcing the program we avoid reference to the balance of payments or to any curtailments. If we were to do so, we would incur all the disadvantages of taking protectionist action without in fact improving our international current account appreciably.

As you are well aware, this problem is particularly sensitive at the moment because of the election campaign in Canada.

The draft letter suggests that we advise the Canadian and Norwegian Governments as to what we are proposing to do and why we are proposing to do it.

I shall be in the Department until 7:15 or so, if you need me in the meeting.

George W. Ball

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Aluminum Problem, Box 1. Confidential.

2 Not printed. This letter, also dated November 3 and addressed to Secretary of Defense McNamara, recommended that the disposal of 200,000 tons of surplus aluminum be justified by military requirements of the Vietnam war rather than by improving the U.S. balance of payments.__During a telephone conversation with Secretary of Defense McNamara on November 2 at 3 p.m., McNamara told President Johnson there was no question in his mind that they ought to take 200,000 tons of aluminum out of the stockpile. McNamara said defense production needs were 150,000–200,000 tons above pre-Vietnam levels and this release would permit the increased defense production without further increases in already rising imports which the balance of payments program could ill afford. McNamara said industry was concerned, and they would have to work out how to do this with the least disruption of the American market, but he had told an industry representative he had been working on increased defense production and the stockpile since July 20 and the current decision was not related to the Olin-Mathieson price increase announced the previous Friday. McNamara also reported telling the industry representative he thought the President was even considering a larger release, up to 400,000 tons a year, to expedite disposing of the 1.3 million ton surplus. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recording of a Telephone Conversation, Tape FMISC.01, Side B, PNO 1)

293. Editorial Note 293. Editorial Note

On November 5, 1965, President Johnson signed two bills releasing minerals held in U.S. stockpiles. H.R. 9047 authorized the release of 200,000 tons of zinc; H.R. 10305, 200 million pounds of nickel. For text of his statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book II, pages 1098–1099.

294. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 294. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in India 1

Washington, November 6, 1965, 12:51 p.m.

843. Refs: New Delhi's 11502 and TAGG 3546.3 Cotton Textiles. Discussion with Lall on cotton textiles held November 3. Ambassador Roth (STR) acted as principal spokesman for USG; all other ITAC agencies represented including Chairman ITA. Roth's points were: 1 a. USG viewed the Wyndham White package approach as the most practical way to reconcile the interests of importing and exporting countries and as compared to all other alternatives offered greatest opportunity for increased liberalization of world cotton textile trade. We are able to offer liberalized administration of LTA and persuade our domestic industry of utility of this approach only because integral part of package is extension of LTA without change for further period after its 1967 expiration date. This is reason why USG and other importing countries emphasize that maintenance of LTA without substantive change is key issue in obtaining trade benefits that GOI and other LDC's seek and that we conceive wld be encompassed within liberalization of bilateral agreements. For same reason India may be over-emphasizing importance of formal changes in language of LTA. We believe that administering existing LTA with greater flexibility wld provide real trade benefits for LDC's.

b. We are concerned over timing and wish maintain momentum of Kennedy Round Sector Discussions. Lall suggested at October 19–20 meetings that sector discussions might be postponed until after thorough debate held over fundamentals of world trade in cotton textiles, including the need for an extension of the LTA; this debate to take place during the major review of the LTA. We are concerned lest such a debate make agreement in sector discussions more difficult to attain, since inevitably in the process of formal debate wld be a hardening of positions. Opportunity exists now for real progress through sector discussions, this opportunity shld not be lost.

c. It appears that some misunderstanding exists in Delhi over nature of W.W. package. Use of package as negotiating framework does not involve any commitment, legal or moral, to accept any one element of package unless countries satisfied as to all elements in package.

d. We wld envisage that in discussions on specifics of Indian-US bilateral, USG wld be forthcoming. Frankly all four Indian requests, for flexibility, carryover, increase in Category 31 ceiling, and increase in overall ceiling are negotiable. Assuming acceptance of W.W. package in principle, we are prepared begin discussion specifics of our bilateral, either here or in Geneva, as soon as K.R. sector discussions reconvene, or on a date convenient to the Indian Government.

2 a. In reply, Lall stated he agreed that timing had now become an important factor and that GOI was prepared to press ahead rapidly. In view of what had happened to India under LTA it wld be superhuman for India to say now that she liked LTA. Major difficulty that India has with W.W. package is her belief that genuinely liberal solutions on tariff reductions and increased access for LDC's products cannot be reached within the framework of existing LTA. India had no idea of negotiating changes in every concept of the LTA. She did have in mind some very specific changes in its language which wld ensure that promised liberalization on part of EEC did in fact take place. The general ideas put forward in India's aide-memoire of September 224 were “half-baked” and did not represent by any means India's last word on the subject. Certainly, India did not intend to propose any changes which the USG wld find absolutely unthinkable. India's accepting the LTA in principle now wld place EEC in a very “happy” position. Under LTA, as it exists, EEC can rely on extra-legal quota restrictions to curb textile imports from LDC's and need not even go over to system of restraints envisaged by LTA itself. As a minimum, he believed it necessary to write into LTA provisions that wld ensure that what EEC promises is done, for example, a fixed time-table to eliminate non-LTA quota restrictions was necessary. Another basic problem with EEC was that present quotas were products of 10 years of restrictive practices, which have resulted in an extremely small base. The EEC does not restrict imports from such countries as Spain and Portugal or even from Peking. The US does not apply restrictions to imports from developed countries. Thus, in his Government's view, the LTA has become an instrument to restrict the imports of 3 or 4 developing countries. Point here, he stressed, is that necessary changes in language of LTA to prevent discriminatory treatment against LDC's shld not be debarred from discussions.

b. Whatever the Indian Govt's predilictions about the LTA may be, they are now prepared to discuss specifics. It is possible that India might be able to get through bilateral discussions as much in dollars and cents as she wld obtain from desired changes in language of the LTA. She is therefore prepared to discuss specific liberalizations in administration of LTA by importing countries. If in the course of these discussions, India becomes convinced that the fruits of liberalization wld come to her, she wld not press for changes in LTA. Test wld be pragmatic one, of balancing off value of trade concessions obtained through bilateral negotiations against possible gains for India through pressing for changes in LTA that may be unattainable. Only commitment that Lall could make at present is agreement that some types of restriction on trade in cotton textiles is necessary; he cannot agree that extension of present LTA is only possible form restriction can take. He can assure us, however, that in sector discussions no Indian proposals wld be put forward that wld necessitate substantive change in the text of the LTA. Changes which might have to be made in text of LTA wld be “consequential", i.e. wld result from bilateral discussions.

With regard to major review in GATT Cotton Textiles Committee, Lall said that he could not agree to its postponement until after completion of sector discussions. He wld, however, seek to avoid temptation to use this as a forum for attacking importing countries or LTA in an inflammatory fashion.

3. Roth said that he did not believe that we were too far apart. USG believes that LTA is flexible enough to accommodate within present framework purposes Lall has in mind. Only “rigidity” in US position is rigidity of form. We want to maintain umbrella of LTA unchanged, but underneath that umbrella, we can move responsively towards liberalizing trade.

4. One possibility discussed by ITAC Chairman at meeting was regulating US-Indian trade by means of a comprehensive bilateral agreement covering all trade in cotton textiles as opposed to present limited bilateral. Lall said he wld be prepared, were its terms reasonable to India, to recommend to his Govt. that “it walk into that trap".

5. In summarizing results of meeting, Lall stated that it was his understanding that trade problem between US and India could be sufficiently resolved through bilateral negotiations so that the problems of general principles wld be reduced to manageable proportions. He was concerned over EEC liberalization. Bilateral negotiations in Geneva, could not begin, however, prior November 15th since Indian textile experts wld not be available before that date. Roth stated that we believed that problem of general principles might become academic and that GOI could expect the USG to be forthcoming in Geneva discussions. Lall asked in conclusion that the Emb. in Delhi not detail his position in their discussions with the GOI, stating that he wld like to have GOI briefed only by himself.

6. We would summarize results of meeting as follows: (1) India now prepared to enter into sector discussions.

(2) Perhaps US and India may be able to settle problem of cotton textile trade through a comprehensive bilateral agreement covering trade in all categories.

(3) India doubtful that she can get liberalization from EEC without changes in LTA.

(4) Whether India will insist on changes in language of the LTA will depend on results of her bilateral discussions with the US and EEC.

(5) If India satisfied with other elements of package she would agree to extension of LTA in some form.

(6) Both parties agree that no parts of package are binding unless all parts agreed.

However, subtleties and nuances of Lall's presentation as reported in foregoing should be borne in mind.

For New Delhi

Foregoing is on FYI basis, since we believe focal point US-Indian discussions textile problem shld be shifted to Geneva.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Confidential. Drafted by Harald B. Malmgren and Charles T. York (E/OR/ICD/FTD) on November 4; cleared by Henry Hopp (FTD), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), and Arthur C. Bauman (SOA/E), and in substance by Thomas W. Wolfe (Treasury), Tendler (Commerce), and Hornbeck (Agriculture); and approved by George R. Jacobs (ICD). Repeated to Geneva for GATT.

2 Dated October 30. (Ibid.)

3 Dated November 2. (Ibid.)

4 Not further identified.

295. Editorial Note 295. Editorial Note

Congress did not enact legislation during 1964 to extend the foreign import quotas of the Sugar Act, which were scheduled to expire on December 31. The administration had proposed a 6-month extension, which was approved by the Senate on September 30 as a rider to the tariff bill H.R. 12253, but which failed to gain the approval of the House Agriculture Committee on September 29. On October 19, 1964, Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman established sugar import quotas for individual countries during 1965 by administrative action.

In 1965 Congress enacted legislation extending the Sugar Act through December 31, 1975. H.R. 11135 (P.L. 89–331; 79 Stat. 1271), which was signed into law on November 8, set domestic production at 6,390,000 tons and foreign imports at 3,310,000 tons: 1,050,000 tons from the Philippines, with the rest divided among 32 countries. Cuba's quota was reassigned to other countries as long as diplomatic relations with the United States remained suspended, and the President could withhold the quotas of other countries if he found it to be in the national interest.

Documentation on the Johnson administration's position on sugar legislation is in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–SUGAR US; ibid., INCO–SUGAR 17 US; and Johnson Library, National Security File, Subject File, Sugar Legislation, Boxes 45–46.

296. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Ackley) to President Johnson 296. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Ackley) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 8, 1965.

SUBJECT

The Copper Price Increase

1. Anaconda has now gone along with the 2 cent increase in the price of copper to 38 cents a pound. The increase started abroad when Chile and Zambia went up by 2 cents. Some of the smaller American companies followed last week. Kennecott and Phelps-Dodge, the other two big producers, have not yet moved.

2. Copper has been in extremely short supply for several years, and the situation is getting no better. Although we are the world's largest producer, we depend on imports for roughly 1/3 of our supplies. Thus the world shortage affects us.

3. The shortage basically reflects rising world usage in the face of failure to discover new deposits as old ones are worked out. But it has been complicated by an endless series of production difficulties. Last year U.S. production was crippled by strikes. Chile has had repeated strikes. President Frei's program gives the promise of increased production in the future, but the Chilean miners are on strike again right now protesting Frei's law as not being tough enough on the companies. Troubles in the Congo have interrupted production there. Production in Zambia has been on and off this year and is in danger of a tie-up as a result of the Rhodesian independence movement. (Zambian copper is produced with Rhodesian power and moves out on a Rhodesian railroad.)

4. The major U.S. producers have tried to keep the domestic price down. Although their price has edged up from 31 cents to 36 cents in the last two years, it has stayed far below the price in the free “secondary” or “dealers” market, where the price is now about 60 cents. The big producers have been rationing their customers, forcing many users to go into the secondary market for all or part of their needs.

5. The stockpile surplus is now gone, with 120,000 tons released for commercial purposes this year and 110,000 tons transferred to the Mint for the new coinage. We still have 775,000 tons of copper in the stockpile, but all of it is required by the stockpile objective. To get additional releases would require both a change in the stockpile objective and Congressional action.

6. On narrow economic grounds, a rise in the price of copper has merit. There simply is not enough copper to go around, and there is little prospect that the situation will improve, even in the long run. An increase in the producers' price makes users economize on copper, eliminating the least valuable uses, and switching to substitute materials. By reducing the extent of producer rationing, it also gives the little fellow or the new business a fairer chance to get copper at the same price as the traditional customers of the companies.

7. On the other hand, we can't welcome a copper increase in the middle of the aluminum crisis. Moreover, the big copper companies are far more profitable than the aluminum companies, and their profits are rising faster—up 54% in the first 9 months of this year compared to last. Their rate of return on equity is about 12% this year—better than either aluminum or steel. They also probably benefit more from percentage depletion.

8. It would be very desirable if Kennecott or Phelps-Dodge could be persuaded to hold off on a price increase, at least until we have the aluminum and steel situations in hand. The President of Kennecott is F.R. Milliken, and of Phelps-Dodge is Robert G. Page. Both companies have their offices in New York.

Gardner Ackley

1 Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, Oversize Attachments 12/65, Box 161. No classification marking.

297. Editorial Note 297. Editorial Note

President Johnson discussed the copper price increase (Document 296) with Senator Mansfield during a telephone conversation on November 12, 1965, at 11:44 a.m. Aside from the immediate economic effects, the President put this price increase in the broader context of several price increases—"aluminum jumped the gun, now copper jumped the gun, and steel is getting ready"—and suggested that such profiteering could not be accepted when he was on the verge of calling up reserves for Vietnam. The President said he would not let the prices of aluminum, copper, and steel go up and mused on cutting foreign assistance to countries that increased prices. Mansfield reminded the President that President Frei had increased the Chilean price 2 cents, that copper exports were the lion's share of Chile's foreign exchange earnings, and the U.S. companies, whose major source of copper was from abroad, were just passing the foreign increase along. The President and the Senator discussed the strategy for revising the copper stockpile requirements and stockpile releases to help roll back the 2-cent increase.

The President also discussed the copper price increase with Secretary of Defense McNamara during a November 13 telephone conversation and again during a telephone conversation on November 17 at 12:28 p.m. During the former the President and McNamara considered export controls on copper to reduce the domestic price and a possible approach to President Frei with an offer of increased foreign assistance in return for a price roll back. McNamara reminded the President the copper market was different from the aluminum market and the companies would welcome a stockpile release. President Johnson asked McNamara to get the name of the steel company that reportedly had raised prices that day. McNamara called on November 17 to report on the 1-1/2-hour meeting he had just concluded with Anaconda and Kennecott, which was also attended by Under Secretary Mann. McNamara reported on a deal with the companies (that Anaconda thought could be cleared with its board within 24 to 48 hours) whereby the U.S. Government would release 200,000 tons of copper from the stockpile, impose export controls on copper, and work with Congress to suspend or eliminate the 1.7-cent duty on copper imports. The companies in turn, would roll back the U.S. price to 36 cents. McNamara reported the Attorney General's certification that the President had the authority to release copper from the stockpile without new legislation. He also reported the Secretary of Commerce's assurance that the President had the authority to impose export controls. An approach would be made to President Frei only after the domestic actions were completed.

On a related matter, Buford Ellington told John Harper of ALCOA during a November 6 telephone conversation that he had drawn up the papers to release 300,000 tons of aluminum from the stockpile (see Document 292), and that 100,000 tons would be released immediately for sale under an open bid by GSA. ALCOA claimed to have informed the President in advance of the aluminum price increase and thought they would have heard back from the President if he had objections. Ellington informed ALCOA that if the price increase were rolled back an accommodation on the stockpile release should be possible. (Johnson Library, Recordings and Transcripts, Recordings of Telephone Conversations, Tape FMISC.02, Side A, PNOs 2 (Ellington), 3 and 4 (Mansfield), 5 (McNamara, 11/13), and 6 (McNamara, 11/17))

On November 10 ALCOA and then other U.S. companies rescinded the aluminum price increase. On November 19 Anaconda and others rolled back the copper price increases.

298. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Shultze) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 298. Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Shultze) to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, November 11, 1965.

SUBJECT

Reducing strategic stockpile goals

A study prepared by the Budget Bureau in response to NSAM 3212 concludes: 1. That special stockpile goals for post nuclear recovery not be established.

2. That the assumptions underlying present non-nuclear war stockpile goals are unrealistic and produce far too high stockpile goals. Specifically, the following changes should be made: a. The assumed duration of a non-nuclear war should be reduced from 3 years to 2 years.

b. The assumption that in such a war we would export freely throughout the entire world but import only from Canada and the Caribbean should be changed to one of free world-wide imports. This position is supported by the JCS.

c. Assumptions on domestic consumption are too generous and should be made more restrictive.

(A draft version of the study is attached.3 A slightly revised draft, for circulation, will be available Friday morning.)4

There is at least one commodity held in the stockpile, copper, that it would be highly desirable to sell at the earliest opportunity on anti-inflationary grounds. (Mercury and platinum are other candidates for immediate sale.)

I suggest the following procedure: 1. I will talk to Governor Ellington about this approach.

2. You tell Secretary McNamara of our intention to lower the stockpile goals and that we intend to do this changing the assumed length of war and the import assumption. (The third dubious assumption, that on high domestic demand, probably isn't worth taking the time to argue about.) An overall McNamara position might also be useful.

3. You circulate the attached BOB paper to the group mentioned in NSAM 321 and immediately call a meeting of the group in order to get agreement on a recommendation to the President on the change in stockpile assumptions and goals. Out of this meeting would come a new basic stockpile charter in the form of a NSAM which would replace NSAM 142 dated April 10, 1962.5

4. The major metals not now in excess which would become excess under the new objectives are: (These are our own rough estimates)

Metal Amount Becoming Excess

copper 775 thous. tons—$560 million

mercury 172 thous. flasks—$118 million

platinum 362 thous. ounces—$36 million

5. All of the above materials are in the National Stockpile and would require congressional authorization for release.

6. Copper is particularly critical in view of recent price developments and the demand/supply situation.

I have talked to Califano and Fowler; they are both anxious that we proceed as rapidly as possible.

Charles L. Schultze 6

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Materials, Box 6. Secret. The source text, which is marked “draft,” was an attachment to a November 11 memorandum from Shultze to Califano that recommended that a meeting be called of agencies involved in the stockpile study, in order to issue a new NSAM establishing new stockpile objectives. (Johnson Library, Confidential File, Oversize Attachments, 12/65, Box 161)

2  Document 246.

3 Not printed here; a copy from another file is printed as Document 299.

4 No revised draft, dated November 12 (Friday), has been found.

5 Text in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IX, pp. 791–792.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

299. Report of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives 299. Report of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives1

Washington, November 11, 1965.

Summary

This report contains the initial findings and recommendations of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives established at your direction by NSAM No. 321 on December 1, 1964, to review strategic stockpile objectives and post-nuclear attack planning. The Committee, chaired by the Special Assistant for National Security Affairs and consisting of the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Commerce, the Special Assistant for Science and Technology, the Director of the Office of Emergency Planning, the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, and the Director of the Bureau of the Budget, was charged with examining planning assumptions and policies for the several stockpiles, with particular attention to: "(1) The major military and economic assumptions used in calculating existing conventional war stockpile objectives.

"(2) The assumptions, techniques, and goals used in the establishment of post-nuclear attack supply requirements.

"(3) The relationship of economic rehabilitation requirements to other post-nuclear requirements, such as those for food, shelter, medicine, and other resources required for the survival of the remaining population in the period of extreme emergency.”

The Committee has sought to assess the various elements of stockpile planning and policy in the light of current military planning and present and prospective international conditions. We have endeavored to insure that stockpile policy is consonant with other elements of national security planning and to avoid the establishment or perpetuation of excessive stockpile objectives and inventories. Unduly high stockpiles result in a drain on scarce budget resources not only in the form of foregone receipts from disposals of unneeded assets, but also in possible further budget expenditures for the purchases of materials.

As of June 30, 1965, the Government held inventories ofstrategic and critical materials having an acquisition cost of $8.2 billion, and an estimated market value of $8.2 billion. These materials are contained in three principal inventories: The National Stockpile, established by the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act of 1964;2 the Defense Production Act inventory, created by the Defense Production Act of 1950;3 and the Supplemental Stockpile (and a related Commodity Credit Corporation account), materials for which are obtained from the barter of surplus agricultural commodities under P. L. 480, as amended.4

In April 1964, the Office of Emergency Planning completed supply-requirements studies which have become the basis for present conventional war stockpile objectives. Of the total materials in Government inventories on June 30, 1965, $4.3 billion at estimated market value were considered to be excess to these conventional war objectives. As of that date, inventories equaled or exceeded the conventional war objectives for 62 of 77 strategic and critical materials for which objectives have been set. The Committee believes that present conventional war stockpile objectives are higher than the Nation needs and that further amounts of stockpiled materials can safely be declared excess and thus become available for disposal action. Its recommendations, therefore, are directed primarily at altering the various conventional war stockpile planning assumptions which are responsible for the present condition of overstated objectives. Many of the recommendations essentially involve little more than the implementation of the most recent “Guidance for Non-Military Planning” document, which was prepared by the Presidentially-established Committee on Non-Military Assumptions (State, Defense, CIA, and OEP), approved by the Cabinet, and issued by OEP in March of this year. The Committee has also considered the need for a nuclear war and reconstruction stockpile and it finds that an adequate basis does not exist at this time for the establishment of formal nuclear war stockpile objectives which would warrant retention of present stockpile surpluses which might otherwise be eligible for disposal.

The specific findings and recommendations of the Committee are summarized below and treated in more detail in the balance of the report.

The Nuclear War Stockpile. The Office of Emergency Planning is now engaged in studies to determine nuclear war stockpile objectives. These studies are not intended to result in a new and separate stockpile, but to augment the existing conventional war stockpile objectives where nuclear war requirements are higher. The OEP expects to complete the studies and establish the nuclear war objectives by the end of the current fiscal year, accepting the higher of the conventional or nuclear war objectives as the overall stockpile objective.

Although the Committee is impressed with the need to move ahead in developing the techniques for determining nuclear war requirements and stockpile objectives, it believes that establishment and announcement of formal nuclear war objectives by the end of the current fiscal year would be premature for several reasons: (1) The relationship of a nuclear war stockpile to other existing or proposed elements of the national damage-limiting and survival system (including fallout shelters, antiballistic missile defenses, etc.) has not been assessed adequately. Until the interplay between competing and complementary elements of the overall system is clear, it is not possible to measure with any confidence the relative marginal benefit of stockpile additions to meet nuclear stockpile objectives.

(2) The wide band of uncertainties concerning the nuclear war environment complicates the task of measuring the payoff from stockpiling for post-attack reconstruction.

(3) The Committee notes that some of the data used in the current studies and analyses are not current (e.g., enemy capabilities, U.S. defense capabilities) and that some of the basic assumptions employed (e.g., the assumed continuance of prolonged hostilities after a nuclear attack, the selection of the 25 percent “risk” level for loss-planning purposes, etc.) are in need of clarification.

(4) The risk of deferring action on setting official nuclear war stockpile objectives does not appear to be great. On the basis of these observations and conclusions, the Committee recommends: (1) That conventional war stockpile objectives be regarded as the maximum objectives and that no stocks be withheld from sale in anticipation of possible future nuclear stockpile goals.

(2) That current nuclear war requirements studies be continued (and refined as new data and techniques become available) but that objectives generated by the exercise scheduled for completion this fiscal year be regarded as tentative and unofficial pending thorough review by the Executive Stockpile Committee.

(3) That the Office of Emergency Planning and the Department of Defense review the various assumptions involved in the nuclear stockpile issue (e.g., the likelihood and timing of follow-on attacks, the probability of continued hostilities following nuclear attack, and the probable levels of damage—both to facilities and resources and to the population) and that differences be presented to, and guidance sought from, the Executive Stockpile Committee.

The Conventional War Stockpile. The Committee believes that several of the basic assumptions underlying the present conventional war stockpile objectives result in considerable overstatement of objectives. We believe that it is unrealistic to assume a long and massive conventional conflict on the order of World War II, that current assumptions on the availability of overseas supplies to the U.S. during an emergency period are unduly pessimistic, and that civilian requirements supported by the present objectives are overly generous. For these reasons, and in order to make our mobilization planning more consistent with our military planning, the Committee recommends (1) that the present 3-year war assumption be reduced to 2 years, which would, because of lags in converting raw materials into end products, still yield production for up to a third year of conflict and (2) that most free world nations be regarded as available sources of supply in the emergency period. The Committee suggests that OEP be directed to calculate tentative objectives consistent with these assumptions by December 15, 1965, for the review of the Executive Stockpile Committee.

[Here follows the body of the report.]

1 Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 217. Secret. The source text, which is marked “Draft,” is attached to a December 6 memorandum from McGeorge Bundy to members of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives and the Executive Stockpile Committee that announced a meeting of these groups on December 9. A draft NSAM, November 10, on these revisions in strategic stockpile objectives is also attached.

2 50 USC 98; 60 Stat. 596.

3 50 USC 2093; 64 Stat. 801.

4 Section 303 of the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, 7 USC 1692; 68 Stat. 459.

300. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Ackley) to Attorney General Katzenbach 300. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers (Ackley) to Attorney General Katzenbach 1

Washington, November 13, 1965.

SUBJECT

Copper

The present situation in the market for copper and the outlook for the near future pose serious risks to the stability of the U.S. economy and to the common defense. These risks can only be avoided if the President is able, as necessary, to release into the market some portion of the copper contained in our national stockpile.

The United States depends for a significant fraction of its copper supply on imports from abroad. Both in the United States and in the free world, copper consumption has been expanding in the past several years more rapidly than copper production. Existing and threatened interferences with the supply of copper may intensify this disparity. As a result, shortages and inflationary price rises have appeared, and threaten to become more widespread. These have tended to interfere with the normal channels of supply of copper to industry and may do so increasingly in the future. Such interferences can impair the ability of defense contractors and suppliers of essential civilian goods and services to produce for the common defense and for the maintenance of a healthy economy.

The world supply of copper has been repeatedly interrupted during the past several years through strikes and political disturbances in several major producing countries. Since most copper producers are operating at capacity, interruptions of supply cannot be easily made up. At the present time, the Chilean copper industry, which produces 15% of the free-world supply and is the largest single foreign supplier for the United States, is on strike, with a loss already which is estimated at 30,000 tons. The supply of copper from Zambia is in serious danger of being cut off by the differences between Rhodesia and her neighbors. Zambian production is even larger than Chile's, and its interruption would immediately impose serious disruptions on the economies of our allies in Western Europe, with immediate repercussions on our own.

The result of the disruptions already suffered and of the speculation promoted by the threat of further disruptions in the future has been the creation of shortages and inflationary increases in the price of copper. The large producers of primary copper in the world, including the principal U.S. producers, have endeavored to maintain the flow of their copper to their regular customers under long-term contracts. However, growing demand and restricted supply have prevented the large producers from supplying the full needs of their customers, many of whom have had to turn elsewhere for a substantial fraction of their requirements. The residual “outside” or “dealers” market, both in the United States and in Europe, is supplied by small producers and by copper refined from scrap. The enlarged demands placed on this market have forced copper prices above 60 cents a pound both in New York and in London, compared with the recent price of the large primary producers of 36 cents.

These circumstances not only pose serious inequities on users of copper, who must obtain varying fractions of their supply in the two markets, but threaten as well the further disruption of supply. The wide price differential tends to divert copper supply into the outside market. This may result in the increased outflow of copper and copper scrap from the United States, or from the United States and its allies to other countries. And the threat of even greater shortages and still higher prices tends to induce the hoarding of copper, not only by pure speculators but by normal suppliers and users of copper. Indeed, there is already some evidence of the building-up of speculative inventories of copper both in the United States and abroad.

An orderly supply of copper is essential for our economic and military strength. Copper is used in a great variety of products, from electrical machinery to automobiles, from household plumbing to our coinage. It is a key material in the war in Vietnam. It is essential in the production of ammunition, planes and helicopters, communications equipment, military vehicles, and many other defense products. Defense uses in 1966 are expected to be more than double those in 1965.

In addition to the existing and threatened interferences with defense and essential civilian production, the health of our economy and the strength of our Nation are also directly threatened by the increase of our price level associated with recent and prospective developments in the copper market. Higher prices for copper and copper products have contributed significantly to the rise in the index of wholesale industrial prices in the past year, a rise which follows several years of complete stability. As copper prices continue to rise, the pressure on the Nation's industrial price level becomes greater. Higher industrial prices affect the cost of living, increase the pressures for wage increases in excess of productivity gains, and threaten to touch off a wage-price spiral. A wage-price spiral would greatly impair our ability to restore equilibrium in our balance of payments. A strong balance of payments is essential to our ability to command resources beyond our borders for defense and other essential national purposes. Development of a wage-price spiral would require policies designed to curb inflation by reducing total production and incomes and thereby the economic welfare of every citizen.

The release of copper from the national stockpile will offset the loss of production that has been suffered due to disturbances in the major supplying countries. It will help meet the increased demands caused by the step-up in the war in Vietnam and by expanding civilian needs. It will reduce or eliminate disruptions to the normal channels of copper supply and tendencies for copper to be diverted to export or to useless hoards. By contributing to the stability of copper prices, it will help assure continued stability of our industrial price structure. It will thereby help preserve the cost-price record which has been so fundamental to our economic expansion and to the restoration of equilibrium in our balance of payments.

Clearly, the President needs to be able to release copper from the stockpile for the common defense and to protect the health of the U.S. economy.

Gardner Ackley

1 Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, Oversize Attachments 12/65, Box 161. No classification marking.

301. Memorandum From Attorney General Katzenbach to the Director of the Office of Emergency Planning (Ellington) 301. Memorandum From Attorney General Katzenbach to the Director of the Office of Emergency Planning (Ellington)1

Washington, November 15, 1965.

RE

Disposal of Copper from the National Stockpile

You have inquired as to whether or not copper now contained in the national stockpile could be disposed of by the United States under Section 5 of the Strategic and Critical Materials Stockpiling Act.2

Section 5(a) provides that a release of material from such a stockpile may be made on order of the President at any time when in his judgment such release is “required for purposes of common defense.” Section 5(b) permits such a release on order of an agency designated by the President in time of war or during a national emergency with respect to common defense proclaimed by the President. While a declared national emergency with respect to common defense continues to exist, the President has not delegated the requisite authority except in the event of an actual armed attack upon the United States, whichever subsection is used. The language of Section 5, taken together with its legislative history, indicates that materials from the strategic stockpile should be released only where there exists a clear relationship between their release and the common defense purposes for which they were acquired.

The authority vested in the President to make this determination is broad and Congress did not seek to set specific standards for its exercise. The legislative history, however, suggests that the President must make a finding which relates the disposal to common defense. He cannot use this authority where he believes the release of materials merely to be in the national interest although not required for the common defense. Concern was expressed in Congress that this authority might be used for the commercial advantage of a particular industry or in such a way as to discourage “development, expansion, and long-term financing,” thus having “an unhealthy and oppressive effect on our mining industry.” It was further stated that stockpilings “are for the national defense and should be used exclusively for that purpose. Any release for purposes other than national defense should be safeguarded …” by disposition with express approval of Congress as provided by Section 3 of the Act.

This interpretation of Section 5 as permitting disposal only for purposes of common defense was adopted by Attorney General Brownell in 1954. At that time Mr. Brownell said that a barter deal involving delivery of industrial diamonds to the stockpile in exchange for gem stones and a purchase of surplus wheat from the proceeds of the sale of those stones was not permissible. He found no relationship between the release of such stones from the stockpile and any common defense purpose; in effect it was an agricultural disposal program and the release of diamonds on the domestic market had no defense purpose whatsoever.

It would seem, therefore, that an essential legal requirement is that there be a sufficiently close relationship between the disposal of material and the common defense purpose.

The present situation with respect to the copper market, and its relationship to our defense purposes, is described in the attached memorandum from the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors.3 His views are concurred in by the Secretaries of State, Defense, the Treasury and Commerce.

The principal point made by Mr. Ackley is that a combination of extraordinary developments peculiar to the copper industry, arising from greatly increased defense efforts in Viet Nam and recent international political disturbances, threaten to disrupt and distort the copper market despite the best efforts of the industry to supply the market. This market disruption will lead to strong inflationary developments not only in copper essential to defense needs but also more generally in the economy. Such developments would seriously impair our defense efforts in Viet Nam and could be averted only through release of copper in the strategic stockpile.

Unlike the situation in the case posed to Attorney General Brownell with respect to the further stockpiling of diamonds, there is clearly a relationship between the release of stockpiled copper and common defense purposes. The remaining legal question is whether this relationship is sufficiently strong and sufficiently direct to justify the use of Section 5.

While there is nothing in the statute and the legislative history dealing explicitly with this point, it is clear that Congress did not wish to limit the President's disposal authority simply to direct military requirements. Had Congress so intended, it would have been easy to specify in the law itself. It is equally clear that Congress did not wish, as Attorney General Brownell indicated in his opinion, to permit release of strategic stockpiles for economic reasons unrelated to defense. Between these two extremes Congress vested discretion in the President and to that end used broad and general language.

This interpretation is reinforced by the extent to which Congress emphasized in debates, and elsewhere in the Act, the need to avoid market disruption and distortion and the inequities which could result from release of stockpiles unrelated to defense purposes. In the present situation the release of stockpiled copper would help to remove inequities and to eliminate distortions in the market situation.

For these reasons, I believe that, as a matter of law, the President could authorize the disposal of copper from the strategic stockpile on the basis of the facts contained in the attached memorandum.4

Nicholas deB. Katzenbach

1 Source: Johnson Library, Confidential File, Oversize Attachments 12/65, Box 161. No classification marking.

2 50 USC 98b; 60 Stat. 598.

3  Document 296.

4 In a November 17 memorandum for the President, Ellington forwarded Katzenbach's opinion on the President's authority to release copper from the national stockpile. (Johnson Library, Confidential File, Oversize Attachments 12/65, Box 161) President Johnson accepted Ellington's recommendations, and those of the Secretaries of State, Treasury, Defense, and Commerce and the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. (Memorandum from President Johnson to Ellington, November 18; ibid.) Secretary of Defense McNamara announced the release of 200,000 tons of copper on November 17. (OAS/PA News Release, November 17; ibid.)

302. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 302. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, November 20, 1965, 1425Z.

TAGG 3611. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. Brussels for USEC. Subject: Cotton textiles sector meeting Nov. 18. Ref: (A) TAGG 3506, (B) TAGG 3507.2

1. Meeting continued discussion of Wyndham White package deal proposal (reftel A) started Oct 19 (reftel B). Amb Lall (India) supported by Amb Ayub (Pakistan) firmly maintained their countries earlier position: they unhappy with LTA, and not prepared to enter negotiations based on assumption that LTA would be renewed unchanged (i.e., WW proposal).

2. US reiterated rationale for package deal stressing that no one committed to accept any one element of package unless satisfied on all elements. But we insisted that negotiating framework had to be established on balanced formula: what combination of tariff cuts and new, more liberal bilaterals aimed at improving access would permit renewal present LTA. This could also be stated inversely: on working hypothesis or assuming LTA renewed without change, what combination of tariff cuts and improved access through new bilaterals can be envisaged.

3. India and Pakistan considered negotiating formula should involve negotiations on tariff cuts and liberalization after which negotiation would turn to question of whether LTA needed and if so what kind of arrangement; i.e., entire LTA would be opened up. Alternatively, they proposed simultaneous discussion tariff reduction, access and proposals for changes in LTA.

4. Hong Kong position was more nuanced. It supported WW package deal but indicated text of LTA should not be sacrosanct. Package deal should envisage renewal of LTA “in its present essentials,” but not necessarily completely unchanged. HK rep indicated he recognized USG considered unilateral determination of market disruption as an essential of LTA. It remains apparent that HK anxious to push ahead with package deal, and that comments on LTA text aimed at achieving negotiating flexibility but not derailing package deal.

5. Japan continued to support package deal but warned that negotiations aimed at improved access must get underway quickly.

6. UK also continued to support package deal, although this support largely passive.

7. EEC, in brief intervention, fully supported US position.

8. US made clear inability reach agreement on package deal would affect ability importing countries discuss liberalization of administration at this time. Instead, we said, tendency would be to defer such action until after negotiations under Art. 8(d) of LTA, beginning not later than Sept 30, 1966.

9. FYI—In separate conversations with WW, Hijzen and Ayub two points emerged: A. Ayub now sees advantages package deal approach and will attempt bring GOP along.

B. Alternative to agreement now by all concerned on package deal would be for limited number of countries to start negotiations on basis WW proposal. This possibility becoming apparent to India and Pakistan, and may influence their positions. End FYI.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, Hong Kong, Karachi, London, New Delhi, Ottawa, Stockholm, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter.

2  Documents 289 and 290.

303. Memorandum From Charles E. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 303. Memorandum From Charles E. Johnson of the National Security Council Staff to the President's Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, November 30, 1965.

SUBJECT

December 1 meeting with Governor Ellington on Stockpile

Harry Rowen 2 filled me in on the meeting Charlie Schultze and Joe Califano had with the President at the Ranch on Saturday.3 He confirmed the word you had received that the President was willing to proceed as rapidly as possible and Harry had the impression that the President considered the entire stockpile concept as basically rather outmoded.

The President would like to proceed immediately with the disposal of those commodities (platinum and mercury, for example) that are in short supply and could be disposed of at a good price.

In view of the several important elements that are involved, Harry and I suggest that Charlie Schultze and Joe Califano join you and Governor Ellington to discuss the following: (1) The kind of an up-to-date letter that either Charlie or you will obtain from Secretary McNamara stating his view (with the endorsement of the Joint Chiefs) that there is no longer a need for basing stockpile objectives on the unavailability of imports and further that a two-year rather than a three-year cycle is completely adequate for planning conventional war stockpile objectives.4 The effect of these two changes will be to practically wipe out the stockpile objectives. In fact, the change in the planning assumption on imports would practically accomplish this by itself. Harry is confident that this letter can be obtained without any difficulty.

(2) The need, if any, for a meeting of the NSAM 321 Special Committee in order to get agreement on the recommendations embodied in the draft NSAM attached herewith.5 In lieu of the meeting, it might be possible to send copies of the report and NSAM to members of the Committee with a request for their comments and concurrence as a matter of priority. The NSAM is needed to put the bee on OEP to proceed immediately to recalculate all of the new objectives on the basis of guidance contained in the NSAM.

(3) The legislative package and procedure required. There has been talk of a “single bill" to be used to obtain Congressional concurrence. Presumably this would be a packaging of all of the disposal actions that the President would be recommending to the Congress. Hitherto such recommendations have been in the form of single bills.

For your information, Ellington, under a delegation of authority from the President (EO 11051),6 could designate the materials which are strategic and critical and establish the quality and quantity of each material that shall be stockpiled. The stockpile objectives were last established by the Director in 1963–64 and are normally reviewed and revised annually as necessary. If an objective is reduced so that materials in the stockpile become excess to the stockpile objective, the excess may be sold only after the Congress has approved of such sale if the material is in the National or Supplemental Stockpile. If it is in the so-called Defense Production Act Stockpile, OEP can sell it without Congressional OK—if they can find buyers—this is largely stuff that's harder to sell.

It might be useful to scan the latest OEP Stockpile Report to the Congress.7 I have marked in red certain sections that are particularly pertinent.

CEJ

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Confidential.

2  Henry S. Rowen, Assistant Director of the Bureau of the Budget.

3 November 27.

4 On December 1, Charles E. Johnson sent a memorandum to Deputy Secretary of Defense Cyrus R. Vance that transmitted the draft Stockpile Report and asked for “formal DOD review and concurrence.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6)

5 Not attached.

6 Section 402 of Executive Order 11051, September 27, 1962; Federal Register, Vol. 27, p. 9686.

7 Not further identified.

304. Memorandum of Meeting 304. Memorandum of Meeting1

Washington, December 1, 1965, 4:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Stockpile Planning

PARTICIPANTS

McGeorge Bundy, Buford Ellington, Charles E. Johnson

1. Mr. Buddy noted that he wished to use the NSAM 321 Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives to further the President's interest in ensuring that current stockpile objectives are no larger than they have to be so that orderly disposal of quantities of materials not essential to the stockpile requirements can be initiated. Governor Ellington referred to the existing Executive Stockpile Committee and the desirability of using this Committee as the top review group in the determination of specific stockpile objectives. It was agreed that it is highly desirable to make use of existing machinery insofar as possible to achieve the President's purpose.

2. Mr. Buddy stated that he has requested the Department of Defense, through Mr. Vance, for up-to-date guidance as a matter of urgency based on the current military judgment of the Joint Chiefs of Staff with respect to probabilities of the loss of essential imports through enemy action and an estimate of the probable duration of a conventional war emergency.2 These two factors largely determine the size of the conventional war stockpile. This letter has been requested as a matter of urgency.

Mr. Buddy and Governor Ellington also noted that Mr. Califano will discuss with the State Department the impact of U.S. disposal of certain commodities on the regular marketing of these commodities by friendly foreign countries.

3. It was agreed that: a. Mr. Buddy and Governor Ellington would convene a joint meeting of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives and the Executive Stockpile Committee, plus certain additional White House staff that are involved, for the purpose of noting the forthcoming letter from the Secretary of Defense referred to above and agreeing on a National Security Action Memorandum to be recommended to the President. This NSAM would be intended to provide new overall guidance to the Executive Stockpile Committee and to the Office of Emergency Planning under which specific new objectives could be established. With the approval of this NSAM, the work of the Special Committee under NSAM 321 would be completed and the Special Committee terminated.

b. An additional subject for possible discussion at this meeting would be the legislative package to be presented in the forthcoming session of the Congress and the procedure to be followed in obtaining early and favorable action thereon.

3. The draft “Report of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives" would be circulated in advance of the meeting only as background information and not for formal action.

CEJ

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Confidential. Drafted by Charles E. Johnson on December 2. The meeting was held in Buddy's office.

2  See footnote 4, Document 303.

305. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the President's Special Assistant (Califano) 305. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the President's Special Assistant (Califano)1

Washington, December 6, 1965.

SUBJECT

Recommendations on Stockpile Disposal Items (Your memorandum to Under Secretary Mann dated December 2, 1965)2

The following are our views on the various stockpile disposal items of significant interest to the Department of State. In recognition of the overall problem faced by the Administration, we have modified some of our previously held positions. We have done this despite the fact that virtually all the proposals to increase the disposal rate will, if adopted, have an impact on our relations with the affected producing countries.

Moreover, on the assumption that our recommendations are accepted, we would require a minimum of three weeks for consultations with interested governments to acquaint them with and explain to them the reasons for the revised disposal program.

I have gone over the following recommendations with Under Secretary Mann and he concurs.

Bauxite

Recommendation: We agree with the General Services Administration's proposal to dispose of 400,000 long dry tons of bauxite during the remainder of fiscal year 1966, and will consult on this basis provided it is clear that the aluminum companies will buy this amount and that we have knowledge of the disposal plan for bauxite for the remainder of the year 1966.

Discussion: We have consulted with Jamaica and Surinam, our principal suppliers, on a rate of 400,000 tons for the calendar year 1966. Jamaica reluctantly accepted this rate but Surinam did not object. The increased annual rate would, of course, arouse complaints. Surinam bauxite, which is of a quality that is more widely saleable, requires Congressional authorization, whereas Jamaican bauxite is available from DPA stocks.

Chromite

Recommendation: We agree with the General Services Administration's proposal for the disposal of 100,000 short dry tons in fiscal year 1966.

Discussion: The only important free world suppliers are Turkey and Rhodesia. The material is in generally short supply and may be in shorter supply due to the political situation in Rhodesia. Authorization for disposals from the National Stockpile are required either from the Congress, or by the President on the basis of the common defense.

Cobalt

Recommendation: We are reluctant to approve the disposal of 1,000,000 lbs. for fiscal year 1966 because the impact is entirely on the Congo to whom we are currently giving balance of payments assistance through the acquisition of diamonds.

Discussion: We believe the sale from the stockpile will probably replace Congo sales and this action together with other disposal actions affecting the Congo would have serious political consequences. Producers' stocks of cobalt, which is a by-product of the Congo copper output, are already high.

Columbite

Recommendation: We are prepared to approve an initial disposal of 200,000 lbs. of columbite (columbium content) with the understanding that subsequent disposals in fiscal year 1966 and for the balance of calendar year 1966 would be made only after the result of the initial offering had been ascertained.

Discussion: The 600,000 lb. disposal represents about one-half of Nigerian exports to the U.S. We have consulted on this rate with the Nigerian Government through our Embassy in Lagos and there was a strong adverse reaction to this amount.

Copper

Recommendation: While we concur in the General Services Administration's recommendation for an additional sale of copper, we think such sale should be deferred beyond the suggested February 1966 date.

Discussion: In our opinion the sale of additional copper should be considered very carefully from the standpoint of our overall national policy. Approximately one-fourth of the world production of copper is threatened with serious interruption. If such interruption took place, consumption might have to be curtailed and redistribution of available supplies will in all likehood take place. The sale of such a large proportion of our remaining stockpile would thus involve a considerable risk. Therefore, we would recommend that the date of sale be postponed until the effect of the Rhodesian UDI on the copper supply becomes clearer.

Diamonds (bort)

Recommendation: We are reluctant to agree to the disposal of 2,000,000 carats of diamond bort at a time when the diamond-uranium barter deal is about to be announced.

Discussion: Any disposal of diamond bort would have a direct balance of payments effect on the Congo as well as upon the barter deal. The barter transaction was entered upon for balance of payments reasons and will replace dollar expenditures required by the AEC contract for uranium from South Africa and give balance of payments aid to the Congo. A disposal of bort at this time might be embarrassing to the Administration, which has sponsored the barter.

Diamonds (stones)

Recommendation: We agree with the General Services Administration's proposal for the disposal of 500,000 carats of industrial stones in fiscal year 1966.

Discussion: The major producer is South Africa and industrial stones are generally in short supply.

Mica

Recommendation: We are prepared to agree to a disposal of mica at the rate of 750,000 lbs. for the remainder of fiscal year 1966.

Discussion: We have been discussing with the representatives of the Indian Government a suggestion for a 1,500,000 lb. disposal for the initial year of the program. The Indian representatives have countered with an escalating program beginning with an initial rate of 200,000 lbs. annually. Any increase in our original suggestion will be regarded by India as evidence of bad faith. In view of the small amount of money involved and the minimal effect of this disposal on our fiscal and balance of payments problems, we believe the increase recommended by the GSA would not be worth the consequences on our relations with India.

Rubber

Recommendation: We cannot recommend an increase in the commercial sales part of the existing disposal program; that part of the program involving disposal for government uses could probably be increased—especially if this meant use of natural rubber where synthetic rubber is now being used.

Discussion: United States natural rubber-consumption in 1965 will total about 520,000 tons. Of this 120,000 tons was supplied from government stocks and the balance of 400,000 tons from imports. The stockpile program includes commercial sales of 72,000 tons and government uses estimated at about 40,000 tons annually. The import of natural rubber in the U.S. has been declining during the postwar period and currently represents less than 25% of total rubber consumed. Any increased disposal program would make further inroads on this market and would create virtually intolerable political problems in Southeast Asia and in producing countries in Africa.

1. In response to technological improvements in synthetic rubber, and in the production of synthetic rubber the price of natural rubber is in a long term decline; the average price per pound in 1960 was 38.16 cents, in 1962 28.56 cents, in 1964 25.24 cents, in August 1965 24.73 cents. Further decline is expected. This has the utmost significance for rubber growing countries, especially Malaysia and Indonesia which derive 50–60% of their export earnings from rubber. Any increase in releases from government stocks would put added pressure on the downtrend in prices and would be seized upon by some elements in these countries as the primary reason for the decline.

2. Rubber growing countries—in particular Malaysia—have adopted imaginative, long-range programs to improve the competitive status of natural rubber through increasing the yield, improving and standardizing quality, development of special types of natural rubber. The release of additional U.S. surplus with a corresponding reduction in U.S. imports and accompanying price pressures will be regarded by Malaysia and other rubber-growing countries as countering their own efforts to which we had heretofore given considerable encouragement. The action would undoubtedly be protested by the less-developed countries in various international forums—including UNCTAD.

3. Indonesia has just experienced political shake-up. The U.S. is its largest market for rubber, taking 254,000 tons out of a production of 638,000 tons. Our action would be regarded as a slap at their recent policies and would encourage them to continue and increase their sales to their next largest customer—Mainland China, who would certainly take every propaganda advantage of our action.

4. The most important producer in Africa is Nigeria, a country which would also be affected by other increased disposal programs. Nigeria has heretofore followed U.S. policies in Africa although there are signs of their waivering and our disposal actions would encourage this tendency.

5. Additional disposals would adversely affect the U.S. rubber import trade. A number of U.S. firms deal almost exclusively in rubber imports and they would regard this action as a future threat to their livelihood.

6. We would not object to a greater utilization of stockpile rubber in U.S. Government use programs which in 1965 will consume about 43,000 tons. We estimate that the DOD programs now utilize around 40,000 tons annually of synthetic rubber. We have no data on the use of synthetic rubber by other government agencies. Presumably, however, this is substantial since other agencies have a higher requirement for automotive type tires which normally use synthetic rubber. Government specifications could be changed so as to incorporate more natural rubber in place of this synthetic rubber. This might be done at some inconvenience to the rubber companies but it would avoid the severe impact on our foreign relations.

Tungsten

Recommendation: We believe the tungsten disposal for the balance of fiscal year 1966 should be limited to 1,500,000 lbs.

Discussion: The 1965 program of 1,000,000 lbs. was reluctantly accepted by the producing countries. The supply situation has however tightened and an increase for the year 1966 would seem in order. The General Services Administration's proposals of 6 million pounds, however, would, in the absence of new demand, displace all our expected imports for the calendar year 1966 in a period of six months. Korea and Bolivia, in particular, are among our principal suppliers. We are committed to consult with the supplying countries before instituting a new disposal program and before consulting we should like some idea of what quantities are envisaged for the full year.

Abaca

Recommendation: We continue to approve the disposal of abaca at a 9–1/2 million pound annual rate.

Discussion: The Philippines strongly objected to a 9–1/2 million lb. rate and carried their objections to the Congress where they succeeded in getting a limitation on abaca to 5–1/2 million lbs. for the first year. If a way can be found around the Congressional limitation, we will live with the Philippine objection to 9–1/2 million lbs.

Aluminum Oxide and Silicon Carbide

Recommendation: We agree with the General Services Administration's proposal to dispose of 10,000 short tons of aluminum oxide and 10,000 short tons of silicon carbide during the balance of fiscal year 1966.

Discussion: We expect no serious foreign relations problems on this disposal.

Anthony M. Solomon 3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by E.E. Getzin (E/OR/ICD/ISM) on December 6. On the source text is the handwritten notation, “Sent.”

2 Not found.

3 Printed from a copy that indicates Solomon signed the original.

306. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 306. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, December 8, 1965, 1817Z.

TAGG 3674. Subject: GATT cotton textiles committee meeting, December 7. Ref: TAGG 3667.2

1. US statement presented, no comment followed immediately.

2. Spain: Emphasized need for increased flexibility and strict adherence to LTA procedures by importing countries. Interpreted U.S. statement as indication willingness to discuss Spanish proposals for changes in bilateral agreement. Re UK proposals, GOS considers completely out of keeping with spirit and letter of LTA and requested negotiation for bilateral.

3. Korea: Principally concerned with low levels of restraint applied for equity reasons to new starters like Korea in categories where other large suppliers are under restraint. Proposed that no restraints be imposed against countries whose exports low in relation to size of market in importing country and that no restraints be imposed in trade in made-up goods (apparel). Considers U.K. global quota proposal favorable for new-starters provided (a) all countries within global quota treated equally, or (b) separate global established for non-Commonwealth exporters. Korean delegates in private conversation with USDel reiterated these views and also enquired about WW package deal, with which they were not informed.

4. China: Cited decline in exports due to import quotas, self-sufficiency of LDC's, competition from man-made fiber textiles. Reiterated Korean views on low levels applied to new starters. Other problem is classification differences; suggested need for a universal classification system. Also proposed periodic review of factors to determine market disruption and 30 percent flexibility within aggregate limits. Emphasis of criticism was more on specific technical problems than LTA as whole.

5. Canada: Willing support realistic proposals to extension LTA. Cited its good record on imports from LDC's. Called attention to (1) long delays in negotiating bilaterals; (2) failure of definition of cotton textile in Article 9 to take account of blends less than 50 percent by weight cotton which directly competitive with cotton products and produced by some industry. GOC intends raise these problems bilaterally; (3) need for relaxation of restrictions by other importers.

6. Pakistan: GOP, highly critical of performance under LTA using GATT study data, concluded that (1) export growth rate of LDC's is declining, (2) modernization of textile industries in importing countries means special protection and severe restrictions no longer needed. Suggested industrialized countries vacate part of cotton textile markets for benefit LDC's. (3) LTA has not resulted in growth of cotton textile exports from LDC's. However expressed willingness join in WW sector discussions if other countries preferred combine Art. 8 (d) and Kennedy Round negotiations, but not willing give up right to propose amendments to LTA and wants all elements of problem, including amendments to LTA, left open for negotiation. Pakistan requires assurances that greater access will result from extended LTA, not just vague promises. Reserved on UK proposal indication it should be discussed after completion of major review.

7. India: Expressed agreement with Pakistan on adverse effects of LTA on LDC's. Additional point is that modernization of textile industry in industrialized countries and rapid development of man-made fiber textiles are threatening competitiveness of LDC's. Cited increased value exports by EEC including intra-Community; high level US exports despite recent decline; EEC imports from Eastern bloc; increases in imports from non-participants to detriment of LDC participants. Observed that industrialized countries had not made structural adjustment in their industries to permit greater LDC share in market, Article 3 restrictively applied, and objectives of LTA frustrated. Concluded that if importing countries want LTA extended, these countries must give assurance on liberalized access. Suggested meeting on this subject early 1966.

8. In addition to above, Austria, Turkey, Sweden, and Norway made statement. These countries generally favored extension of LTA, but Turkey and Sweden did not foreclose possibility of amendments.

9. At conclusion, WW reiterated proposal in his opening speech that consideration be given to measures for increasing trade among Group II countries.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Kingston, London, Madrid, New Delhi, Paris for USOECD, Rawalpindi, Rome, and Tokyo.

2 Dated December 7. (Ibid.)

307. Record of Action 307. Record of Action1

Washington, December 9, 1965, 4 p.m.

Joint Meeting of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives and the Executive Stockpile Committee, held on December 9, 1965, at 4:00 p.m. in the Situation Room of the White House

The two Committees took the following actions: (1) Agreed that the draft National Security Action Memorandum should be amended by the addition of a third numbered paragraph of guidance providing that conventional stockpile objectives should be regarded as maximum and that no stocks should be withheld from sale in anticipation of possible future nuclear stockpile requirements. (The amended draft NSAM is attached herewith.)2

(2) Concurred in the draft NSAM as amended above, for recommendation to the President, subject to the position of the Department of Defense which is expected by December 17, 1965.3

(3) Discussed the legislative presentation to be made early in the next session and agreed that it would be desirable to have a single bill that would authorize the President to dispose of surpluses in the stockpile without specific Congressional approval of each disposition action. However, it was agreed that alternative arrangements would also be studied so that the President could determine the best legislative approach.

(4) Agreed that analysis and research should continue on the question of possible nuclear emergency stockpile requirements but that until firm nuclear emergency needs are established the nation cannot devote scarce resources to the creation and maintenance of contingency nuclear emergency stockpiles, the need for which has not yet been established.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 70 D 217. Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text and there is no indication that Bundy, Chairman of the Special Committee, or Ellington, Chairman of the Executive Stockpile Committee, approved the Record of Action. An attached list of participants includes the following officials: Henry Rowen (Bureau of the Budget); John T. Connor (Commerce); Gardner Ackley (Council of Economic Advisers); Cyrus Vance (Defense); Lawson B. Knott (General Services Administration); Stewart L. Udall and William E. Florey (Interior); Seymore Wolfbein (Labor); Buford Ellington (Office of Emergency Planning); Thomas C. Mann and Edmund Getzin (State); McGeorge Bundy, Joseph Califano, Donald Hornig, Charles E. Johnson, and Henry Wilson (White House).

2 Dated December 13, not printed.

3 In a January 22, 1966, memorandum to Buddy, McNamara wrote: “The Department of Defense concurs in the draft NSAM dated 12/13/65 concerning revisions in strategic stockpile objectives.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 70 A 1266, 400.23 Stockpiles 1965)

308. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson 308. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson 1

Washington, December 9, 1965.

I hope you have had time to read Tony Solomon's attached memorandum of December 6, 1965 on stockpile disposals.2 The disposals recommended will cause us difficulties with a number of countries. We estimate, however, these will be manageable.

Our views on rubber are at page 4 of the memorandum. The question is not whether we are free to dispose of rubber at a faster rate. (Our only commitment is to consult in advance.) Rather our recommendation was: First, as to the extent we can increase disposal for U.S. Government uses at the expense of synthetic rubber, there is no problem.

Second, it is not in our interest to reduce further export earnings from rubber of Indonesia, Malaysia (or, to a lesser extent, Nigeria) because: a) Malaysia and Indonesia depend on the export of natural rubber for the bulk of their foreign exchange earnings.

b) The price of natural rubber in world markets has been declining and natural rubber's share of total world rubber consumption has also been declining. The proposed increase in commercial sales of our stockpile rubber (as distinguished from increased United States Government use of natural rubber) will not only reduce United States imports from these countries by 25% but will depress even further the world market price that these countries can obtain in their worldwide sales.

c) Malaysia is our most stable ally in South East Asia and the political and economic impact of this action will be very great.

d) The Indonesian military are still struggling with Sukarno and the communists for power in their country and this action could tilt the scales against the military.

e) Even though our stockpile of natural rubber is “over age" it is frozen solid and the rate of deterioration is, I am told by the experts, negligible.

f) The proposed disposal rate would mean an annual saving to the United States Government of approximately twenty five million dollars which although substantial may not be worth the consequences outlined above. This amount of budgetary saving through stockpile disposals could be achieved in other commodities.

Thomas C. Mann

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321, Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6. Secret.

2  Document 305.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 309. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 1

London, December 10, 1965, 1715Z.

2666. Pass STR and Agriculture. Annual review UK grains agreement concluded December 9. Highlights as follows.

1. Exporter dels met December 8, reached general accord UK would be told (a) agreement not working and UK actions under agreement insufficient; (b) failure implement agreement has serious implications for cereals negotiations Kennedy Round; (c) UK economic plan raises questions re UK intentions implement agreement. Hedges outlined UK position that action required to implement agreement by end annual price review or we would have seriously to consider terminating agreement. Canada del (Schwartzman) took somewhat softer line. Argentines (Marco) favored above general line without taking position re ultimatum. Australia (Carmody) joined other exporters in expressing disappointment over operation of agreement, but disassociated Australia from UK position. Meeting with UK del proceeded along these lines.

2. UK del (Engholm, Sparks, Askew) stated essentially UKG has acted fully in accordance agreement, that actions taken by UK greater than they would have been in absence agreement. Engholm noted that world wheat demand-supply situation had created firm market in which UK target indicator price mechanism not able come into play, therefore price machinery set up to implement agreement frustrated. He noted also that shifts in world supply situation had favored major exporters in UK market, essentially that big four exporters had gained somewhat at expense lesser exporters. Engholm concluded it up to major exporters to show that UK actions under the agreement had not been sufficient and attempted to distinguish between appropriateness actions taken—maximum possible cut in guaranteed price and minimum possible increase in standard quantities—and their effectiveness in altering imbalance between imports and domestic output in consumption.

3. US del commented world market situation influenced by many factors including US output restrictive policy, level US stocks and grain demands LDC's; that US exports UK down about 12 percent, roughly same percentage as overall shortfall and in any event performance under agreement ran to total volume imports not position particular suppliers. Canada del stated that, even assuming UK view world market situation correct, UK still expected take action to restore balance between imports and domestic output. Australian and Argentine dels generally agreed.

4. Engholm responded UKG was looking forward in spirit agreement not in letter and had taken every maximum action possible in light (a) UK agriculture political situation; (b) balance payments problem; (c) difficulties in Parliament. Added that actions taken last annual price review could not affect immediate situation and it too early judge their effect. Nevertheless he anticipated actions taken would not halt growth in output, but might level off curve. US reiterated UK had been warned by exporters last year that price changes would not have significant effect; that so long as target indicator prices set at or below minimum import prices mechanism could have no additive effect.

5. Engholm vacillated in presentation between position that UK had taken adequate corrective action, and position had taken all possible action in light of domestic political and balance of payments considerations. Specifically disavowed under questioning, however, UK was pleading inability take further corrective action for balance of payments reasons.

6. Re UK economic plan, Engholm took position earlier reported, but noted re cereals that balance of payments situation dictated meeting great portion new requirement from domestic output.

7. In discussion Kennedy Round implications, Sparks said he criticized in Geneva for vagueness offers but such criticism colored by disappointment exporters with results UK grains agreement. He indicated UK had gone about as far as could be expected and unless others were more forthcoming, more modest arrangements might be necessary. US del replied we had hoped UK agreement would have value as precedent stimulate movement toward and set guidelines for broader cereals arrangement and that agreement subsequently would be subsumed in the broader agreement. US del stated he had not expected that UK agreement would be buried in GATT arrangement and that if UK did not take action to implement agreement it would have negative value for KR. Concluded with plea that each participant be forthcoming in KR, that basing offers entirely on expectations of what others did was formula for assuring no negotiations would take place. Concluded with statement in position paper that UK would have seriously consider terminating agreement unless further corrective measures restore volume imports taken by end of annual review, and that importance agreement for KR would weigh heavily in decision.

8. Canada del took line that working of UK agreement had serious implications for conclusion of an effective cereals arrangement in Kennedy Round, and that concluding KR cereals arrangement was prerequisite to successful KR agreements on industrial and other goods in which UK has direct commercial stake. Australian del urged compliance with terms UK agreement but specifically disavowed any intent to denounce the agreement.

9. In summarizing, Engholm retreated somewhat from his earlier position that he was not convinced that exporters had shown a need for further action or that the actions taken would not in themselves be effective. He said exporter disappointment with performance would be taken into account in the annual price review, but that it was important not to underestimate the significance of UK actions so far and particularly important for exporters to distinguish between appropriateness of actions taken and their results.

10. US del emphasized this meeting was start of review and that we would wish consult further at any time re contemplated UK actions to implement the agreement. Engholm refused to commit UKG to detailed consultations.

11. On balance we believe UK somewhat taken aback by vehement insistence exporters on compliance with agreement and by unwillingness exporters accept actions taken by UK as adequate. Believe US position fully understood. Engholm obviously affected by strong US line, even though line not wholly supported by other exporters. Weak position Australians re future of agreement reflects inter alia bilateral UK-Australian deal to implement fully 750,000 ton arrangement in trade agreement. Carmody told US del member that Australia has made offer to hold that quantity for UK out of new crop and Australians fully expect it to be bought.

12. We believe that Engholm and other civil servants genuinely wish maintain agreement but realize that they have particularly difficult task this year to convince Ministers take further action. If this assessment correct, Engholm now has strong reaction to present his Ministers. We should plan on supplementing this during course of price review.

Bruce

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Buenos Aires, Canberra, Geneva, and Ottawa and passed to the White House.

310. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) 310. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) to the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann)1

Washington, December 15, 1965.

SUBJECT

Outcome of Coffee Council Meeting2

Brazil held out adamantly against any reduction in the Brazilian share of the basic export quotas3 set up under the 1962 Agreement.4 However, in a last day's compromise, Brazil agreed to grant 1.4 million bags of special waivers which will permit African and Mild coffee producers to ship additional quantities this year, but will not increase Brazil's entitlement.

The two-weeks' meeting was educational to all involved. The general complaints about sacrifice and retention of coffee turn out to have been gravely exaggerated—very few countries have surpluses which could be considered burdensome on any realistic basis. The African countries, in particular, seem to be more aware of how Brazil's former firm price policy has kept their prices up. The Central Americans unfortunately still seem to believe that the purpose of a coffee agreement is to permit them to sell all they produce at high prices. While Colombia and Mexico were prepared to see their share of basic quotas somewhat reduced, they fought hard to make Brazil share the cost of any increases in other countries' quotas—there was more open dispute between Colombia and Brazil than has been seen for many years in the coffee world.

The eleventh-hour compromise, which increases many countries' annual export quotas for this year considerably more than could conceivably have been negotiated if their basic quotas had been revised, left most everyone happy for the moment. Brazil was able to go home claiming that her share of basic quotas is unaltered and that the waivers for others will remain in effect only so long as the others keep their prices close to Brazil. The other loudest claimants—Ivory Coast, El Salvador, Guatemala, Dominican Republic—have all gone home with larger entitlements for this year.

The basic issue of permanent shares of the market has, however, only been delayed and we will have to face it again, either in the Spring of 1966 or when we set annual quotas in August for the 1966–67 year.

The Council agreed to a rather weak resolution on enforcement under which we should be able to help the Colombians cut down on smuggling through Aruba. We laid the groundwork for, but did not actually obtain, controls over shipments which either actually or reportedly come from or through non-member producing countries like Guinea or Honduras.

The most hopeful augury for the future lies in the Council's approval of a study to set up terms of reference for a diversification fund to be financed by an export tax, administered by IBRD and hopefully augmented by IBRD financial participation.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD/TRP Files: Lot 79 D 354, Coffee Memoranda, 1966–67. No classification marking. Drafted by Jack B. Button (E/OR/ICD/TRP) and cleared by Edward R. Fried (OR) and George R. Jacobs (ICD). The date is the drafting date. This memorandum, although initialed by Solomon, was apparently not sent, because the introductory address lines have been crossed out and the following handwritten note added: “Mr. Solomon briefed Mr. Mann orally on this. He expanded the briefing book item for the Secretary a bit to cover his commitment to inform him of the outcome of the meeting.”

2 The International Coffee Council met in early December 1965.

3 Basic export quotas are set out in Annex A of the Agreement. Brazil's basic quota, for example, is 18 million bags of the total of 45.8 million bags. Annual quotas are set each year as a percentage of basic quotas. Quotas for 1965–66, for example, are set at 94 percent of basic quotas. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IX, pp. 807-808.

311. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 311. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, December 22, 1965, 1624Z.

TAGG 3725. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. Ref: (A) ND's 1507 to Dept.2 (B) TAGG 3683.3 Subject: cotton textiles.

1. Re last para reftel A, package deal approach emerged from Dec 6–10 CTC meeting4 with considerably stronger support from most interested countries. US del position on package deal unchanged, and in view increasing interest by others in this approach we see no reason to modify our position. Specifically, we are continuing to firmly discourage idea that any changes can be made in LTA.

2. Package deal now has support of all key importers and exporters except India and Pakistan. At CTC meeting position of both these countries far from adamant. However, do not think it useful to intervene in New Delhi as suggested by Doraiswami in reftel B for reasons cited below.

3. At CTC meeting WW highlighted package deal approach as best means of improving conditions of cotton textile trade. Yesterday WW told us he plans to urge countries to move ahead with substantive discussions on countries' desiderata re specific parts of package, i.e. nature of tariff cuts and exceptions, liberalization of administration, and LTA extension. In this way we would hope to avoid procedural debate on whether all elements of package are equally open for negotiation. WW would like these substantive discussions to start promptly in January. We hope both India and Pakistan will be ready to join in this effort. If not, negotiations with other exporting and importing countries can move ahead in any case. We hope that when Indians and Pakistanis see others engaging in such negotiations they may decide come along.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Confidential. Repeated to Karachi and New Delhi, and passed to the White House.

2 Dated December 15. (Ibid., INCO–COTTON 4 GATT)

3 Dated December 10. (Ibid., INCO–COTTON GATT)

4 Details of the GATT Cotton Textiles Committee meetings are in TAGG 3678, December 9, and TAGG 3684 and TAGG 3685, both December 11. (All ibid.)

312. Editorial Note 312. Editorial Note

The Protocol for the Further Prolongation of the International Sugar Agreement was adopted in London on November 1, 1965. The United States signed the Protocol, which was negotiated as an executive agreement, on December 23, and it entered into force for the United States on January 1, 1966. The Protocol extended the International Sugar Agreement until December 31, 1966. For text, see 16 UST 1961; TIAS 5933. Additional documentation on the ratification of the Protocol is in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–SUGAR 4.

313. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) and the President's Special Counsel (McPherson) to President Johnson 313. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) and the President's Special Counsel (McPherson) to President Johnson 1

Washington, February 2, 1966, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Textile Import Policy

The textile industry continues to push us hard to restrict imports of wool and artificial fiber, and to keep a low ceiling on cotton imports through tight administration of the International Cotton Agreement. The industry is basing its case on your conditional pledge of September 1964 to restrict imports—and on the Kennedy commitment of 1962. They ignore the fact that the conditions which led you and President Kennedy to offer help: idle capacity and large-scale unemployment, have long disappeared.

The textile industry is booming. Every indicator—profits, return on investment, dividends, employment—confirms that the industry no longer needs special help. The real problem with textiles, as with copper and shoes, is to offset shortages and pressure on prices. (A memorandum on textile prices, profits, imports, investment, and employment is at Tab A.2 An earlier, more detailed, Ackley memo is at Tab B. Your two 1964 statements on textiles are at Tab C.)

The Government has not adjusted its textile policy to the new situation either. We continue (i) to restrict cotton imports under the international agreement much more tightly than a fair reading of it would support; and (ii) on wool, we keep telling the industry that we will make every effort to get Italy, Japan, the UK and the other producers to agree to quotas. The result is bad economics, bad foreign policy, and bad domestic politics: 1. The policy will not buy us peace with the industry—at least not for long.

—An international wool agreement is not negotiable. By continuing to announce our determination to get an agreement (Jack Connor last did so just three weeks ago), we confirm the industry's view that we owe them something. As it becomes clear that we cannot deliver, the industry will start pressing us to impose quotas unilaterally. This would be exceedingly costly. Under GATT rules, we would face compensating tariff increases on some $300 million worth of trade in other items. And our Kennedy Round negotiating hand would be seriously weakened.

—On cotton, the international agreement expires in September 1967. If we continue to exploit the fine print, renegotiation could become very tough. A number of governments believe that we have violated the spirit of the agreement, and are most reluctant to renew it. No doubt we will succeed in getting some kind of renewal. But unless we ease up on imports during the next few months, we probably won't be able to get as good a deal as we have now. And the industry will blame us. (In the meanwhile, the textile people are expanding capacity at break-neck speed on the assumption that tight restrictions will continue.)

2. We are hurting ourselves in the fight against inflation. Cotton textile prices have been rising—one wholesale index, for cotton fabrics, rose by 6% during '64-'65—despite the equalization payments to the mills under the '64 one-price program, which should have led to a sharp cut in prices. The industry is operating at 96% of capacity; the trade news indicates widespread shortages of yarns and fabrics; bookings for future delivery are piling up; and the Defense Department is having trouble filling orders quickly on a number of items.

3. We are paying a foreign policy price in our relations with textile producing countries. Singapore is a recent example. We are about to impose quotas on their cotton-good exports. (Until separation, they came under the Malaysian ceiling.) The resulting unemployment is likely to lead to anti-U.S. street agitation and strikes. Bill Bundy is rightly worried. The British have serious doubts already about being able to maintain their important base; anti-western rioting is not going to help. On the other hand, if we make an exception of Singapore, we will get into trouble with Taiwan, Japan and Korea—they are angry at us already about textiles—and risk the erosion of the entire textile control structure.

The question is how to get off the hook without a major row with the textile people and their friends on the Hill. At Tab D is a good memorandum from Chris Herter which makes the case for a change in policy, and suggests a procedure to minimize the pain. The procedure is designed to make it clear that you intend to keep watching the textile situation and to help when help is needed, but that your 1964 statements were based on economic conditions in 1964, and textile policy in 1966 must be based on conditions in 1966.

The Herter procedure would involve:

1. Adding Ackley and Schultze to the Cabinet Textile Committee chaired by Jack Connor. The Committee is now divided between those primarily concerned with foreign policy (Herter and Tom Mann) and those who properly worry mainly about the textile industry and textile labor (Connor, Wirtz, Freeman and Udall). Adding Charlie and Gardner would ensure that the Committee would look at the effects of textile policy on the economy as a whole.

2. On cotton imports, a signal to the Committee to take the general economic situation into account and to live up to the spirit as well as the letter of the International Cotton Agreement.

3. On wool, stopping our foredoomed efforts to get international agreement to impose quotas, until and unless the study now under way clearly indicates that such quotas would be justified and negotiable.

4. Setting up a special Defense Department reporting arrangement to keep the Cabinet Committee informed about bottlenecks of textile needed by Defense.

Schultze, Ackley, Herter and the two of us can make a strong case that these steps are justified—and that now is the time to move, if ever we are to extricate you from the corner into which the industry has been trying to paint you. But the textile people would be very unhappy, and even Jack Connor would not be pleased. (Industry and Hill pressure, and his own textile staff, have forced Jack far out on a limb in promising further special help. The Herter procedure is designed in part to put some distance between the White House and some of the more extravagant Commerce promises. It would also take some of the heat off Jack.)

On Congressional reactions, you know the situation far better than any of us. Bill Roth's memorandum at Tab E gives his assessment. Our line of counter-attack would be that you are not going back on your 1964 promise, but that the industry's situation has changed—it no longer needs to be “restored to good health.” But there is no question that we would have to take a lot of heat.

The political case for going ahead nevertheless, is that our present policy will get us into even more trouble as soon as it becomes clear that we can't deliver on wool and will have to compromise with the foreign producers to save the cotton agreement.

The Choices: If you agree that we should shift our direction, and that the new procedure is right, you could: 1. Simply approve the Herter memorandum. However, Jack and perhaps Tom Mann would be concerned that you did not give them a hearing. (To avoid any chance of a leak before you have made up your mind, we have not talked about this to anyone except Schultze, Herter, and Bill Roth. Tom, incidentally, is likely to be ambivalent. He understands the foreign policy case for shifting our ground, but is likely to be worried about Congressional and industry reactions.)

2. Instruct Connor—or instruct us to ask Jack on your behalf—to have the Cabinet Committee prepare recommendations for presidential decision, with or without participation by Ackley and Schultze. The trouble with this is that your instruction would leak as soon as it reached the staff people concerned with textiles, and Pastore, Talmadge and the rest would be on the telephone within hours.

3. Call Connor (or ask us to do it), and tell him that you have been thinking about a procedure like this, and that, unless he can make a strong case to the contrary, you want to put it into effect. (You might wish to give him a chance to sleep on it, or suggest that he talk to the two of us, but instruct him not to say anything to his staff.)

Our vote goes for #3. It gives Connor his say without prematurely stirring up the industry.

If we do go ahead with the Herter procedure, you will wish to consider how to break the news on the Hill. One possibility would be to call in, for coffee and a talk, Pastore, Muskie, and a few of the others who might listen to reason, and have Mann, Connor, Fowler, Ackley, Herter/Roth, Schultze, etc., explain what we have in mind. (On the other hand, it would be important not to over-dramatize the change.)

Harry C. McPherson

Francis M. Bator 3

Approve Herter Memorandum (#1)

Have Cabinet Committee (plus Ackley and Schultze?) prepare recommendations (#2)

I will talk to Connor (#3a)

McPherson/Bator talk to Connor (#3b)

Talk to me4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Bator Memos [2 of 2], Box 1. Sensitive. Drafted by Bator.

2 None of the tabs is printed.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed signatures.

4 None of the options is checked.

314. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the European Communities 314. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission to the European Communities 1

Washington, February 8, 1966, 9:29 a.m.

BUSEC 229. Coffee. ECBUS 664.2 Two copies President's Annual Coffee Report pouched today.3 Report does not deal extensively with possible application of Article 45(3) of Coffee Agreement. President in speech August 17, 1965 to Latin-American Ambassadors (State Dept. Bulletin September 13)4 did say US would continue to strengthen the operation of the Coffee Agreement.

Dept. has worked toward objective tightening Agreement, most recently in December Coffee Council meeting where other consumers were persuaded to accept new requirements for certificates of origin. After April 1, 1966 a certificate of origin will be required on all coffee produced in a member country even if trans-shipped through a non-member country. We feel this is only a first step however as it will not stop shipments of coffee where bags mislabeled to show they are produce of a non-member country.

Clandestine shipments of coffee were very large last year and there is reason to believe they are continuing in substantial volume. For example, US December import statistics show 77,000 bags of coffee imported from Tangier and declared to be of Guinea and Liberian origin. These states are non-members so no certificates of origin required. We would bet however that coffee was actually produced in other African countries that are members of Agreement.

We believe it is only question of time before more stringent meas-ures must be applied by consuming countries to coffee imported from non-members if quota system is to be respected and quota violations eliminated. We are not yet aware if Greece is in business of trans-shipping illegal coffee in important quantities to detriment of International Coffee Agreement, but this is the aspect EEC Commission should focus on if it wants to make constructive contribution to success of Agreement.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COFFEE 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Paul E. Callanan (E/OR/ICD/TRP) on February 7; cleared by Bashkin (Commerce), Barbara F. Thomson (EUR/RPE), and George R. Jacobs (E/OR/ICD); and approved by Edward Fried.

2  ECBUS 664 from Brussels, February 4, requested a copy of the President's annual report to Congress on the International Coffee Agreement and added that because of reports of Greek reexports of coffee to EEC nations, the EEC was interested in the U.S. position of Article 45 of the Agreement, which pertained to development of a more effective quota system. (Ibid.)

3 Not found.

4 Printed in Department of State Bulletin, September 13, 1965, pp. 426–430, and Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1965, Book II, pp. 884–889.

315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, March 11, 1966, 1:17 p.m.

5316. The following letter from Governor Herter to Minister of Agriculture Peart was delivered to Philip W. Ridley, Commercial Counselor of the British Embassy, today.

You may wish to follow up with representation at appropriate Government levels with the U.K. Government in London.

Begin text. My dear Mr. Minister:

I am writing you again to express our disappointment in the results achieved to date under the US–UK Bilateral Cereals Agreement effected by the exchange of notes between our two Governments on April 15, 1964.2

In spite of the price restraints introduced by the UK Government on domestic production in 1965, UK cereals imports for 1965 were 900,000 tons below the level specified in paragraph 11 of the Agreement, and even further below what would be required to maintain a fair and reasonable balance between UK domestic cereals production and imports. By the end of the current marketing year, the cumulative short-fall in imports below the levels required to maintain the fair and reasonable balance envisaged in the Agreement promises to be in the region of three million tons.

At the meeting which the UK Government held with its principal cereals suppliers December 8–9, 19653 the US representative pointed out the serious view which his Government took of this short-fall in imports, emphasized that the restraints on financial assistance to its producers already applied by the United Kingdom Government were not effective in maintaining cereals imports, and that additional measures were needed. He also pointed out that, unless further effective remedial measures to restore cereals imports to the levels envisaged under the Agreement were forthcoming as a result of the next UK Annual Agricultural Review, the US would have to give serious consideration to terminating the Agreement.

We would of course take such a step with reluctance, since the US attaches great importance to the Agreement and the commitments our two Governments have undertaken thereunder. In the press release announcing the Agreement at the time it was signed we hailed the Agreement as an important precedent for the negotiation of acceptable conditions of access to world markets for cereals and other major agricultural products in the Kennedy Round of trade negotiations. We are still of the view that the Agreement could serve this purpose. I must reluctantly point out, however, that if it is not implemented according to its terms the Agreement could have quite the opposite effect. Unsatisfactory performance under the Agreement would negate the value of its underlying principles and could jeopardize the prospect for negotiating a broader cereals arrangement aimed at expanding world trade in cereals and bringing about greater stability in world cereals markets.

As the time approaches for the UK Government to conclude its current Annual Agricultural Review, I very much hope that your Government will keep these considerations in mind and introduce the additional remedial measures required to give full effect to the Agreement. End text.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges (STR) on March 10; cleared by Schnittker (Agriculture), Julius L. Katz (E/OT), and Fred H. Sanderson (E/OR/ICD/TEP), all in draft; and approved by Herter. Repeated to Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Ottawa, and Geneva for GATT.

2  See Document 215.

3 A British draft summary of this meeting was transmitted in airgram A–1396 from London, December 16. Comments and suggestions by the U.S. delegation on this draft were sent in telegram 4038 to London, January 13, 1966. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK)

316. Editorial Note 316. Editorial Note

On April 4, 1966, Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman signed a Protocol for the Further Extension of the 1962 International Wheat Agreement. The Protocol provided for the extension of the Agreement, which would expire on July 31, 1966, until July 31, 1967. Regarding the 1965 Protocol extending the 1962 International Wheat Agreement to July 31, 1966, see Document 261. Request for the President's approval of full power to Secretary Freeman and Under Secretary Schnittker to sign the 1966 Protocol for the United States is contained in a March 2 memorandum from Benjamin H. Read to Bromley Smith. A typewritten note on this memorandum indicates that the President signed the paper granting this full power on March 4. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT 3) The U.S. Senate gave its advice and consent to the Protocol on July 14, which entered into force for the United States on July 16 (Parts I and III–VII) and August 1 (Part II). For text of the Protocol, see 17 UST 948.

317. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 317. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 1

Washington, May 11, 1966, 8:32 p.m.

GATT 3678. For Blumenthal. Ref: TAGG 4021.2

1. Proposed change in tactical position in cotton textile sector discussions involving quiet end to efforts to obtain comprehensive multilateral acceptance of working “hypothesis” that LTA will be extended in its present form is acceptable to us provided it remains entirely clear, as you indicate it will, that extension LTA in present form remains essential condition US ability to liberalize administration and reduce tariffs in package deal context.

2. However, following four important elements of our position must not be compromised: A. That US, as reiterated above, has not abandoned insistence that extension LTA in its present form necessary if we are to agree to liberalization of administration and that present tariff offers take into account continued existence of LTA in present form.

B. That negotiations regarding liberalization of administration on part of United States will be carried on bilaterally.

C. That there not be any discussions in sector meetings of any changes in LTA, at least changes having applicability to US, as result this tactical change in our position. We assume that consequence this position is that multilateral sector discussions will now move to question of tariff reductions. (Obviously, tariff discussions would be without commitment, subject to completion negotiation WW package.) We would not be prepared to participate in any multilateral discussion on liberalization of administration which might affect the U.S., or in any discussions on changes in text of agreement.

D. That countries with which we have reached agreement on liberalization of administration and which have undertaken to support extension of LTA in its present form, including Japan, Republic of China and Hong Kong, will not find basis for arguing that US has indicated willingness to be less demanding of other countries than we have been of them.

3. Manner in which this tactical change in our position accomplished is one which you will necessarily have to determine in light discussions at next meeting WW calls.

4. We draw your attention to Deptel 2176 to Delhi and repeated Geneva 36733 in which conversation with Indian Textile Commissioner Doraiswamy is reported. You will note that we emphasized that we had already reached agreement with the suppliers of a substantial portion of our textile imports regarding liberalization of administration and extension of the LTA in its present form. If tactical situation at WW meeting permits you may want to have prior understanding with representatives of these countries, suppliers of substantial portion of our imports, to avoid risk referred to in para D. above and to place appropriate emphasis in sector meeting on completion of these negotiations and fact that we are in communication regarding liberalization of administration with such additional countries as Korea, Spain, Jamaica, Israel, and Colombia. While we received no direct encouragement from Doraiswamy re Indian reaction to our position he did tell us he had reported it fully to Delhi. Since our effort and yours have been to persuade Indians (and Pakistanis) that they are injuring their own interests by holding out, we would not want to weaken effect of this position by overeagerness to accommodate them in Geneva or any place else. However, if some delay in accomplishing change in tactical position will not seriously affect time-table in Geneva this might provide useful time for Indians to reconsider their position on basis conversation reftel.

5. We would appreciate advance notice of time of sector meeting.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by George R. Jacobs (E/OR/ICD); cleared by Harald B. Malmgren (STR), Stanley Nehmer (Commerce), Herbert N. Blackman (Labor), and Thomas W. Wolfe (Treasury); and approved by Henry Hopp (FTD).

2  TAGG 4021 from Geneva, April 26, proposed U.S. tactics for an upcoming meeting of the Kennedy Round cotton textile sector group that might help “to break deadlock caused by Indian and Pakistani refusal to agree to LTA extension as working hypothesis for ‘package deal' negotiations.” (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 2176 to New Delhi (repeated as telegram 3673 to Geneva), May 9. (Ibid., INCO–COTTON 17 US–INDIA)

318. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson 318. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Mann) to President Johnson 1

Washington, May 21, 1966.

SUBJECT

International Cocoa Conference

The United States is participating in another Conference beginning May 23 in an effort to negotiate an international cocoa agreement.2 Discussions and negotiations toward an agreement have been taking place off and on for the past ten years in various UN forums. The pressure comes mostly from Ghana, Nigeria, the Ivory Coast and Cameroon who account for 75% of world exports and whose economic development and political stability are bound up with cocoa. Brazil, the major producer in Latin America, also wants an agreement.

Since the U.S. accounts for one-third of world cocoa consumption, our participation is essential to any agreement. Our negotiating position, however, is complicated by two conflicting forces: a) The producers seek more from an agreement than we believe is either necessary or feasible. Unfortunately some consuming countries, led by France, are willing to go much further than we to satisfy them. We would wish to avoid being isolated at the conference or blamed for its failure;

b) We want to work out something that could be acceptable to our cocoa industry. The industry is unenthusiastic in principle about any commodity agreement and it would oppose an agreement of the type which the producing countries, with the support of some European consumers, want. Their representatives will continue to work closely with us during the negotiations. We would have great difficulty with Congressional approval of an international agreement if the industry were opposed.

Among other specific problems, the U.S. may face a financial issue at the conference. We expect to be asked whether the U.S. would make or guarantee a short-term loan of perhaps $10 million to the cocoa organization so that it could begin operations before it accumulated its own funds. France, the Netherlands, the UK and Germany have already said they would consider such loans if all consuming countries participate. We have yet taken no position on this issue but will be under considerable pressure to do so.

We informed the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and the Senate Finance Committee of our participation at the conference3 and had informal discussions with Senators Smathers, Talmadge, and Carlson. We also discussed the negotiations with Chairman Mills and Congressman Curtis of the House Ways and Means Committee. They were all interested in the conference but expressed no firm view favoring or opposing an agreement pending a better idea of its content.

We will keep in close touch with the Congress and your staff as the negotiations go along.

Thomas C. Mann 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Confidential. Drafted by Edward R. Fried and Paul E. Callanan (E/OR) on May 20 and cleared by Bashkin (Commerce), Joseph A. Silberstein (ARA), Joseph Palmer (AF), and Solomon (E).

2 Additional background on the calling of this conference and guidance to posts on the U.S. proposed negotiating position and objectives are in circular telegram 2239, May 14. (Ibid.)

3 Identical letters to Senators Fulbright and Long, dated May 13, are ibid., INCO–COCOA 4.

4 Printed from a copy that indicates Mann signed the original.

319. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 319. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, June 8, 1966.

TAGG 4107. For Governor Herter from Blumenthal. Subject: cotton textiles. Ref: TAGG 3506.2

1. KR cotton textile sector group met June 7.

2. WW, in opening remarks, made two points: (A) As result his consultations with interested governments, and responses to his Dec 29 letter,3 WW concluded that it not possible to obtain agreement on multilateral “package deal” approach (reftel). He proposed, therefore, that countries negotiate bilaterally in effort to maximize reduction of cotton textile tariffs in KR. He warned that time was growing short and countries should not miss opportunity afforded by KR. At same time, WW noted that for some countries ability to reduce tariffs was linked to continuation LTA.

(B) LTA Article 8(D) discussions must begin by end of September, but do not have to be completed by Sept 30. Fourth annual LTA review Article 8(C) also had to be held in fall. WW proposed CTC meet September 26 lasting week or ten days. Meeting would start with Article 8(C) annual review, immediately followed by initiation of Article 8(D) discussions on future of LTA. He anticipated that after initial round of 8(D) discussions CTC would recess briefly. WW called on countries to use period between now and Sept 26 in constructive effort to “prepare ground for meeting,” and pointed out dangers of countries coming to Sept 26 meeting without adequate inter-governmental preparation.

3. WW's proposals were accepted by group. Japan, Pakistan, India, UAR, Spain, Portugal, Turkey, US, EEC, Austria, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Canada all made brief statements. US noted shortness of time available in KR, and importance of using time before Sept 26 constructively. We said that while we could leave aside formal linkage of KR and LTA as incorporated in package deal, everyone recognized de facto linkage. We indicated willingness to negotiate bilaterally re tariff cuts LTA administration; such negotiations based on assumption by US of LTA renewal.

4. India (Swarup) commented that GOI had already made written suggestions re future of LTA. WW indicated that he had in mind intergovernmental consultations which went beyond such unilateral pronouncements.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. Limited Official Use; Priority. There is no time of transmission on the source text; the telegram was received at 7:37 a.m. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, The Hague, Hong Kong, London, Luxembourg for USEC, New Delhi, Paris for USOECD, Rawalpindi, Rome, and Tokyo and passed to the White House.

2  Document 290.

3 Not found.

320. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 320. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 1

New York, June 23, 1966, 0325Z.

5388. Re: Cocoa Conference.

1. Intensive mtgs of Group of 12 with Prebisch and Conference Chairman Ali over weekend ended in failure to find common basis further negotiations.2 In effort get discussion off dead center, it was proposed that range of min prices be agreed as basis for resumption of discussions. Producers suggested 20–22 cents, most consumers 19–21 cents, and US moved to 18 cents. Germany stated that would recommend strongly to his govt acceptance of the zone of 19 to 21 cents. US attempted obtain agreement on 18–22 cents but this not acceptable all other members Group of 12.

2. In desperate last effort, Prebisch held meetings individually with 12 members of Group to float compromise proposal which would have amended draft agreement to incorporate following features: 1) minimum and maximum prices would be replaced by intervention and resale prices; 2) intervention price, which would be 21 cents, would be point at which automatic reduction of sales quotas would begin; 3) buffer stock would not exceed 250,000 tons and would buy from producers only; 4) cocoa in temporary surplus would be bought by buffer stock for 10.5 cents; 5) when cocoa sold from buffer stock producer would receive deferred payment of additional 10.5 cents; 6) once buffer stock reached 250.000 tons, cocoa would be bought at diversion price (roughly 5 cents) and diverted to non-traditional uses such as production margarine; 7) all surplus cocoa would be mandatorily sold to buffer stock, however, producers would have right to buy back from buffer stock any surplus cocoa resulting from quota reduction which was subsequently restored during same quota year; and 8) net assets of buffer stock at end of agreement could be lent to cocoa producers through regional banks to finance econ development. In preparation for resumption of Conference at some time in future, Prebisch also proposed establishment WP which could refine draft agreement, attempt reach accord on unresolved issues and look into possibilities of prefinancing.

3. After lengthy meeting afternoon June 21, and in knowledge US acceptance, producers rejected Prebisch proposal on grounds it represented radical departure from draft agreement and that insufficient time remained in which to obtain instructions from capitals. Understand Nigeria and Ghana would have accepted proposal but refrained from doing so in light opposition other producers, primarily Brazil and Ivory Coast. At request producers, Prebisch withdrew proposal and so informed consumers.

Goldberg

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Abidjan, Accra, Addis Ababa, Geneva, Lagos, Lome, London, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, and Paris for USOECD.

2 Telegram 5320 from USUN, June 17, earlier detailed the impasse and summarized the main unresolved issues. (Ibid.)

321. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 321. Telegram From the Mission to the United Nations to the Department of State 1

New York, June 23, 1966, 0355Z.

5389. Cocoa Conference. Cocoa Conference adjourning June 23 with US being charged with breakdown negotiations this session. Ghana, speaking for all producers at Executive Committee meeting, June 22, said US Government wanted agreement but unable to negotiate because of opposition US industry. Other producing countries consistently stressed that US alone held up agreement because of unwillingness accept negotiating range 19–21 cents for minimum price. No delegations came to US support. However, producer criticism obviously not meant to break off negotiations as every speaker referred to need make arrangements continue work toward agreement. We expect Conference will make arrangements Thursday for continued work on reaching cocoa agreement. In discussing Conference with host government officials you may draw on following: 1. There should be no questioning of US motives and US interest in wanting cocoa agreement. Industry views important to US but not overriding.

2. It has now become clear that many difficulties arose from fact that basic negotiating document which of unexpected complexity was not available to governments until two weeks before start of Conference. US emphasis on need for workable mechanism and agreement consist-ently misconstrued as attempt obstruct negotiations.

3. US was most vulnerable however on price issue. No one could understand why US as richest country in world should have lower position on price than other consumers. Fact is we view minimum price as integral part of mechanism and not as price at which bulk of cocoa would be sold on market. Too high a minimum price could put excessive strain on buffer stock quota mechanism and cause agreement breakdown. Furthermore, our assessment future supply-demand prospects based on FAO analysis generally more pessimistic in regard to price market would be able to support than that of producers or other consumers. We consistently emphasized that agreement should be based on conservative, prudent assumptions to reduce risk it would break down under pressure first serious surplus. Producers preferred assume optimistic view that surplus year always followed by shortage. Their assessment failed take into account effect of agreement. Nor is it consistent with FAO projections.

4. In effort break deadlock US supported informal compromise proposal floated personally by Secretary General Prebisch and Chairman of Conference Ali. Prebisch told us he genuinely convinced this proposal would have settled major issues Conference and permitted rapid conclusion cocoa agreement. Producers refused consider Prebisch proposal without first knowing whether US prepared accept it. To demonstrate sincerity our negotiating effort US accepted Prebisch proposal without reservations. Proposal required US increase its minimum price offer to 19 cents and accept deferred payment concept which we had always opposed. In addition, US suggested to Prebisch that funds remaining in buffer stock at liquidation should be used wholly for benefit producing countries through contributions to African Development Bank and Inter-American Bank. After two days' consideration proposal was rejected by producers, not apparently on basis of substance but on grounds there was inadequate time to consider what they maintained were entirely new concepts. Prebisch proposal thereupon withdrawn, has no official existence, and will not be mentioned in conference records.

5. Conference greatly narrowed differences and achieved agreement on market shares among producing countries. Agreement on permanent financing for buffer stock, which was major breakthrough of Conference, was based on US proposal and adopted through US initiative.

6. US prepared participate in resumption negotiations either through working group or other organizational arrangement leading to resumption negotiating conference.

Goldberg

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Abidjan, Accra, Addis Ababa, Geneva, Lagos, Lome, London, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, and Paris for USOECD.

322. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) 322. Memorandum From the Department of State Executive Secretary (Read) to the President's Special Assistant (Rostow)1

Washington, June 25, 1966.

SUBJECT

Cocoa Conference

The Conference to negotiate a cocoa agreement recessed yesterday without reaching agreement. This outcome is a severe disappointment to the African cocoa producing countries, especially Ghana and Nigeria, which are heavily dependent on cocoa exports. The failure is being blamed on the United States. The criticism of our position includes charges that our position was determined by the negative attitude toward an agreement of the U.S. cocoa using industry.

The United States Delegation took positions which proved to be at the farthest remove from the African producers and Brazil. It consist-ently found other consuming countries (the U.K., Netherlands, France, Germany and Switzerland) willing to go further than we and our industry would go in compromising with the producers.

In the last few days of the Conference the other consumers offered to reach agreement that the minimum or floor price which the agreement would seek to maintain should be set between 19 and 21 cents.2 The U.S. industry was not willing to agree to our going above 18 cents despite efforts Arthur Goldberg and State Department officers made to obtain their agreement. (Prices have been above twenty cents for the past fifteen years, averaging more than thirty cents in the fifties and about twenty-four cents in the early sixties. In 1964–65 a record crop drove prices down to twelve cents for a few weeks last summer. Prices are now 23–24 cents.)

Despite the opposition of the U.S. industry we instructed our delegation to initiate a compromise setting the minimum price at 19 cents which Dr. Prebisch of the UN put forward. After two days of discussion, the producers decided not to accept this proposal and Dr. Prebisch withdrew it at their request. The final result of the conference shows the U.S. offering 19 cents, other consumers 19–21 cents and the producers asking 20–22 cents.

The Conference adjourned, therefore, without agreement on price, and with no agreement on the operating rules and mechanism of the Agreement dealing with the purchase of cocoa surpluses. We have definite views on these rules which we want to be written to limit intervention in the market.

However, agreement has been reached to continue in a consultative group with a conference to be scheduled before the end of the year. At that time it seems to us that we will still have a chance to obtain agreement on the type of operating rules we want if we can join other consuming countries on the minimum price.

John P. Walsh 3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use. Drafted by George R. Jacobs (E/OR/ICD) on June 24 and cleared by Assistant Secretary Solomon.

2 Telegram 5405 from USUN, June 24, summarized the efforts of the U.S., British, Netherlands, and West German delegations on June 22 to revive Prebisch's compromise proposal. (Ibid.) For Prebisch's proposal, see Document 320.

3  Walsh signed for Read above Read's typed signature.

323. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Connor to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze) 323. Letter From Secretary of Commerce Connor to the Director of the Bureau of the Budget (Schultze)1

Washington, June 30, 1966.

Dear Mr. Schultze:

I have received from Mr. Focke a copy of a letter addressed to you, dated April 15, 1966, from Assistant Secretary of State MacArthur 2 commenting on my proposed revisions in Executive Order No. 11052,3 as amended, which I transmitted to you on March 29, 1966.4 Mr. Focke indicates that you would be pleased to receive any further recommendations from me in the light of the position taken by Assistant Secretary MacAr-thur.

All departments appear to concur in my first proposal, to provide formal representation for the Agriculture and Treasury Departments on delegations to cotton textile negotiations. Although the Agriculture, Labor, and Treasury Departments also concur in my second proposal relating to the chairmanship of U.S. delegations to negotiations on cotton textiles, the Department of State and the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations disagree.5

Comments of the Department of State on my second proposal indicate that there may be some misunderstanding as to its nature and intent. Assistant Secretary MacArthur's letter states that “it is the responsibility of the Department of State to carry on negotiations with foreign governments.” I am not suggesting that this basic responsibility of the Secretary of State be modified in any way in the field of cotton textiles. My proposed revision in the Executive Order specifically states that “the Secretary of State shall designate the Chairman of each delegation from among the representatives designated by the members of the President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee.”

I am suggesting that the Secretary of State have the flexibility to designate, as chairmen of delegations to the GATT Cotton Textiles Committee or the negotiation of cotton textile bilateral agreements, the most qualified officers available in the government without regard to the departments for which they work. I know of no other case where this flexibility is denied to the Secretary of State by Executive Order or otherwise.

As I have pointed out, more than fifty U.S. delegations to international conferences dealing with economic subjects in 1965 were chaired by officials from departments or agencies other than the State Department. A number of these involved important foreign policy interests, as in the case of cotton textiles. In these cases the government gained by utilizing the most qualified person as chairman, and thus benefitted from the flexibility of choice available to the Department of State.

I can cite examples of three officials currently concerned with all or some aspects of the textile program who are not attached to the Department of State and who would be eminently qualified to serve as chairmen of delegations to the GATT Cotton Textiles Committee or to negotiation of bilateral agreements.

The present Deputy Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Resources would be a logical choice. He is Chairman of the Interagency Textile Administrative Committee and the Management-Labor Textile Advisory Committee. He was an employee of the Department of State from September 1961 until September 1965, throughout the life of the Short Term Cotton Textile Arrangement and the first three years of the Long Term Arrangement and is today still a Foreign Service Reserve Officer detailed to this Department. He served as the Chairman of the U.S. delegation to the GATT Cotton Textiles Committee and to bilateral negotiations while he was assigned to the State Department. His move from the Department of State to the Department of Commerce should not preclude the Secretary of State from relying upon his expertise as a delegation chairman.

The Assistant Secretary of Labor for International Labor Affairs has had extensive experience in areas of Southeast Asia which are growing in importance as cotton textile producers and exporters to the United States. His services as chairman of a delegation which might negotiate cotton textile bilateral agreements with such countries would be invaluable, if the Secretary of State were to designate him as chairman. His background knowledge of the textile program is extensive and he has had long experience in negotiating in many fields.

The Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations, resident in Geneva, is a Foreign Service Officer with the rank of Ambassador. As he is not an official of the State Department, Executive Order 11052 as presently written would preclude him from serving as chairman of the U.S. delegation to the GATT Cotton Textiles Committee although he is resident in Geneva. He was one of the negotiators of the Long Term Cotton Textile Arrangement when he was Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, and he is presently handling cotton textile problems in the Kennedy Round.

Finally, referring to the recent directive of the President concerning direction, coordination, and supervision of interdepartmental activities overseas by the Department of State, Assistant Secretary MacArthur suggests in his letter that “furtherance of the national interest in cotton textile negotiations as in other areas of negotiations with foreign governments requires this kind of coordination and direction.” I cannot agree with the notion that the kind of coordination and direction required for effective administration of U.S. foreign policy can be achieved by continuing to preclude the Secretary of State from selecting as delegation chairmen individuals of the greatest competence available from all parts of the government at any given time. Regardless of who chairs U.S. delegations to negotiations with foreign governments these delegations follow instructions predetermined by their government. In the formulation of these instructions, interested agencies look to the Department of State for guidance on the foreign policy interests of the United States.

I think it should be clearly understood that in the field of cotton textiles, the authority for any negotiation is determined by the President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee of which the Secretary of State is a member. This Committee is responsible, under the provisions of Executive Order 11052, for “supervision over the administration of the Long Term Arrangement Regarding Trade in Cotton Textiles done at Geneva on February 9, 1962” and for providing the President with advice “generally with respect to problems relating to textiles.” Positions taken by the Cabinet Committee are implemented in negotiations with foreign governments. U.S. delegations engaged in these negotiations should have the benefit of the best qualified chairmen without regard to the department for which they work.

In replying for the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations, Ambassador Roth has indicated that particular examples of the adverse effect of the present situation should be shown before his office can consider the proposal further. I think that he would agree and indeed his comment on my proposal so implies, that the best qualified individuals should chair U.S. delegations notwithstanding their departmental affiliation. Without regard to the particular experiences of the past, it is enough, in my opinion, that a substantial potential problem has been recognized. I feel that we should proceed to deal with it as promptly as possible on the basis of the principle of providing maximum flexibility to the government and not tieing our hands.

I hope that the foregoing clarifies the nature and intent of my proposed revision of Executive Order 11052, as amended. I have no further recommendations to make, other than to suggest that if there should still be objection to my proposal, you might wish to convene a meeting of the six agencies concerned to discuss and resolve this problem. In the alternative, I shall be glad to have the President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee meet to consider it.

Sincerely yours,

John T. Connor 6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT. No classification marking. Copies were sent to Secretaries Rusk, Freeman, Fowler, and Wirtz, and to Herter.

2 Under cover of a May 19 letter to Secretary Connor, Arthur B. Focke , General Counsel of the Bureau of the Budget, enclosed a copy of MacArthur's April 15 letter to Schultze. (Ibid.)

3 Cotton Textiles and Cotton Textile Products, September 28, 1962. (Federal Register, vol. 27, p. 9691)

4 As summarized in Connor's March 29 letter, the proposed amendment dealt “both with the composition of United States delegations to the Cotton Textiles Committee established by the Contracting Parties to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and to bilateral textile negotiations contemplated under the Long Term Arrangement Regarding Trade in Cotton Textiles, and with the selection of chairmen for these delegations.” A copy of the proposed amendment is attached to Connor's March 29 letter. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON GATT)

5 In addition to the Department of State objections (see footnote 2 above), the other agency views were expressed in letters to Schultze from Fred B. Smith, Acting General Counsel of the Department of the Treasury, April 8; John A. Schnittker, Acting Secretary of Agriculture, April 18; W. Willard Wirtz, Secretary of Labor, April 22; and William M. Roth, Deputy Special Representative for Trade Negotiations, May 4. (All ibid.)

6 Printed from a copy that indicates Connor signed the original.

324. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 324. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, July 29, 1966, 1820Z.

542. GATT—For Governor Herter from Lewis. Subject: Meeting exporters July 25 and meeting of GATT Cereals Group July 26–28, 1966.

1. Exporters at meeting Monday July 25 succeeded in reaching broad measure of agreement on tactics to be pursued in subsequent GATT cereals meeting. US suggestion to focus on usefulness self-sufficiency formula in meeting exporters' needs of access assurance and food-aid aspects of EEC proposal generally accepted. While Australia raised question of international price levels, readily accepted response of USDel that US not prepared at this time advance position on international pricing beyond that stated US paper presented GATT Cereals Group May 17, 19652 meeting also brought out differences in evaluation long-term market prospects, particularly with Canada. Agreed, however, this did not alter basic exporters' objectives in cereals arrangement. Exporters agreed to schedule another meeting in September prior to resumption GATT Cereals Group.

2. Summary. Meeting Cereals Group opened July 26 under chairmanship Wyndham White. Major part of sessions devoted to thorough and business-like discussion new EEC proposals. Exporters generally agreed proposals in present form do not have great operative significance and fail provide exporters with access assurances they seeking. Consensus among exporters was that if EEC shows sufficient flexibility new EEC proposals could be made meaningful in trade terms with substantial modification and tightening up. Nevertheless general feeling among exporters which shared by USDel is that proposals are positive contribution to work Cereals Group, that there is flexibility in EEC negotiating position and job now is engage negotiations on basis EEC proposal as well proposals tabled by other participants.

3. WW concluded session Thursday by proposing that at next session to [topic?] will be prepared and circulated by Secretariat in meantime. His suggestion accepted by delegates. USDel stressed that at this time no one proposal had any more significance than another and that in preparing its working paper Secretariat should give due consideration to proposals tabled by other participants last year and subsequent discussions which took place re these proposals as well the new EEC proposal and discussions held this week.

4. Following are highlights of session.

Self-sufficiency rate. EEC del (Malve) made skillful presentation of SSR concept stressing obligation to take corrective measures to withhold excess production from commercial channels. Subsequent questioning however brought out numerous loopholes which make proposal in its present form virtually inoperative particularly from point of view of assuring access to markets of importing countries: (A) Importing country required to take corrective action only if world surplus has been created and Governing Council of WGA found that surplus caused by that country exceeding its SSR. SSR inoperative if surplus removed by emergence of new markets or increase in bilateral food-aid shipments.

(B) SSR operative only when Cereals Council determines world surplus exists over sum of maximum stock levels bound by each participant. IWC rep's statement indicated that in view present relatively low stocks considerable buildup could take place before SSR would go into effect. Triggering of any corrective action would be further postponed if allowable level of stocks negotiated under arrangement exceeded normal world carryover. Difficulties of ascertaining actual level of stocks also pointed out.

(C) Lack of provision for corrective action if world demand declines without any participant exceeding SSR.

(D) SSR of 90 percent claimed by EEC exceeds not only recent average (85–86 percent) but also SSR projected by Commission for 1970 under highest production assumption (87.8 percent).

(E) EEC explicitly reserved right to supply any growth in domestic demand, thus negating concept of minimum ratio so far as it applies to itself.

5. EEC del displayed some impatience with critical reception by virtually all participants but suggested that various aspects of proposal (e.g. 90 percent) negotiable. Fairly clear however that EEC views proposal essentially as supply control device operative only in event world surplus and not as market access device operative at all times. US and other exporters focused questions to highlight modifications necessary to make concept useful and effective in latter respect. UK said it would have difficulty accepting concept without modifications to take account of differences in efficiency and level protection. Japan unwilling accept any formal limitation its freedom of action re domestic policies.

6. Supply management. Consensus was that while commercial market likely to continue strong for another 2 years there was no assurance that this would continue indefinitely. EEC most emphatic in stress-ing danger oversupply in light output projections submitted to technical WG last fall. Statements by Canada, Australia and IWC rep confirmed indications of rising exports catching up with commercial demand. Only Canada insisted favorable long-term outlook had so changed picture to make supply management secondary concern. Time had come for us to remove indirect aids to production while continuing production restraints. Australia viewed food aid as principal tool for maintaining supply-demand balance but willing consider SSR mechanism in this context.

US indicated willingness consider all proposals for more equitable sharing of supply management responsibilities but stressed no need for uniform measures applicable to both exporters and importers. Stressed that present world grain situation should confirm value to importers of exporter commitments to carry adequate stocks, and to supply importer access requirements within the price range.

7. Food aid. US welcomed EEC acceptance principle of joint responsibility for food aid, and EEC proposal divert excess production to non-commercial channels, but this not enough meet need for growing and dependable flow of food aid to LDCs unable finance their essential import requirements. US therefore proposed 10 million ton international program to be shared equitably by grain exporting and importing countries, with each country's contribution in grains or cash based on economic capacity and role in world grain economy. Distribution could be through bilateral or multilateral means subject to guidelines to (A) define terms and conditions, (B) ensure food aid contributes to agricultural development, (C) avoid interference with commercial trade. US reiterated offer to contribute up to 40 percent of international program while continuing substantial US bilateral program. US prepared submit more specific proposal assuming agreement can be reached on above principles.

Australia, Canada, Argentina all supported US initiative, indicating general agreement with approach and principles. EEC holding to its earlier disposal appoach said proposal deserved consideration. Japan modified earlier negative stand and stated willingness cooperate in developing acceptable formula which should take account differences in income and degree self-sufficiency. Only UK reiterated position food aid should not be part of grains arrangement.

8. Domestic policies. EEC del stressed value to importers of 3-year standstill on EEC domestic prices in view rising costs. Consolidation of MDS turned out to be “bold offer” which now widely criticized by Community producers. EEC therefore asking for escape clause, subject to compensation, in event “overriding national interest.” EEC still insisting on corresponding commitments by exporting countries by interest expressed by EEC del in “base price” proposal by US suggests EEC may settle for appearance of symmetry in this area. UK, Argentina said MDS should not apply to them or be subject to broad escape clause. Japan unwilling accept any obligation re domestic price policy.

9. International prices. Australia and Canada welcomed EEC support of higher minimum price while UK, Japan saw no reason for changing present IWA range. US reiterated support of strengthened prices within price range to be set realistically in light other provisions of arrangement and wide enough so that actual price would not be at either end of range except in unusual circumstances. Re differentials, Canada, EEC and UK favored tighter definition “with some flexibility,” while US stressed need for flexibility to reflect changing market conditions. Suggested that if price range adopted problem of differentials would only occur when trading took place at maximum or minimum. Problem might be handled by price equivalent committee acting under agreed upon guidelines.

10. Other Exporters joined in stressing grains arrangement would not be self-balancing and commitments thereunder must have same status as other trade commitments under GATT, i.e. be of indefinite duration rather than limited to 3 years.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bern, Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Buenos Aires, Canberra, Copenhagen, The Hague, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Oslo, Ottawa, Paris for USOECD, Rome, Stockholm, and Tokyo and passed to the White House for Herter.

2 Not found.

325. Editorial Note 325. Editorial Note

The International Coffee Council held its eighth session in London from August 22 to September 6, 1966. One major U.S. goal for this meeting was the establishment of a Coffee Diversification Fund. As stated in circular telegram 15095, July 26, “The immediate purpose of Fund is to provide funds to assist in general programs to diversify away from coffee production, but Dept hopes that in addition existence of Fund will generate use of IBRD and bilateral aid funds for rational diversification programs in countries where continued production of unsaleable coffee constitutes waste of natural resources.” (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COFFEE 3) General instructions to Edward R. Fried, who headed the U.S. delegation to the London meeting, are contained in an August 19 memorandum from William B. Buffum, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs. (Ibid.)

In remarks to the International Coffee Council on September 5, after the Council's passage of several resolutions attacking the chronic problem of coffee overproduction, Fried provided his evaluation of the meeting. Among other things, he noted that “we have come a long way and we have a long way to go,” and he hoped that “it will prove possible to put the Diversification Fund in operation during the next coffee year.” (Text sent in circular airgram 2111, September 15; ibid.) For a Department of State summary and evaluation of the meeting, see Document 325.

Additional documentation relating to the London meeting is in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COFFEE 3.

326. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 326. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 1

Washington, September 14, 1966, 4:40 p.m.

46760. BUSEC. Ref: London's 1839 and 1841, September 62 (sent or pouched to all addressees). Coffee.

1. US views recently concluded meetings International Coffee Council as major step toward answering public, Congressional and industry critics of Coffee Agreement and toward making Agreement important instrument for more effective use resources in producing countries.

2. Council passed series of resolutions that should result in most coffee producing countries finally facing up to basic problem of general overproduction and taking measures to speed adjustment their coffee economies to this reality.

3. Effective enforcement measures now agreed by importing countries will make clear that continued production in excess of quotas represents economic waste. In past year, many countries have found loopholes through which to ship large quantities in excess of quotas. Council's action limiting imports from non-members effective not later than January 1 and setting up arrangements effective April 1 for limiting issuance of Coffee Council stamps to amount of quota should effectively prevent all over-quota shipments except those to “new markets.” Dept. does not believe most new markets can absorb much more coffee for consumption except at sharply declining prices. Member countries have been warned that shipments ostensibly destined for new markets but which show up in traditional markets prior to April 1 will be charged to quotas. After April 1, only shipments with stamps will be admitted into traditional markets. Days of large-scale evasion of quotas should now be over. Coffee in excess of quotas can only pile up in warehouses as visible evidence wasteful use of resources. Therefore all the more necessary for surplus countries to take serious view and prompt action on diversification efforts.

4. Selective system under which quotas of particular types of coffee can increase if market conditions warrant will make operation of Agreement more flexible. Will also serve to defuse much of emotion about issue of revising basic quotas. Important point is that increases in production should not serve as justification for claiming increased quotas.

5. Direct incentives to start diversification programs provided by conditions attached to continuance waivers in third and fourth quarters of coffee year (para 2 reftel).3 The 15 countries and OAMCAF group granted waivers (described in CA-2017, Sept. 12)4 must either set aside part of proceeds for diversification purposes or freeze stocks. If they cannot meet either of these conditions they forfeit waiver for second half coffee year. In countries where marketing boards or other government arrangements exist, conditions can presumably easily be met. In other countries, new legislative authority may be required to provide central control of stocks or to put aside revenues in special reserve for diversification—e.g., through higher export levies. In next six months, special ICO group will work out procedures for freezing stocks and using funds held in special reserve for diversification programs.

6. Special group will also be studying general producer-financed Diversification Fund whose resources could be used in conjunction with and supplemented by bilateral and multilateral economic development programs to increase pool of funds needed for diversification and development.

7. Posts are requested to keep coffee developments under close observation, reporting reactions and future plans. In particular, AID missions are urged to take advantage of new incentives toward diversification and development provided by Coffee Council actions to assist in planning and execution desirable programs.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COFFEE 3. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Jack B. Button (E/OR/ICD/TRP) on September 12; cleared by Paul E. Callanan (E/OR/ICD/TRP), William Kling (AF/AFI), and Joseph A. Silverstein (ARA/ECP); and approved by Fried (E/OR). Sent to Bogota, London, and Rio de Janeiro and pouched to 23 other posts.

2 Telegram 1839 from London, September 6, summarized the resolutions adopted at the meeting of the International Coffee Council. Telegram 1841 from London, September 6, summarized the “selective system of quota adjustments” adopted at the end of the meeting of the International Coffee Council. (Both ibid.)

3 Reference is to telegram 1839 from London; see footnote 2 above.

4  CA-2017, September 12. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COFFEE 3)

327. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 327. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, September 30, 1966, 1905Z.

1184. Ref: Geneva 1165.2

1. Fourth session September 29 continued discussions under Article 8(D) of LTA.

2. Hong Kong prepared support LTA extension in present form for a period of three years only, if there are specific and concrete assurances (a) relaxation of restrictions to maximum extent possible and (b) new restrictions would be sought only if unavoidable. Negotiations could be bilateral but there should be multilateral exchange of views on common standards of behavior in administering arrangement re swing, growth, carryover, categorization, export control, trade with non-LTA-member countries, and Article 2 restrictions. Stated HK satisfied with US ideas on liberalization but US only one country and Hong Kong must know intentions of other importers. Emphasized urgency of bilateral discussions and decision on extension.

3. Mexico stated following points should be taken into account in consideration LTA extension: clearer statement of “standstill rule” on restrictions (Article 2) and relaxation of restrictions; tighter definition of disruption (Article 3); specific consideration needs of LDC's vis-a-vis developed exporters. Cited UNCTAD and Chapter IV of the GATT as desirable basis for LTA.

4. In response Chairman's request views of importing countries, US del reaffirmed US position that LTA should be extended in present form; noted that US has been and remains available to negotiate bilaterally with exporting countries; accepted procedure proposed by Chairman (reftel, paragraph 3); said US has no problem arranging bilateral discussion but Pakistan proposal to use good offices Secretariat in arranging bilateral discussions could be useful for countries having limited staff and time.

5. Canada supported extension of LTA and emphatically supported view that Article 2 be rigidly adhered to.

6. EEC expressed willingness to hold preliminary bilateral conversations to permit clarification of demands for liberalization. Doubted wisdom of establishing tight timetable for these discussions.

7. India referred to and summarized its views expressed in prior CTC meetings on LTA aspects considered undesirable and India's proposals for modification. However, agreed with WW suggestions for bilateral discussions. Said deeds not words will show if importing countries prepared to give trade opportunities to LDC's. Results obtained in these discussions will be considered by India in formulating views it will express in proposed meeting later this year.

8. UK favored LTA extension and expressed willingness to undertake review of UK administration in light of events in the next few months.

9. Norway, Sweden, Colombia, Austria, Spain, Portugal, Finland, Denmark, Israel, Turkey supported extension of LTA and procedure proposed by Wyndham White. Some favored extension without change. Others to varying degree indicated less inflexibility on question of amendment. Several expressed view modifications would be desirable.

10. Meeting concluded with Wyndham White presentation of Chairman's summary of meeting: A. Between now and latter part of November, interested countries will determine through bilateral negotiations conditions under which LTA would be administered by individual countries in event it is renewed.

B. WW emphasized that since decision as to future of LTA must be made during the course of this calendar year, bilateral negotiations should be rapid and continuous. Noting proposal negotiations should be centered in Geneva and coordinated with assistance of GATT Secretariat, WW stated Secretariat on request would assist delegations set up negotiating schedule.

C. Re EEC, it understood that negotiations would be arranged through Porte Parole of Community (at present Netherlands) who in consultation with Secretariat of Council would ensure adequate representation to permit effective negotiations.

D. Rather than attempt possible agreement now on guidelines or standards for administration of extended LTA, WW proposed examine possibility that from the results of bilateral discussions a set of understandings be deduced. If understandings could be formulated that could be agreed on, these could both reflect intentions individual countries and give a kind of multilateral recognition of intent under extended LTA.

E. To clarify question raised by HK delegate, WW also said that cotton textile tariff negotiations should proceed in normal course KR negotiations and not await decision on extension LTA, it being understood that certain importing countries might make tariff cuts contingent on extension of LTA.

F. CTC will reconvene November 28. As a negotiating session, length of meeting cannot be foreseen.

G. Suggested consideration be given a change of name from Long Term Arrangement to simply “an arrangement, etc.”

11. Secretariat will circulate written text Chairman's summary on procedures. EEC reserved Community position pending study of written text of summary but, despite comments re feasibility of completing negotiations within proposed timetable, appeared to accept November 28 date.

12. Harb, Chief UAR delegate, in separate conversation with US rep, confirmed that he would recommend to Cairo that bilateral negotiations be undertaken with U.S.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON 4 GATT. Confidential. Repeated to 26 posts.

2 Telegram 1165 from Geneva, September 29, summarized the third session of the meeting of the Cotton Textiles Committee, which concluded discussion of the annual review. (Ibid., INCO–COTTON 3 GATT)

328. Memorandum of Conversation 328. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, October 5, 1966, 12:58–1:05 p.m.

SUBJECT

GSA Rubber Disposals

PARTICIPANTS

Deputy Prime Minister of Malaysia Razak

Tan Sri Ong Yoke Line, Ambassador of Malaysia

President Johnson

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State, FE

Deputy Prime Minister Razak said that the fall in rubber prices to a lower point than at any time over the past 12 years was a cause of grave concern to the Government of Malaysia. He said that Malaysia produced about 40 per cent of the world's natural rubber, and that Indonesia and Thailand together accounted for another 40 per cent. The drop in rubber prices from little over 25 cents last spring to about 22 cents at present represented a loss of foreign exchange for these countries of over $240 million on a yearly basis. With Malaysia's development plans dependent upon foreign exchange earnings, loss of income from rubber was a real disaster for Malaysia. He said it was impossible to attribute to one or another factor fluctuations in rubber prices but the United States Government's program of disposing of stockpile rubber played, in his opinion, a significant part in the decline of rubber prices. The Deputy Prime Minister said that he hoped that the United States could reconsider present rubber disposal policy, particularly in view of the President's much appreciated expressions of interest and support for the development plans of the countries of the Southeast Asia region—of which Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia are such important parts.

2. The President reminded the Deputy Prime Minister that the United States faced critical budgetary and balance of payments difficulties owing to the high costs of war in Viet-Nam. He spoke of the fact that stored rubber had to be sold or it would deteriorate in quality. He assured the Deputy Prime Minister, however, that he would have our rubber disposal program looked into in light of the views expressed by the Deputy Prime Minister.

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential Files, CM (Tin—Watches). Confidential. Drafted by Robert W. Barnett (FE). On the source text the time of the meeting is 12:30, which is incorrect. The actual time of the meeting is taken from the President's Daily Diary. (Ibid.) An attached undated note from Barnett to Rostow, noted that GSA suspension of sales had to be for an indefinite period pending completion of the review discussed by the President and the Deputy Prime Minister. Barnett's note concluded: “Suspension for the rest of this quarter would be in effect locking the barn, etc.”

329. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the President's Special Assistant (Califano) 329. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the President's Special Assistant (Califano)1

Washington, October 5, 1966.

SUBJECT

Rubber and Tin Disposals

1. Our current rates of stockpile disposal are 170,000 tons a year for rubber and 15,000 tons a year for tin, with projected earnings of about $140 million during fiscal year 1967.

2. Since the beginning of the year the prices of these two commodities have fallen sharply, tin from $1.78 to $1.53 a pound and rubber 26 cents to 22 cents a pound. If we continue selling at current rates, prices of these commodities will fall further—tin probably to about $1.40 a pound and rubber probably to about 20 cents a pound.

3. Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and other friendly developing countries are being hurt. Their foreign exchange earnings from tin and rubber this year will probably be down by almost $300 million figured on the basis of annual rates as a result of the decline in prices that has already occurred. The further fall in prices that is likely to occur if we continue our present rate of disposals will cause an additional loss of $150 million a year in their export earnings.

4. Secretary Fowler is concerned that the Malaysians will be forced to sell sterling from their reserves because of these developments. As you know, this adds to our problem of supporting the pound and also risks an indirect drain on our gold stocks.

5. Delegations are being sent from the rubber and tin producing countries and from the rubber and tin inter-governmental organizations to attempt to persuade us to cease sales. We have no intention of doing so since we are all aware of the importance of these revenues, but I recommend that we be authorized to ease off in our sales during those periods when the price structures of these commodities are being undermined. Even if this price weakness were to continue, we would still make sure that we sold during the remaining nine months of this fiscal year a minimum of 6500 tons of tin and 100,000 tons of rubber. Thus under the very worst circumstances we would get $105 million during this fiscal year from the stockpile sale of rubber and tin. Taking into account the lower current prices, this compares well with the $130 million we earned in fiscal year 1965 from rubber and tin.2

Nicholas deB Katzenbach

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, CM (Tin—Watches). Confidential. In an attached October 5 note to Califano, Katzenbach emphasized that while he recognized the importance of selling from the stockpile, “it still does not make sense to me to push so hard for an additional $35 million, or less, that we cost Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, $150 million of their earnings.” Katzenbach's note concluded: “I know the President's concern with stockpiles. I really feel quite strongly about this one.”

2 On October 17, President Johnson approved a Department of State recommendation to dispose of 120,000 tons of rubber from the stockpile in 1967. (Memorandum from Secretary Rusk to President Johnson, October 15; Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1–2 US, and memorandum from Bromley Smith to Secretary Rusk, October 17; ibid.) On October 18, the General Services Administration announced that beginning on January 1, 1967, it would reduce its rubber disposal program from 42,500 long tons per quarter, which had been announced on June 10, 1966, to a quarterly rate of approximately 30,000 long tons, or 120,000 long tons annually. (Text of GSA News Release 3428, October 18, transmitted in telegram 68093 to Kuala Lumpur (and 10 other posts), October 18; ibid.)

330. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 330. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 1

Washington, October 19, 1966, 9:20 p.m.

69437. GATT. Wheat exporters—Canada, Argentina, Australia, U.S.—have been meeting in Washington in effort develop agreed exporter position for Kennedy Round cereals negotiations. Considerable progress has been made in narrowing differences and in developing common position on market access, supply restraints by exporters when prices approach the minimum and food aid. Basic issue among exporters remains level of minimum prices in new agreement. U.S. position has been in favor modest increase present International Wheat Agreement minimum but could not go along with excessive increase because implication that substantial increase might give rise to need for heavy use export tax arrangement wheat which politically difficult, and because price rise would give impetus to wheat production in other exporting countries.

Canada and Australia at current round of meetings insisted that exporters go to Geneva with proposal for 40 cents a bushel increase in minimum. They also asked U.S. to go along with increase of 32 cents as firm position to be held by exporters. To accommodate their views U.S. in the end offered to go along with 25 cents increase (up from our initial offer of 10 cents) with appropriate differential between U.S. and Canadian wheats and for initial position in Geneva negotiations to support other exporters proposal for 40 cent increase.

Canada finally said minimum price would have to be one that would enable them to say that agreement guaranteed $2 Canadian wheat. This presumably means $2 (Canadian) at Lakehead for Manitoba #1 but implications this formulation not clear. Australians said 25 cent increase with current differentials between Canadian and U.S. wheats would result in only 6 cents increase for Australian wheat. Basis of this calculation not clear.

Discussions broken off at this point at request of Canadians to seek instructions from Ministers. Australians and Argentines went along with Canadian move.

Comment: Australian representative (Westerman) said this issue of critical importance to Australian economy and sensitive in domestic politics. Said Australians likely raise at “highest political level” and indicated privately might be raised with President during current visit.2

U.S. has made maximum effort accommodate its views to those of other exporters in attempt to present unified exporter position at Geneva negotiations. We agreed support 40 cent increase in minimum price as opening offer and said we prepared make necessary adjustments if such price or anything close to it was acceptable to importers. We also committed ourselves to hold to 25 cent increase if obtainable in Geneva. We concerned however that very large increase in minimum price will not be acceptable to importers and we refused commit ourselves in advance to break off Geneva cereals negotiations and possibly jeopardize entire Kennedy Round by insisting on unrealistic minimum prices. We would hope that market price will in fact be substantially higher than minimum and we prepared cooperate fully in measures that will make this possible, but we do not believe that we should jeopardize the prospects of reaching a grains agreement by binding ourselves to minimum price provisions that may not be negotiable.

Believe we offered Canadians and Australians essential elements effective agreement they could sell at home but which still might be negotiable in Geneva. In our view ball now in their court. We expect Canadians will be back next week.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT GATT. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Irwin R. Hedges on October 19; cleared by Julius L. Katz (E/OT) and Fred H. Sanderson, Raymond A. Ioanes, and Schnittker (Agriculture), and Roth; and approved by Fried (E/OR). Repeated to Buenos Aires, Ottawa, and Geneva.

2 President Johnson visited Australia October 20–23.

331. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 331. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 1

Canberra, October 21, 1966, 0705Z.

2153. Reference: State 69437.2 For Acting Secretary from Walt Rostow. Please inform Brom Smith immediately. In bilateral discussion between President and Holt minimum wheat price issue strongly raised with McEwen taking lead.

Although State 69437 was available, U.S. position and considerations bearing on it were not sufficiently clear for President to make reply which he would like to be able to do tomorrow before leaving Canberra. Discussion confused because 40-cent increase did not match Australian statement they wished to raise minimum from $1.53 to $1.85; that is, 32 cents.

Therefore please send answers immediately to following questions: 1. How would $1.85 minimum affect U.S. agricultural interests, size of U.S. subsidy, etc.?

2. Australians say U.K. insistence on treating low wheat price as balance of payments respite no longer acceptable. They want our support for higher price. What are U.S. policy considerations bearing on this choice?

3. What precisely are special factors bearing on the Canadian as opposed to Australian position?

4. How far does flexibility in present U.S. position now go? What is upper limit we now think we can accept and still get an agreement?

5. What do you recommend by way of a Presidential response to Holt tomorrow?

Text of aide-memoire follows.3

Clark

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT GATT. Confidential; Flash. Passed to the White House and USIA.

2  Document 330.

3 Sent in telegram 2155 from Canberra, October 21. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT GATT) For a supplement to this aide-memoire, see Document 332.

332. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 332. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 1

Canberra, October 21, 1966, 0810Z.

2156. For Acting Secretary from Walt Rostow. Please inform Brom Smith immediately. Ref: Canberra 2153 and 2155.2

"Supplement to aide-memoire

We have learned this morning that the U.S. would be prepared to join other exporters in seeking, as an opening bid, a minimum price of $1.85.

We appreciate this indication of U.S. preparedness to try to meet us.

However, it would be little more than a gesture unless the U.S. is prepared to stick with other exporters in effectively negotiating with importers.

It should not be difficult to get the European Economic Community to accept a minimum price of $1.85. The major problem will be with Britain, whose desire for cheap wheat is determined by balance of payments considerations.

Balance of payments difficulties should not be accepted as justification for low-cost exporters, who have their own pressing needs for expanding export income, being expected to accept unremunerative prices and to draw on Treasury funds to support their efficient industries.

Our request, therefore, is that the U.S. not only join other exporters in an opening bid of $1.85, but persist, in concert with others, in doing its utmost to get a minimum price of this order.

Any revelation to Britain, or other importers, that the U.S. cohesion with other exporters may be capable of being split after the opening bid is on the table, and negotiations get underway, would be fatal to the prospects for a meaningful result. In that event, the consequences for Australia would be as stated in the aide-memoire. Canberra, October 21, 1966.”

Clark

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT GATT. Confidential; Flash. Passed to the White House and USIA.

2  Document 331 and footnote 3 thereto.

333. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 333. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Australia 1

Washington, October 21, 1966, 1:14 p.m.

70493. Reftel Canberra 2153.2 Confusion over figures stems from proposal to shift base wheat in new agreement from Canadian (Manitoba #1 at Lakehead) as in present International Wheat Agreement to U.S. wheat (hard winter #2 at Gulf ports). To make comparison between present IWA minimum and proposed minimum prices necessary to set differentials between U.S. and other wheats. These differentials not yet agreed. No differentials are established in present International Wheat Agreement.

Canada, Australia and Argentina have made clear they wish start with opening bid of $1.85 for U.S. hard winter as new minimum as suggested by EEC. Canadians said this equivalent to present IWA maximum and would thus raise minimum by 40 cents. Canadians admitted this calculation based on present market differentials of 29 cents. However, it is on basis of 20 cent rather than 29 cent differential between U.S. and Canadian wheats that Australia interprets $1.85 price as 30–32 cent increase rather than 40 cent increase in present minimum.

In any event Canadians made clear they prepared settle for less than $1.85 in negotiating new grains agreement. Said $1.77 their fallback position. They explained that this price for U.S. wheat would enable them to say that new agreement guaranteed Canadian farmer $2.00 (Canadian) wheat and thus justify other measures in new agreement which Canadians would find onerous.

U.S. said we prepared go along with opening bid of $1.85, that we would work hard for it, and if contrary our expectations this price or anything close to it proved to be negotiable with importers we would make necessary domestic adjustments.

On the other hand we were not prepared to commit ourselves rigidly to Canadian fallback position of $1.77 and suggested instead that $1.70 was realistic target. This represents substantial movement in U.S. position. We emphasized final price we could accept contingent upon satisfactory arrangement on other elements of agreement including differentials. Thus on price issue we are agreed on initial negotiating position and are separated by difference of 7 cents in ultimate fallback position. In fact we very doubtful that either UK or Japan would join an agreement with a minimum higher than $1.70.

There are additional considerations militating against our taking an extreme position on minimum price: a) If pressed too far, exporters' price demands will jeopardize other U.S. objectives in agreement including market access and importers' contributions to food aid;

b) Excessively high price would further encourage irreversible expansion of production in exporting countries and thus could make minimum unmanageable;

c) High minimum price would mean extensive use of “negative subsidy” in U.S. For example, if $1.77 minimum for U.S. Hard Winter at Gulf were accepted, this would work back to typical Kansas farm return of $1.45. With present loan rate level of $1.25, large U.S. crop might push U.S. price to loan level for part of year. Export certificate (tax) of 20 cents a bushel would have to be collected to raise U.S. export price to agreed minimum. Although we have legislative authority for this, it remains in the courts. Persistent use of this device would revive “export tax” issue.

Above considerations all the more pertinent as all exporters agree objective should be to maintain market price within range rather than at minimum.

In post mortem with Westerman, Australians said they were mystified by Canadian walkout since talks seemed to make progress. Emphasized however that Australians felt as strongly about price issue as Canadians and considered U.S. proposal of $1.70 minimum for No. 2 hard winter at Gulf inadequate. Australians now estimate U.S. proposal would mean improvement of about 15 cents for Australian wheat, assuming historical differential between U.S. and Australian wheat. Westerman leaving for London today but rest of delegation staying behind for further work on exporters draft next week following visit to Canadian Wheat Board.

Re specific questions reftel: 1. U.S. agricultural interests would be happy with $1.85 minimum since this assures them return for export portion their crop at about current high market prices. U.S. Government would be able to administer $1.85 minimum but with difficulty as noted in opening paragraphs. If $1.85 price were agreed and larger U.S. production materialized in relation export demand without other supporting action, prices would tend to fall to loan level. With prices at loan level of $1.25 USDA would have to collect export certificate of approximately 28 cents per bushel, or raise guarantee (and program cost) significantly.

2. UK imports 170 million bushels wheat. $1.85 is roughly 10 cents above current market. Additional cost to UK balance of payments of $1.85 level at least $20 to 25 million. UK not likely to accept $1.85 minimum price, but may accept close to present US firm target of $1.70.

3. Canadians may have more immediate political problem than Australia. Canadian fallback position of $1.77 U.S. at Gulf can be represented to Canadian farmers as a guarantee of $2.00 (Canadian) for a key Canadian wheat on the farm. This has become a political symbol in Canada. U.S. offer of $1.70 could be represented in the same manner with appropriate market differentials that make U.S. and Canadian wheat competitive. Canada would like to use 20 cent differential established in period when U.S. not competing aggressively for world markets.

4. Believe U.S. price of $1.70 is probably maximum we can expect importers to agree to. Our $1.70 minimum in practice would mean $1.75–$1.80 market prices since prices must be kept above minimum to avoid market rigidities and market sharing arrangements which are necessary under the agreement if prices stay at minimum for any significant period. U.S. already committed to $1.85 if negotiable in balanced package in Geneva.

5. U.S. offered support increase to $1.85 with appropriate competitive differentials between U.S. and Canadian wheat. We refused accept Canadian position that if increase at least to $1.77 not obtained Geneva negotiations with importers would be broken off. Recommend President assure Holt that U.S. will give strong support to $1.85 minimum as negotiations with importers begin in November. Suggest leave until later question of final settlement of minimum price, which in any event depends on developments in the negotiations. Believe Australians will agree.

Recommend President stress that price is one of several key factors which have to be negotiated, and until whole package emerges, impossible to fix any final positions.

State, Agriculture (Schnittker), STR (Herter) and Bator concur in above recommendations.

Katzenbach

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT GATT. Confidential; Flash; Limdis. Repeated to Ottawa, Buenos Aires, and Geneva for GATT. Drafted by Ioanes and Schnittker (Agriculture), Hedges, and Fried; cleared by Eugene Rostow, Solomon, John P. Walsh (S/S), and Bator; and approved by Katzenbach.

2  Document 331.

334. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson 334. Memorandum From the President's Deputy Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bator) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 3, 1966, 3:10 p.m.

SUBJECT

New England Speech Commitments on Textile Imports

You will be under pressure if you go to New England to promise to explore further controls on textile imports. As you know, the industry wants to extend the present controls on cotton goods to wool and synthetic products. In terms of economic policy—foreign and domestic—it is important to resist these pressures. There is no justification for further protection of textiles: —the industry is making money hand over fist;

—unemployment of textile workers is down to about 3.2%;

—imports have risen because demand has been running ahead of domestic capacity. (Without imports we would have faced a run-away price situation in textiles.)

I am aware of the importance of November 8.2 However, as the history of the Kennedy “commitment” on textiles makes clear, the industry would use any Presidential statement as a stick to beat you with the next 6–1/2 years. The truth is that no international agreement covering wool and man made is negotiable; and unilateral U.S. controls would result in drastic retaliation. Further, any indication of Presidential willingness to yield to protectionist pressure would weaken our negotiating hand in Geneva during the next few critical months.

I attach Bill Roth's excellent run-down on the textile situation (Tab A)3 and Jim Duesenberry's comments (Tab B).4 You need not take time to read these. I attach them on the outside chance that you may want to find out a little more about the current picture. In any case, Ackley, Roth, Charlie Schultze, Tony Solomon, and Joe Califano fully agree that we should try to avoid any indication that you are prepared to consider more controls.

Welcome home.5

FMB

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Bator Memos, Box 1–2. No classification marking. In an attached note to President Johnson, November 4, Bator wrote that he would “try to avoid bothering” the President “with minor nuisance problems during the next few weeks.” (The President had announced late on November 3 that he was going to Texas for a few weeks to rest up for upcoming surgery.) Bator added, however, that because he thought “there is chance that the textile people will try to get you to say something in Texas about import controls,” he was sending him the attached summary, which he had prepared before the President's announcement of his Texas trip and operation, “of the arguments for turning them down.”

2 The date of the mid-term Congressional elections.

3 A 6-page memorandum from Roth to Bator, October 27, not printed. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Name File, Bator Memos, Box 1–2)

4 Not found. Dr. Duesenberry was a member of the Council of Economic Advisers.

5 President Johnson returned from a 17-day Asian-Pacific trip on the morning of November 3.

335. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 335. Telegram From the Embassy in Australia to the Department of State 1

Canberra, November 7, 1966, 0225Z.

2529. Ref State 78292.2

1. To best of our knowledge only conversation between President and Holt on minimum wheat price issue was that reported in Canberra 2153.3 According to notes taken by Sir John Bunting, Secretary to PriMin's Department, President noted Australian points sympathetically, remarked that Australian interests are our interests and said that if US could not meet GOA position entirely on price issue he would require full justification our position.

2. Although Embassy prepared talking paper based on State 704934 and delivered it to Rostow, we have no indication that second conversation took place, nor has Department of Trade and Industry.

3. In any event, conversation between Econ Counselor and Deputy Trade Secretary Campbell today indicates Australians satisfied with US position as indicated para five State 70493.

Clark

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS GATT. Confidential.

2 Telegram 78292 to Canberra, November 3, noted that Australian participants in grain talks in Washington claimed that President Johnson gave Prime Minister Holt definite assurances on the U.S. position on the price issue and asked the Embassy for its “understanding of where matter was left.” (Ibid.)

3  Document 331.

4  Document 333. The talking paper has not been found.

336. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 336. Memorandum From Secretary of State Rusk to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 21, 1966.

SUBJECT

Negotiation of Extension of International Multilateral Executive Agreement on which U.S. Cotton Textile Import Program Based

Conclusion

We are planning to begin negotiations on November 28 to extend the international cotton textile multilateral agreement on which the U.S. primarily bases its program for protecting our industry from disruptive imports of cotton textiles. These plans are based on the assumption that prior Presidential directives indicating the appropriateness of cotton textile negotiations continue to apply.

Discussion

The current trade restrictions protecting U.S. industry from disruptive imports of cotton textiles are based on the Long Term Arrangements Regarding International Trade in Cotton Textiles done at Geneva in 1962 (LTA) and on a series of bilateral agreements negotiated under the LTA. The LTA will expire September 30, 1967 and we plan to begin negotiations on November 28 for its extension, probably for a 3-year period.

The domestic authority for this executive agreement authorizes the negotiation of such agreements whenever the President determines such action is appropriate. The present United States program regarding trade in cotton textiles pursuant to international cotton textile agreements was initiated by President Kennedy in 1961. We are assuming that the Presidential approval of this program continues, as evidenced by Executive Order 110522 issued by President Kennedy and by your Executive Order 11214.3 Nevertheless, we believe it desirable to inform you that we have made this assumption and are planning to begin the negotiations.

Dean Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COTTON 4 GATT. No classification marking. Drafted by J. David Stoner (L/E). Attached to the source text are two memoranda. The first is a November 16 memorandum from Stoner to the Executive Secretariat requesting that Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Eugene Rostow approve a memorandum granting Circular 175 authority for the negotiation and signature of an agreement extending the LTA before forwarding to the Secretary his memorandum to President Johnson. (The Circular 175 memorandum has not been found.) The second, from Solomon through Rostow to Secretary Rusk, November 18, notes among other things that Rostow had granted this Circular 175 authority in part on the assumption that prior Presidential determinations authorizing such negotiations continued to apply.

2 See footnote 3, Document 323.

3 E.O. 11214, April 7, 1965, amended Executive Order 11052 by adding a member from the Office of the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations to the President's Cabinet Textile Advisory Committee, to its subcommittee, and to delegations negotiating textile agreements. (Federal Register, vol. 30, p. 4527)

337. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Palmer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) 337. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs (Palmer) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon)1

Washington, November 26, 1966.

SUBJECT

US Position at Cocoa Working Party Meeting in New York2

The revised draft position paper for the UNCTAD Cocoa Working Party (just received)3 provides that the US should endeavor to postpone the price issue until other elements of an agreement can be settled. While I agree entirely that we should strive to resolve these issues before grappling with the price issue, I fear that events may not allow us to follow this course. With cocoa producers focusing their attention on price, it is likely that price may be a major issue from the start. If this in fact occurs (and we would support appropriate efforts to avoid this), I believe that the US should be prepared to discuss price in the following context: "We should not indicate in this Working Party any willingness to consider a higher level than 19 cents now but seek new instructions on this issue if the situation warrants. We should first press for agreement on other essential issues, and as the negotiating situation develops keep the Department fully informed on the price question.”

I understand that the proposal put forward by the Cocoa Producers Alliance, if modified, has real possibilities for negotiation. As the Position Paper states hopeful preliminary indications are that producers have agreed “in large part to the terms of the proposal advanced by Dr. Prebisch and accepted by the US.”

I hope that we can proceed on the basis of this proposal to reach agreement.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Solomon Papers, Cocoa. Confidential.

2 On November 7 Prebisch sent a commercial cable to the Department of State inviting the United States to attend a meeting on cocoa in New York on November 29. The Department accepted and inquired about documentation that would be circulated to the delegations in advance of the meeting. (Telegram 81493 to Geneva, November 8; Department of State, INCO–COCOA 3)

3 "Position Paper for the U.S. Delegation to the UNCTAD Cocoa Working Party, New York, November 29–December 6, 1966,” drafted on November 21 by Paul E. Callanan . (Johnson Library, Solomon Papers, Cocoa) Callanan served as the U.S. representative at these talks.

338. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 338. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 1

Washington, November 30, 1966, 3:49 p.m.

93601. Joint State/USDA/STR Message. Subject: Annual Review of UK Cereals Agreements.

1. Anderson 2 and Hartman as designated US representatives should, at appropriate point during December 1 review, state the US position as follows: a. The Government of the United States wishes to reiterate its views that the UK Government is not fulfilling its obligations under the bilateral cereals arrangements. Positive remedial measures are required to restore imports to the level the UK is committed to maintain under the agreements.

b. Cereals imports into the UK during each of the past two years have failed to reflect the balance with home production which was originally contemplated. Overseas suppliers have been unable to share in growth of the UK home market in a fair and reasonable way; although UK home consumption has risen steadily from a base period level of 19.5 million tons to an estimated 2l.6 million for 1966/67, imports have actually fallen. Imports should have increased, given the increases in exports which have also occurred, to approximately 9.5 million tons in 1964/65, 10.3 in 1965/66, and about 10.5 million in 1966/67. Actual imports during the first 3 years will have fallen roughly 5.3 million tons short of these targets.

2. The US representatives may draw upon the following for additional comment as appropriate: a. Regarding UK Document RCA/66/1, November 22,3 paragraph 12 (ii): The UK states that the original standard quantities were fixed too low since the subsequent wheat and barley harvests were higher by 1.3 million tons. It is our understanding, however, that the standard quantity mechanism was introduced as disincentive measure aimed at achieving parallel growth of production and imports. Although that objective had not been achieved, either through the standard quantity or adjustments of guaranteed prices, the UK in early 1965 and again in 1966 proceeded to raise the standard quantities. The US regards these actions as clearly inconsistent with the undertakings of the UK in the bilateral agreements; and would so regard any suggestion that these standard quantities might again be raised in 1967.

b. Delegation should note that UK Government seems to be in accord with position taken by US and other exporters that agreements are not working out in way originally contemplated. Material contained in UK paper in no way excuses the UK from its obligations to take effective remedial action to maintain imports. Data on UK production-consumption trends merely confirm what exporters have repeatedly said, namely that the disincentives applied thus far are clearly inadequate and additional measures are required to achieve the objectives of the Agreements.

c. The Delegation should express disappointment that the UK Government, despite the acknowledged failure of the agreements to meet these objectives, still has not come forward with effective remedial meas-ures. Failure to fulfill these obligations cannot but worsen the prospects for concluding a broader cereals arrangement in the Kennedy Round which the UK Government has said it favors. In the exchange of notes which constitutes the present bilateral agreement, it was mutually agreed between the two governments that the arrangements “shall be without prejudice to, and indeed are intended to facilitate the negotiation of more comprehensive commitments by all participating countries.” It is difficult to see how this intent can be realized if the UK Government fails to carry out its obligations under the present agreement.

d. Indications that UK reconsidering basic premise of the agreements is matter of serious concern. UK still is high-cost producer; increased efficiency should make it possible to reduce level of support. Nor do we agree that relaxation of production restraints in the US, designed to meet food aid requirements of LDC's, justifies expanding uneconomic production for the commercial market in Europe.

Katzenbach

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–GRAINS 4 UK-US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by D. Novotny (Agriculture/FAS) and Irwin R. Hedges; cleared by Julius L. Katz, James T. Johnson (EUR/RPE), and Raymond A. Ioanes; and approved by Fred H. Sanderson.

2  Robert N. Anderson, Agricultural Attache at the Embassy in London.

3 Not found.

339. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 339. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 1

Washington, December 8, 1966, 11:24 a.m.

98835. 1. Proposed amendment (Rule 36) to the Federal Trade Commission regulations under the Wool Products Labeling Act of 1939,2 if adopted, would provide for testing of fiber content of imported wool products when requested by FTC. Proposed rule is outgrowth of mislabeled imports in which the presence of inferior fibers, i.e., used and reprocessed wool and man-made fibers, is concealed or understated. Domestic manufacturers have long been required to maintain detailed records of fiber content through all stages of manufacture.

2. FTC is now considering views on proposed rule presented to it in public hearings held October 26–27, 1966.3 Hearings brought forth suggestion of a voluntary program under which importers might utilize either foreign or domestic laboratories to test and certify to fiber content. Certifying laboratories might be required to follow test procedures approved by FTC.

3. Addressee posts are requested asap to inquire, probably of Min Foreign Trade, whether laboratory facilities presently exist in their countries for either expert chemical or microscopic analysis of textile fiber content. Any affirmative answers should be supported by general indication whether laboratories are now testing and can utilize various chemicals for extraction of fibers and/or can distinguish characteristics of various fibers microscopically. If present capabilities are partial or non-existent, post should determine whether host government likely to be developing test facilities in context of domestic labeling programs or as aid to export trade.

4. Tokyo and Vienna: Japanese Government has offered to arrange for a government inspection institute to issue certificates of fiber content. Austrian Government has indicated that the Hoehere Bundeslehr and Versuchsanstalt fuer Textilindustrie in Vienna is equipped to make tests. Posts are asked to obtain general description of tests which the Japanese and Austrians undertake to guarantee compliance of their wool products with Labeling Act.

Katzenbach

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Unclassified. Drafted by Mary E. McDonnell (E/OT/STA) on December 7; cleared by Garber (FTC), Edward Dahl (E/CBA/REP), and William W. Shoaf (Commerce/BDS) (in substance); and approved by John F. Shaw (E/OT/STA). Sent to Bern, Bonn, Brussels, Dublin, The Hague, Hong Kong, Lisbon, London, Madrid, Ottawa, Paris, Rome, Seoul, Taipei, Tokyo, Vienna and repeated to Geneva for GATT.

2 P.L. 850, approved on October 14, 1940. (54 Stat. 1128)

3 Not further identified.

340. Note Verbale From the European Economic Community to the U.S. Mission to the European Communities 340. Note Verbale From the European Economic Community to the U.S. Mission to the European Communities 1

Brussels, December 13, 1966.

The Directorate General of External Relations presents its compliments to the United States Mission and has the honor to refer to the proposal of the Federal Trade Commission to amend the “Rules and Regulations under the Wool Products Labeling Act of 1939” by the insertion of a new paragraph 300.36 made public through the notification of the Trade Commission on September 12, 1966.2

It appears from this proposal that, if the new measures should enter into effect, all importations of wool products within the meaning of the “Wool Labeling Act” would be detained by American customs authorities until they had received either a certificate indicating satisfactory results of an examination of a sample of the merchandise in question by an approved laboratory, or a notification from the Federal Trade Commission stating that it would not require such tests or certificates. If it is true that, in the absence of such notification, customs could release the products in question on condition that a security be given to it, the importer could, however, not dispose freely of his merchandise before the laboratory examinations had been carried out, or the Federal Trade Commission had officially waived them. The American producers, on the other hand, would continue to submit only to the obligations of article 31 of the regulation in keeping records on the exact composition of their production.

The Community industry is extremely worried by the plan in question. Its fears are centered primarily on the following aspects: —the large trade volume affected by the measures: the value of European exports alone would be between 70 and 300 million dollars;

—the financial charges falling on the importers, not only for the laboratory analyses, but also for warehousing the products pending completion of all the new formalities;

—the inevitable duration of these formalities, taking account of the limited number of qualified laboratories and experts able to carry out the prescribed tests;

—the serious consequences that this delay in customs clearance is bound to have on the future development of American importations in a field which is already highly competitive and where the importance of fashion and season requires the strictest respect of delivery schedules;

—the discriminatory treatment between foreign exporters and domestic producers.

The United States Mission is certainly aware that these concerns, which have been abundantly expressed to the American authorities at the recent hearings in Washington, are shared by other countries.

The Directorate General of External Relations wants to inform the United States Mission of its concerns in this matter. Putting off temporarily any assessment of these measures in regard to the applicable provisions of GATT, as well as the principles which govern the trade negotiations currently in progress in Geneva, the Directorate General requests the American Mission to inform it as to what its government plans to do with the proposals of the Federal Trade Commission in the light of the above mentioned hearings.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL. Unclassified. The source text is the enclosure to ECBUS A–341 from Brussels, December 23, which was also sent to Bonn, The Hague, London, Luxembourg, Paris, Rome, and Geneva. The airgram indicates that the text is a Mission translation of the Note Verbale. The date is taken from information provided in the airgram.

2 Regarding Rule 36, see Document 339.

341. Letter From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg) 341. Letter From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to the Representative to the United Nations (Goldberg)1

Washington, December 22, 1966.

Dear Arthur:

We regret that the cocoa issue added to your troubles at the General Assembly. Our isolation on the Cocoa resolution was unfortunate,2 but without being defensive, I think there is insufficient awareness among your colleagues, particularly those from cocoa-producing countries, of the genuine difficulties the U.S. faces in negotiating an agreement. These are not simply a question of the lack of “political will” or the attitude of our industry.

There is no enthusiasm in Congress or anywhere else in this country for a cocoa agreement. Indeed, Congress finds commodity agreements little to its liking. We had the greatest difficulty getting the Coffee Agreement3 through, despite its importance to Latin America. It took two years and we were once repudiated by the Congress over it. Cocoa, unlike coffee, is hardly in chronic over-supply, which is the most impressive case for a commodity agreement. Compounding our difficulties is, of course, the industry's complete opposition to an agreement. We have made the decision, nevertheless, to try to reach an agreement in the face of this opposition and a general lack of public support because we believe that a good agreement can help cocoa-producing countries. It is entirely possible, and perhaps even probable, that no agreement will be acceptable to the Congress.

Knowing that any agreement that is negotiated will face a negative attitude on the Hill and the united opposition of the domestic industry, we have had to examine our position on the substantive issues very carefully. We have not, however, taken a rigid line and we are continuing to test each proposal on its merits. The key test we have been making and will continue to make is this: Will a proposed provision of the agreement be workable within the financial and operational capabilities we can build into an agreement? If not, the Congress, aided by industry experts opposed to the agreement, could establish our failure to do our job properly and make an unanswerable case that the agreement is likely to fail. The case would be made that failure of the agreement would put great pressure on the United States to save it by assuming large new responsibilities, financial and other. Failure of a cocoa agreement might not bother our European friends but for us it would raise new demands on us, discredit the Coffee Agreement and foreclose future possibilities of actions in other commodity fields.

Each of the major points outstanding—price, buffer stock machinery and operating rules—involves the critical issue of what will work with the resources likely to be available. There are, in addition, many difficult technical issues. It will take time, but we believe they can be resolved. We regret being publicly isolated but you should know that our isolation is more apparent than real because the European consumers during the recent discussions basically shared our views on most of these major points. Apparently in the General Assembly they chose to hide behind us.

We've begun consideration of next steps—how best to make use of the demonstration you've given that we will maintain our views when we are convinced of them. We don't think further efforts with Prebisch can have any use at this stage. His behavior has convinced us he is not a reliable mediator in this kind of negotiation. It will be necessary to help the Africans to understand what our problems are and how they can be solved in ways that meet their fundamental interests and are still consist-ent with what we can do. If you think it would help, we could send Ed Fried to New York to talk to Ambassador Arkhurst of Ghana to try to discover if we can reach an understanding with Ghana. We are not sure how well informed he is about the cocoa negotiations—for example, the Ghana delegate to the cocoa consultations was quite clearly upset by the tone of Arkhurst's critical remarks in his speech in Committee II. However, if the leading producer and consumer can agree on the essentials of an agreement, other producers and consumers would probably find it possible to go along. Would you let me know how this strikes you?

Sincerely,

Nick

P.S. I am concerned about this on the Hill and we need your best help and advice there as well as in N.Y.

Nick 4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. No classification marking.

2 On December 17, the U.N. General Assembly adopted Resolution 2210 (XXI), by a vote of 110–0, with 1 abstention (United States). Among other things, this resolution deplored the breakdown of the New York talks November 29–December 7, called upon “all concerned in the negotiations, particularly the major consumer countries, to do their utmost to arrive at an agreement on all outstanding matters,” and urged an early resumption of these negotiations. For a summary of the U.N. talks and the text of the resolution, see Yearbook of the United Nations, 1966, pp. 251–256.

3 The International Coffee Agreement, 1962, was signed at New York on September 28, 1962, and entered into force on December 27, 1963. (14 UST 1911) See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IX, pp. 807–808.

4 The postscript is handwritten.

342. Editorial Note 342. Editorial Note

Because the 1966 Protocol to the 1958 International Sugar Agreement (see Document 295) had extended the Agreement only through December 31, 1966, the International Sugar Council in late 1966 invited members to negotiate a further extension of the Agreement. Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Eugene V. Rostow initialed his approval for U.S. participation in the negotiation of a new Protocol and for the Ambassador to the United Kingdom to sign it for the United States. (Memorandum from Solomon to Rusk, November 1; Department of State, INCO–SUGAR 4 US) A new Protocol for Further Prolongation of International Sugar Agreement of 1958 was agreed to in London on November 14. A memorandum from Benjamin H. Read to Walt Rostow, December 2, requested that the President grant full power to David K. E. Bruce, Ambassador to the United Kingdom, to sign the 1966 Protocol. A typed note on this memorandum indicates that President Johnson signed a paper on December 8 granting full power to the Ambassador. (Ibid., INCO–SUGAR 4) On December 22, 1966, Ambassador Bruce signed the Protocol for the United States. (Telegram 5087 from London, December 22; ibid.) The U.S. Senate gave its advice and consent to the Protocol on December 6, 1967, and it entered into force for the United States on December 21, 1967.

For text of the Protocol for the Further Prologation of International Sugar Agreement of 1958, see 19 UST 4572.

343. Editorial Note 343. Editorial Note

At its 48th session in London April 3–5, 1967, the International Wheat Council adopted a Protocol for the Further Extension of the 1962 International Wheat Agreement until July 31, 1968. (Circular note, April 27; Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT 4) Foy D. Kohler, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, who had author-ized negotiation of the Protocol on March 31, approved on May 24 the U.S. signature of the Protocol. The 1967 Protocol was treated as an executive agreement rather than a treaty, which was consistent with the procedure used in 1965 to extend the International Sugar Agreement. The purpose of the Protocol was to serve as a bridge to cover the interval between the expiration of the 1962 Agreement and final action on a new arrangement covering wheat on which agreement in principle had recently been reached as part of the Kennedy Round negotiations in Geneva. The 1967 Protocol could be terminated prior to July 31, 1968, if a new arrangement was adopted earlier. (Memorandum from Solomon to Secretary Rusk, May 23; ibid.) Protocols negotiated in 1965 and 1966 (see Documents 260 and 316) had earlier extended the 1962 International Wheat Agreement until July 31, 1967. Regarding the 1965 extension of the International Sugar Agreement, see Documents 295 and 312.

For text of the 1967 Protocol, which was signed by the United States on May 31 and entered into force on July 16, see 18 UST 1699.

The meeting of the International Wheat Conference in Rome July 12–August 18, 1967, reached agreement on the latter date on the text of a new International Grains Arrangement to replace the International Wheat Agreement, 1962. It would come into force on July 1, 1968, and would be open for signature October 15–November 30, 1967. (Telegram 909 from Rome, August 19; Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WHEAT 4)

Regarding approval of the International Grains Arrangement by the U.S. Government, see Document 354.

344. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Installations and Logistics (Ignatius) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 344. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Installations and Logistics (Ignatius) to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, June 27, 1967.

SUBJECT

Stockpile Objectives

For 14 important stockpile materials we have prepared a brief summary to show the portion of the total requirement that is based upon direct and indirect military use, compared with the portion considered by OEP to be essential for the balance of the economy. We have also developed for your information a brief background paper (Tab A), outlining recent history of stockpile actions.

Additionally, for these materials, estimated supply is shown, indicating the amount estimated to be available after applying “discount” factors agreed to by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the State Department, compared with estimated availability as calculated by OEP in determining stockpile objectives by applying further discount factors to eliminate all foreign sources (except Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean). This OEP source discount assumption has been used since 1954 and was reaffirmed by the President on February 24, 1964.2 We do not know whether the President was aware that State and DoD had made different recommendations.

In the tables, which show requirements and source availability for both 2-year and 3-year periods, it is readily apparent that a change in the supply source availability assumptions, along lines recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the State Department, would result in “zero” stockpiling needs for seven of the fourteen items and drastic reductions in the other seven.

Additionally, it is obvious from the separate supporting detailed summaries for each of the materials that generally the direct and indirect military requirements are far less than the “essential civilian” requirement.3 Admittedly, a substantial portion of the “essential civilian” is, in fact, necessary for National Security and required by the military effort. For example, transportation, communications, and federal, state and local government all must continue to operate effectively. On the other hand, preliminary probing into the basis for the “essential civilian” estimate suggests that it is far from austere and seems to assume continued heavy production of luxury-type consumer goods.

We are not in a good position to challenge the validity of the “civilian” estimate because our own figures are badly out of date and possibly far from accurate. The latest complete DoD materials estimate was made in 1963. Even though overall force levels are reasonably comparable, there have been significant changes in equipment and estimated consumption and attrition rates. Also, the 1963 computation omitted some important items. For example, there were no Air Force bombs or airfield matting in the estimates. Recently, as you know, we have attempted some rough approximations for a few basic materials. Although probably acceptable “ball park” estimates, we must concede the possibility of substantial error and would be hard pressed to defend the validity of our estimates.

Senior working level people in Commerce and OEP are thoroughly familiar with the obsolescence of our data and when pressed on their own “civilian” estimates tend to defend them as being necessarily high to compensate for possible shortcomings in the military estimates. Since this could become an issue in either a Presidential or Congressional review of stockpiling, we should probably undertake a fairly comprehensive review of our direct and indirect military material requirements as soon as possible so that we can adequately justify and defend our position.

Since our calculation of raw materials requirements would require detailed mobilization production schedules which, in turn, would require the development and issuance of extensive mobilization planning guidance for the Military Departments and DSA, it is possible that a complete DoD materials requirements review could take from 6 to 12 months.

It should also be noted that the Senate Armed Services Committee has shown considerable opposition to proposals to decrease stockpile objectives and inventories. Also, Commerce Department, OEP, and State Department generally have been opposed to sale or disposition of presently held stockpile inventories. In view of this, you would probably want the support of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for any recommendations you may wish to make concerning reductions in stockpile inventories and objectives.

Conclusions

—Need for stockpile (for many items) would be eliminated for many items and drastically reduced for others by assuming some availability of overseas supply sources as recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and State Department rather than no overseas supplies as now assumed by OEP calculations.

—Substitution of 2-year planning factor rather than 3 would further reduce objectives.

—The above could be accomplished without the necessity of a change in or review of “requirements” estimates for either military or civilian purposes.

Recommendations

In view of expected opposition from some sources within the Administration, as well as from the Senate Armed Services Committee, you will probably want to review the above analysis with General Wheeler to gain the whole-hearted support of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for significant downward revision of stockpile objectives and inventories. Assuming his concurrence and support, the following actions would appear to merit consideration: —Suggest to the President that he consider the advisability of directing OEP to base their stockpile objectives on the overseas source availability recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and State Department.

—Suggest to the President that he also direct a 2-year planning period in lieu of 3.

—Direct a comprehensive review within DoD of military requirements for materials. (This will require that the Military Departments be furnished mobilization planning guidance for developing detailed mobilization production schedules to form a basis for material calculations. This entire process could take from 6 to 12 months.)

—Upon completion of DoD material requirements review, suggest a re-examination of the basis for calculating civilian requirements so that a new total requirements estimate will be available as a basis for determining stockpile objectives.

Paul R. Ignatius

TABLE I

ALTERNATIVE INVENTORY OBJECTIVES FOR SELECTED NATIONAL STOCKPILE MATERIALS

A Comparison of Present Objectives (3 Year Period Using OEP Supply Assumptions)

With

Estimated Revised Objectives (2 Year Period Using OEP Supply Assumptions and 3 Year or 2 Year Periods Using DoD/State Department Supply Assumptions)

See Annexes for Detail of Each Material

Stockpile Inventory Objectives

OEP Supply DoD/State Supply

Material Unit 3 Years * 2 Years 3 Years 2 Years

Aluminum 1000 S.T. 450 450 200 200

Bismuth Mil. Lb. 2.4 1.7 0 0

Chromite (Met.) 1000 S.T. 2,970 1,971 1,571 1,038

Cobalt Mil. Lb. 42 27.6 0 0

Copper 1000 S.T. 775 519 0 0

Magnesium 1000 S.T. 90 89 0 0

Manganese (Met.) 1000 S.T. 7,900 5,330 3,173 2,365

Mercury 1000 Fl. 200 134 149 103

Molybdenum Mil. Lb. 40 27 0 0

Nickel 1000 S.T. 20 18 8 6

Platinum 1000 Oz. 335 226 0 0

Rubber 1000 L.T. 130 90 0 0

Tin 1000 L.T. 200 134.5 160.7 104.4

Tungsten Mil. Lb. 44 28.9 20.7 16.6

Tab A4

STOCKPILE BACKGROUND

The National Stockpile constitutes a reserve of strategic and critical materials which, by definition, would not otherwise be available to the United States during wartime in the amounts needed to support military and essential industrial and civilian production.

The quantity of any material which needs to be stockpiled depends upon three major factors: 1. The assumed period of conflict.

2. The total supply available to the U.S. from domestic production and imports, by period, for the duration.

3. The total U.S. requirements, by period, for the duration.

When the present law was enacted in 1946, the Army/Navy Munitions Board exercised the central policy direction over the program. This function was transferred in 1953 to the Executive Office of the President and now is vested in the Office of Emergency Planning. The Department of Defense is one of OEP's statutory advisory agencies. The DoD direct functions are to provide (1) information as to the quantities of materials needed to support planned wartime military production and (2) guidance as to the probable duration of a future major war and the geographic areas which would be accessible to the U.S. as sources of imports. The Department of State evaluates the political and economic dependability of the accessible sources and determines appropriate discount factors to be applied to normal availabilities of materials from each source. The Departments of Interior, Agriculture and Commerce furnish projections of potential supply, by source, and of the non-military requirements.

From 1946 to 1958, the assumed duration was five years. In 1955 the Department of Defense recommended a reduction to three years, but this was not accepted by the other agencies until 1958. On December 13, 1965, a special group under Mr. McGeorge Bundy prepared a draft NSAM recommending further reduction to two years.5 The Secretary of Defense concurred in this on January 22, 1966 and reiterated his concurrence in a letter of September 14, 1966 to Governor Bryant.6 This change has not yet been implemented and it is uncertain whether it has ever been presented to the President for approval.

The Department of Defense has on many occasions forwarded to OEP its guidance relative to offshore source accessibility. This guidance, developed by the JCS, has varied somewhat over the years but presently considers all world areas accessible except the Communist Bloc, the mainland of Southeast Asia and the Middle East. In past years DoD also has excluded most of Europe and the north coast of Africa. This general pattern of accessibility assumptions was applied to stockpile objective calculations from 1946 until 1954, at which time the President, acting on the recommendations of a special Cabinet Committee on Minerals Policy (not including DoD ), authorized a “long term” stockpiling program for metals and minerals. This program employed extremely conservative wartime supply assumptions (access assumed only to U.S., Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean area). At this time the planning period still was five years. Hence, between 1954 and 1958 stockpile objectives of maximum historical magnitude were in force. The DoD has consistently opposed these extremely conservative supply assumptions, but thus far without effect. The December 13, 1965 draft NSAM referred to above also called for adoption of the DoD/State Department concept of import availability.

A further supply discount is applied by OEP, even against U.S. capacities, where production facilities are relatively concentrated and possible sabotage might reduce the supply. DoD has protested this also, and only recently has OEP moderated, but not eliminated, this factor.

In regard to requirements, the latest DoD submission was in 1963. Lack of updated mobilization production planning studies for end items has precluded our revising these data on a current basis. Our 1963 data are known to be obsolete, even though the planned force levels are relatively unchanged since then. There have been many changes in equipment, as well as in consumption rate allowances, since 1963. Furthermore, the 1963 planning did not include any Air Force bombs or airfield matting, to name only two major omissions. DoD has recently attempted to update the mobilization data for a few basic materials, using a rough factoring procedure. The current relationships between materials requirements and hardgoods production dollars were expanded to an assumed mobilization production dollar level (approximately three times current level). These data have been furnished OEP, however, they are approximations only.

The non-military requirements included in the present OEP stockpile objective calculations are felt to be generally excessive. They were computed on an industry-by-industry basis, using historical relationships between materials input and dollar value output, expanded to levels representing that portion of the wartime GNP capability not taken up by military production. Thus, they assume full employment and full utilization of manufacturing capabilities. There has been a certain amount of critical materials conservation and substitution assumed, but no actual cutbacks in civilian production. These generous non-military estimates generally tend to offset any shortcoming of the military estimates; however, two wrongs do not make a right. Furthermore, the offsetting inaccuracies may or may not occur in the same commodities.

There is no question but that the requirements element of the stockpile studies is badly in need of review. Until there is a reasonably complete mobilization production plan, reliable mobilization materials requirements data cannot be developed.

The analysis of the 14 stockpile items must be taken as generally illustrative, rather than precise, for the following reasons: —The DoD/State system for factoring supply has been dormant for 13 years; hence its application without detailed commodity-by-commodity study is not precise. The system inherently depends upon identification of all import data to the true country of origin, not a possible third country to which the material may normally be sent for processing and eventual export to the U.S. For example, crude South African platinum normally goes to the U.K. for refining and that portion reaching the U.S. shows up as an import from U.K., not South Africa. Under the OEP system which discounts all but very nearby sources, this element in the data is academic and, therefore, has received no attention in the OEP basic commodity data sheets.

—For most stockpile materials the DoD requirements are not computed directly but can be reasonably inferred from relative military and non-military data for manufactured materials derived from the raw stockpile material. For example, nickel is used to make alloy steel, stainless steel and various non-ferrous and heat resistant alloys. We can reasonably infer the military-generated demand for nickel by analyzing the data for the further manufactured alloys and the amounts of nickel needed therefor.

As noted in the earlier discussion, most of the OEP basic data sheets are 3 to 4 years old and need updating both as to requirements and world-wide supply capability.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, Records of the Office of Secretary of Defense: FRC 72 A 2468, 400.23. Confidential. Stamped notations on the source text indicate that Secretary McNamara saw this memorandum on June 29.

2 Not further identified.

3 Reference is to 14 annexes, one for each of the 14 materials listed in Table I below; not printed.

* Present Objectives

4 Confidential.

5 See footnote 2, Document 307.

6 Not found.

345. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 345. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) to President Johnson 1

Washington, June 30, 1967.

SUBJECT

International Cocoa Agreement

Recommendation:

That you authorize us to tell the Government of Ghana that we will support an International Cocoa Agreement along the lines of the proposal shown in the enclosure,2 if they can convince other producers to go along.

An agreement based on this proposal would stabilize cocoa prices and further our foreign policy objectives. It meets U.S. Government and industry requirements as to how an agreement should operate, but it provides for a minimum price of 20 cents, which is 2 cents higher than the industry has been prepared to accept and 2 cents lower than producers are asking for. Our industry is likely to use the price issue to oppose such an agreement. We believe their argument is not justified since cocoa prices have gone below 20 cents only once in the past 15 years. All other consuming countries, furthermore, are prepared to accept a minimum price of 20 cents. Should we refuse to make this one concession, now that Ghana has accepted our position on all other issues, we would damage our relations with Ghana and the other cocoa producers and bring into serious question our good faith in 10 years of participation in these cocoa negotiations.

We promised to give Ghana our answer within a week. They are holding off their discussions to line up the other producers until they hear from us.3

Discussion:

1. An agreement based on the proposal in the enclosure would stabilize cocoa prices and further our foreign policy objectives. Cocoa is a major source of income to important African economies, providing up to 60 percent of foreign exchange earnings. Brazil is the major Latin American producer. (The enclosed table shows the major producers and consumers of cocoa.)4 As you know, a principal recommendation of the Korry Report is to negotiate a cocoa agreement and such an agreement is an integral part of our program for Africa.

2. The U.S. has been blamed for the failure to reach an agreement last year when all consuming countries except the U.S. were willing to go along. African countries in particular charged that our position was negative and inflexible because the U.S. cocoa industry strongly opposed an agreement.

3. The Government of Ghana initiated bilateral talks with us to break the impasse. They accepted all our requirements on how the agreement should operate and came down from 22 cents to 20 cents on the minimum price on the condition that we also accept this compromise. If we accept this price, we would be in agreement with Ghana on the main outlines of an agreement.

4. We have already met with our industry advisory group to discuss the results of our talks with Ghana and to ask for their comments. The Advisory Group consists of manufacturers, cocoa traders, and confectioners; Clark Clifford's firm is their Washington representative. They have always worked closely with us but they prefer that there be no cocoa agreement. Their preliminary reaction was essentially negative. We do not anticipate any change in their position despite the favorable outcome of our talks with Ghana.

5. Should an agreement be negotiated by the end of the year, which is the earliest possible time, we would seek Congressional approval sometime in 1968. There might not be enough time to complete action before the end of the session.

6. We assume the legislation would have rough going in the Congress. The industry probably would be opposed—either passively or actively. The grounds for their opposition would be weak but they could play on Congressional prejudice against commodity agreements. On the other hand, domestic groups concerned with African political and economic development would support the agreement as a major U.S. foreign policy initiative in relations with developing countries.

7. Acceptance of a minimum price of 20 cents and reaching agreement with Ghana would put us in a favorable position internationally and would place the responsibility for making further progress on the producers. They will have their difficulties. In any event, the U.S. would be relieved of the onus of obstructing an agreement.

8. We believe it is essential that we take advantage of our understanding with Ghana to eliminate a major source of friction in our relations with African countries. Arthur Goldberg believes that our rigidity on the price issue on cocoa has prejudiced the U.S. position at the UN. Since the Ghanaians conceded to us on all the main issues and compromised on the price issue, a failure to move would subject us to widespread and serious criticism. The fact is that the cocoa producing countries are among the more moderate elements in Africa and have supported us on many occasions.

The kind of agreement we can now expect to negotiate would enable us to demonstrate to Congress that we are helping the economic development of producers without injury to the U.S. consumer or the U.S. industry. Even if the Congress initially rejects an agreement, the U.S. would still be in a better position than if the Administration showed unwillingness to accept a reasonable settlement. A major effort may well be required to convince the Congress and the industry of the need for an agreement, but it is of the greatest importance to our relationship with Africa that we make this effort.

Nicholas deB Katzenbach 5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. Confidential. An attached June 30 memorandum from Solomon to Katzenbach indicates that Solomon prepared the attached memorandum in accordance with the decision made at Katzenbach's staff meeting on June 23 and asks Katzenbach to sign it.

2 Entitled “Basis for U.S.-Ghana Understanding,” not printed here, but a telegraphic text of the same document is printed as Document 346.

3 A typed notation on the source text indicates that Walt Rostow informed John P. Walsh (S/S) on July 7 that the President had approved the recommendation and that E had been similarly advised on the same date.

4 Not printed.

5 Printed from a copy that indicates Katzenbach signed the original.

346. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 346. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 1

Washington, July 7, 1967, 10:01 p.m.

3253. Ref: State Circular 215393.2 Subject: Cocoa Agreement. Following is text of understandings reached at Ghana-US talks on operation of international cocoa agreement:3

1. Buffer Stock Mechanism

a. All cocoa—both that arising from quota cuts and surplus emerging at the end of year—must be sold to Buffer Stock. In the case of cocoa made surplus by quota cuts during the year, producers have option of cancelling contract if quota cuts are restored during year.

b. Buffer Stock buys surplus cocoa (up to each country's share) at minimum price with appropriate differentials, subject to the following conditions: (1) 50% payment on delivery of cocoa and (2) remaining 50% when and if cocoa is sold and all costs and carrying charges have been met.

c. Each exporting country is allocated a share of the Buffer Stock capacity, proportionate to its basic quota. Any additional surplus cocoa is purchased at the margarine price, but can be held by the Buffer Stock for possible subsequent resale if conditions warrant. Cocoa purchased at the margarine price would be paid for in full on delivery. If such cocoa is subsequently resold for normal market uses, the difference between the margarine price and the minimum price would be paid after all costs and carrying charges have been met.

d. Buffer Stock buys surplus cocoa directly from producing countries; it does not operate in spot or futures markets. Buffer Stock buys cocoa beans only—no products. It sells cocoa to the market under conditions set by Council and through established channels of trade.

e. At end of agreement, Buffer Stock funds and assets shall be transferred to successor agreement in amounts decided by Council. If cocoa agreement is not renewed, any cocoa in Buffer Stock would be sold on an agreed basis, designed to minimize market disruption. Funds then shall be used for purpose of economic development in producing countries, through regional development banks or such other means as may be agreed. Such funds would be earmarked for use in producing countries in proportion to sales levies paid.

2. Trade Barriers—Tariff Preferences

It is desirable that a solution to the problem of tariff preferences should be sought during the course of negotiations of a cocoa agreement.

3. Allocation of Votes

It was recognized that as a general principle votes should be distributed in proportion to each country's share in world trade. It was recognized that allocation of votes among producers and among consumers need not necessarily be done in the same manner, as producers may wish to allocate a minimum number of votes to each small producer. No maximum limit should be placed on the number of votes held by any member.

4. Prefinancing

It was agreed that prefinancing is not a major issue to be resolved. In view of the current and short-term prospects for the cocoa market, there would appear to be adequate time for funds to be accumulated from the sales levy. If these accumulated funds did not prove to be entirely adequate, resort could be had to financing from commercial and other sources. The subject of contingency financing should be explored by a Working Party after negotiations are concluded.

5. Indicator Price—Minimum Price—Price Range

It was noted that the indicator price reflects the current market price of the lowest grade of cocoa deliverable on the Exchanges, and that other cocoa normally commands a higher price. The price range should be 8–10 cents, with the minimum and maximum prices serving as guidelines for appropriate action under the agreement. There will be one intervention point above the minimum price requiring a quota cut and an additional quota cut would be required at the minimum price. A trigger point near the top of the range requiring Buffer Stock sales might be introduced, but in any event all cocoa in the Buffer Stock would be offered for sale at the maximum price. The minimum price will be 20 cents and the intervention price 21 cents.

6. Standby Operation of the Agreement

It is anticipated that under conditions such as the present, the sales quota and other stabilization features of the Agreement would not be operative. In all circumstances, however, sales would be registered and the levy collected so that surplus cocoa could be effectively removed when world over-supply occurs.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Morton Abramowitz (E/ORF/TRP) on July 7; cleared by William Kling (AF/AFI), Liane Atlas (IO/OES), and Bashkin (Commerce); and approved by Fried. Sent to Accra, Abidjan, Lagos, Lome, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, USUN, Geneva, Bern, Bonn, London, Paris, and The Hague.

2 Circular telegram 215393, June 23, quoted the text of a message to be delivered to Prebisch on June 26, informing him of the progress made in the U.S.-Ghanaian talks on cocoa but requesting postponement of the New York meeting of the cocoa consultative group on July 10 to allow for more time for these bilateral discussions as well as consultation with the U.S. consumer colleagues. (Ibid.)

3 During a conversation with Ghanaian Ambassador Abraham B. B. Kofi on January 12, Assistant Secretary Solomon suggested among other things that it “might be useful for Ghana as largest producer and US as largest consumer to have quiet bilateral talks to seek areas of agreement and make progress toward successful negotiation. Ambassador Kofi reacted with enthusiasm and said he was about to make same proposal.” (Circular telegram 119626, January 16; ibid.) These bilateral talks began in earnest in Washington on June 20.

347. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 347. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Posts 1

Washington, July 7, 1967, 10:04 p.m.

3254. Subject: Cocoa Agreement. Ref: A—State Circular 215393; B—State Circular 3253.2

1. As reported ref A, we recently held informal discussions with Ghana at her request to see if we could reach consensus on main elements of international cocoa agreement. Both countries viewed talks as possible means of avoiding the fruitless multilateral negotiations of the past and enhancing prospects for agreement.

2. We have completed consultation and mutually agree we could support main elements of agreement along lines set forth in reference B. These provide for a buffer stock mechanism which can effectively protect against sharp falls in cocoa prices without disturbing normal channels of trade, without direct intervention of buffer stock on spot and futures markets, and without providing incentive to over-production all of which consuming countries have consistently demanded.

3. On basis agreement of how buffer mechanism would work, U.S. was able to express willingness to accept minimum price of 20 cents and intervention price of 21 cents. It was understood by both parties that all elements were agreed to as part of one interrelated package.

4. It is understood that Ghana will now attempt to get agreement of other producing countries to this understanding. We will await report her efforts. If Ghana successful in gaining agreement of producers, believe solid basis would exist for Prebisch to reconvene cocoa consultative group along lines reftel.

5. Please pass text of our understanding to pertinent host country officials with above explanation and pointing to our belief that understanding represents sound basis for negotiation of agreement. We are also calling in representatives addressee countries who have expressed interest to give them memorandum of understanding.

6. Please report reaction.

7. Geneva please pass text of understanding to UNCTAD.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. Limited Official Use. Drafted by Fried and Abramowitz; cleared by Kling, Liane Atlas, and Bashkin (Commerce); and approved by Assistant Secretary Solomon. Sent to Bern, Bonn, London, Paris, The Hague, and Geneva and repeated to USUN.

2 See Document 346 and footnote 2 thereto.

348. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 348. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, August 26, 1967, 1618Z.

628. Subject: Cocoa Meeting. Ref: Geneva 615.2

1. US opened meeting by suggesting US-Ghana agreement be discussed paragraph by paragraph for clarification instead of taking questions at random. Chairman by pre-arrangement quickly supported idea. This brought protest from Cameroon, Nigeria, Brazil, and France (Janton). Latter said he didn't come here only to take note of any US-Ghana paper. Cameroon and Nigeria said they didn't agree that US-Ghana paper was reason for the meeting. Ghana and UK suggested that paper be circulated as conference document. This was agreed over strong opposition and immediately French, Spanish and Russian texts were demanded. The discussion however brought to light a position paper agreed to by the producers alliance (pouched Dept.)3 and it was decided this too would be circulated.

2. The Chairman then went through the US-Ghana paper section by section and by close of day all sections except tariff preferences and standby nature of agreement were discussed. Ivory Coast speaking for alliance led off each discussion and gave producers view. Following differences emerged:

3. Mechanism. Producers want buffer stock to have authority to intervene directly in market in exceptional circumstances when Council approves by special vote. Brazil does not agree to mandatory sales to buffer stock. A new concept was introduced—if one or more countries share of the buffer stock was exhausted, producers would permit countries to make arrangements among themselves to utilize unused capacity allocated to other countries.

4. Voting. There was strong opposition from both producer and consumer (France, Swiss and Netherlands) to US or Ghana having veto power with Coffee Agreement cited as precedent against. Fact that EEC's total votes would give them veto power did not seem objectionable. Suggestions were made for various possible compromises and Secretariat asked to develop voting formula for consideration next meeting.

5. Price range. Producers want price range of 10 cents. Nigeria would settle for 8 cents if they could get decent minimum price. UK, Germans, Swiss want 8 cents. France wants more than one cent spread between minimum price and intervention price. Janton suggested minimum 21 cents, maximum 30 cents, intervention prices at 23 and 28 cents.

6. Minimum price. Producers want basis for price negotiation to be 20 to 22 cents. Brazil wants to start from 22 cents. Ivory Coast pointed out Ghana had agreed to 20–22 cents, then went on to say as member alliance UK suggested 19–21 cents at New York, EEC now willing to negotiate in range of 19.5 to 21.5 cents. When Chairman asked if this true, Germans as EEC spokesman said there is no formal proposal of EEC but consultations still going on. Fact is that EEC has withdrawn its offer of this range when it did not prove acceptable to AOT's. (See paragraph 8 of Geneva's 615)4 It is difficult interpret what this actually means. It seems impossible to believe that at this stage producers want to keep open the possibility of 22 cent minimum.

7. Producers accepted US/Ghana view as to pre-financing buffer stock without comment other than hope that sales levy would be reduced or eliminated as soon as possible. Discussion conducted in terms one-cent levy without apparent objection or reservation.

8. Chairman noted that US position on price was on table and asked for other consumers views. When no one would speak he said he was stopping price discussion and would talk privately to each head of delegation on Monday. Issue of tariff preferences will be discussed on Monday and Russians have indicated they wish make statement.

9. In private discussions with African dels (Ghana, Nigeria, Ivory Coast) we keep emphasizing that US-Ghana agreement came about as result genuine effort US authorities to help producers by obtaining cocoa agreement to stabilize export earnings. We also make clear we came here on the understanding that African producers had accepted these principles as basis for agreement. Africans responded with reassurance that in the end Ghana/US principles would be adopted but that it is necessary allow few days of debate to avoid appearance they are rubber-stamping agreement. It is difficult reconcile these assurances with formal positions they are taking in meetings and in writing as outlined above.

10. Chairman asked trade advisers to meet Saturday5 morning to deal with problem of buffer stock buying cocoa at minimum price with appropriate differentials for various growths and grades. It is now becoming apparent that Ghana believes it will receive 20 cents minimum price plus market differentials that could bring its total return to 22–23 cents and that buffer stock also pays freight costs. There are also indications that Ghana is trying to convince other producers to accept 20 cent minimum on grounds their actual return will be substantially more.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Accra, Abidjan, Bonn, The Hague, Lagos, London for Jacobs, Paris, Rio de Janeiro, Rome, Yaounde, and USUN.

2 Telegram 615 from Geneva, August 25, summarized the proceedings of the first meeting of the Cocoa Consultative Group. (Ibid.)

3 "Positions Adopted on Certain Issues To Serve as Basis for Discussions on UNCTAD's Consultative Meeting on the Draft International Cocoa Agreement” (TD/COCOA 1/CONS/CRP–2, August 25), sent in airgram A–131 from Geneva, August 30. (Ibid., INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD)

4 This paragraph reads: “EEC officials have apparently been working for some time to obtain agreement between EEC countries and AOT's. EEC has agreed to a price range of 19.5 to 21.5 as basis for negotiations of minimum price. Dutch, however, have made it clear they will not go higher than 20 cents. Germans willing to go 20.5 cents, French to anything producers want. In long meeting Thurday morning EEC and AOT's were apparently unable to agree on a common basis for an agreement. On the price issue the AOT's refused to accept the range indicated above and stood on their previously agreed 20–22 cents. EEC and AOT's will meet again Friday.” (Ibid.)

5 August 26.

349. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 349. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission in Geneva 1

Washington, August 29, 1967, 0010Z.

28307. Deliver Callanan 9:00 a.m. August 29. Transmit following personal message from Solomon to Prebisch:

"I intended telephone you last night but because lateness hour decided send you this message instead. I am greatly concerned about reports I have received that other members Consultative Group apparently regard US/Ghanaian understanding2 as basis for further negotiation. It had been clear understanding that US/Ghanaian memorandum had been accepted by African producers as basis for agreement and it was for this reason that meeting Consultative Group scheduled. I need not remind you of efforts made to reach agreement with Ghanaians on behalf African producers. I hope you clearly aware that any significant departure from substance of memorandum of understanding is outside the authorization I worked so hard to get. Given the assurances that I gave in good faith on basis the understanding with Ghana, it would make it impossible for me to recommend to my superiors significant alterations.”

At discretion Delegation give similar communication to Hackman.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Limited Official Use; Priority. Drafted by Julius L. Katz on August 28, cleared by Assistant Secretary Solomon and Samuel Z. Westerfield, Jr. (AF), and approved by Katz.

2 See Document 346.

350. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 350. Letter From Secretary of State Rusk to Secretary of Defense McNamara 1

Washington, September 1, 1967.

Dear Bob:

I share your concern about the prospective budget deficit and want to be helpful. The sales program you suggest in your letter of August 18,2 however, poses problems not merely for the State Department but for the Administration as a whole.

As you will recall, it was the President who decided to limit the rubber sales program as of July 1, 1967 to 70,000 tons (or the amount of actual government use, whichever higher)3 because of the developments in the international market for natural rubber and the importance of rubber-derived revenues to producing countries. Since then, natural rubber prices have continued to decline and on August 28 stood at an 18-year low of 18–3/4 cents per pound. A price decline of one cent per pound represents an export earnings loss for Malaysia, which exports about 1 million tons annually, of about $22.4 million. For all rubber growing countries as a group the earnings loss is about $51.5 million, most of it hitting Southeast Asia.

Tin also presents problems. The buffer stock of the International Tin Agreement is buying tin to support prices which are now at a three-year low. This means the under-developed tin producers (Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and Bolivia) are in effect buying the tin GSA sells. The only reason we are getting away with it is that we have an arrangement with the Tin Council which has the effect of keeping GSA sales at the present rate of about 6,000 tons per year. If we took steps to raise the sales rate, there would be world-wide protest, not only from these countries but also from UNCTAD and from the Latin Americans who would charge a violation of the President's commitments at Punta del Este.

Notwithstanding these very major considerations, I have asked my staff to have another hard look at the situation regarding commodities mentioned in your letter, as well as other commodities in surplus, in order to see what possibilities exist for stepping up the sales program in the current fiscal year. For example, there may be some means of expanding rubber sales by extending government-use programs beyond tires and tubes to other products incorporating rubber. My people will be in touch with their counterparts in DOD and GSA.

Regarding the two other items you named specifically, tungsten and abaca fibre, I am informed (1) that the tungsten target you mentioned will probably be met, and (2) that the Department will, notwithstanding the Philippine problem, raise no objection to an increased abaca disposal rate.

With warm regards,

Sincerely,

Dean

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 72 A 2468, 400.23. No classification marking.

2 Not found.

3 Not further identified.

351. Intelligence Note From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denny) to Secretary of State Rusk 351. Intelligence Note From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denny) to Secretary of State Rusk 1

Washington, September 6, 1967.

No. 719

SUBJECT

Geneva Consultative Meeting: Bitter Cocoa

Fruitless Conclave Again. For the tenth time in two and one-half years an international cocoa meeting convened—this time in Geneva during the last week in August—and, as in the past, accomplished very little. Seven of the principal producers, four African and three Latin American, and seven leading consuming nations met under UNCTAD auspices to decide whether a full-fledged negotiating conference should be held.

A Bewildering Failure. The US and Ghana reached an understanding in June on the basic principles of an agreement on cocoa,2 a commodity not heretofore subjected to international commodity control. Ghana was to obtain the agreement of the other producing countries to this understanding. If it did, the US would then agree to attend another meeting of the cocoa consultative group. In early August the Ghanaian Government told our Embassy in Accra that it had obtained “unqualified” agreement from Nigeria and the Ivory Coast, and the concurrence of Cameroon and Togo. Brazil submitted a request for the “clarification of certain points.” At Geneva, however, the other producers denied that they had agreed to the terms worked out by the US and Ghana. Indeed, the delegate of Cameroon said he had never seen them.

Like Ships Passing in the Night. Thus, the principles agreed upon by the largest consumer and the largest producer were not generally accepted by the group, presumably owing to a misunderstanding or a series of them. The US viewed the bilateral agreement as a final understanding and, except on technical details, not negotiable. The Africans other than Ghana resented the drafting of an agreement without their participation, and they rejected the take-it-or-leave-it basis on which it was presented.

During the talks, France was quite difficult; Cameroon raised all sorts of problems; Nigeria did not always attend; the Ivory Coast “if'd and but'd;” and even Ghana equivocated. Brazil was especially intransigent on the minimum price and on the preferences given the African associates of the EEC. At adjournment therefore many important issues remained to be resolved. Yet the group announced it would reconvene in late September, making fairly optimistic remarks on the likelihood of success.

And Next Time? The International Coffee Organization is now in session in London, trying to reach agreement on the renewal of the coffee agreement. Two of the three leading coffee producers are Brazil and the Ivory Coast. Should the London meeting fail, these two—which are also the third- and fourth-ranked cocoa producers—may not be willing to return to Geneva to discuss cocoa this year. Even if this hurdle is successfully negotiated, the odds remain heavily weighted against a successful cocoa meeting, assuming the US will stand pat on its position.

In the unlikely event that a cocoa agreement is reached, it is by no means certain that it will come into operation. The American chocolate industry opposes the ratification of this (or any other) agreement; the prospects for Congressional approval are therefore clouded at best.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 4. Confidential; No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem.

2 See Document 346.

352. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 352. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, October 4, 1967, 0956Z.

1071. SUBJECT: Cocoa Consultations. Ref: Geneva 1036.2

1. Late Tuesday3 evening producers and consumers agreed on package deal containing essential elements cocoa agreement. Package is essentially that described para 8 Geneva 1036. While producer dels here have accepted package they did request time to telephone governments for final approval.

2. US del made strong effort as instructed Dept.'s 475014 to hold lower level free zone below 24 cents to extent that Chairman forced cancel three scheduled meetings including plenary while US del met privately with heads producer delegations. US del unable make any impression whatsoever as: (A) producers had certain knowledge that other consumers supported 24.5 cents and some willing to [go] even higher; (B) some consumers advising producers they would oppose any lower price; (C) producers willing gamble US would not break up conference in face UNCTAD II; and (D) Chairman unwilling present any figure lower that 24.5 cents. At insistence US del Chairman did get clarification and acceptance by producers of other open points and then US del finally gave in and accepted package.

3. Initial reaction of industry advisers was one of anger and disillusionment at what they called betrayal by Solomon and Fried as to standby nature of agreement.5

4. Schedule for Wednesday includes plenary to consider report of buffer stock working party, approve final text of package and decide on when negotiation conference should be called. Voting will be discussed by consumers but final settlement left to conference. Brazil has not mentioned preference issue since early in meeting.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Abidjan, Accra, Bonn, The Hague, Lagos, London, Paris for USOECD, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, and USUN.

2 Dated October 1 (incorrectly dated September 1). (Ibid.)

3 October 3.

4 Dated October 2. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD)

5 On October 9 from New York, the U.S. cocoa trade and industry issued a statement criticizing U.S. acceptance of the international cocoa agreement. It noted that “despite assurances from government officials that they would not join in a scheme which is unworkable and uneconomic, they have now agreed to a price and quota mechanism completely at variance with their own assurances and contrary to the considered advice of the total industry. It is regrettable that political considerations have obscured the economic shortcomings of the proposed plan.” The statement further complained that “the proposed agreement would create an unnecessarily cumbersome international bureaucracy which must inevitably threaten the free market in cocoa” and cause “at great administrative cost many more problems than it cures and will restrict the continued expansion of the cocoa economy.” (Text in circular telegram 51541 to 11 posts, October 10; ibid., INCO–COCOA 4)

353. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 353. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, October 5, 1967, 0915Z.

1082. Deliver George Jacobs E Bureau 9 am Friday.

1. Following is complete text memorandum of agreement adopted at final plenary Oct 4 Cocoa Consultative Group:

"At the Cocoa consultations held in Geneva from 25 September to 4 October 1967, the following matters were unanimously agreed by the delegations represented at the consultations for inclusion in the agreement to be concluded at a resumed United Nations Cocoa Conference.

1. If, at the time the Council fixes annual sales quotas under Article 29, the indicator price is between 24–1/2 and 28 cents, quotas do not become immediately operative, unless the Council by special vote decides to put them in operation.

2. Where quotas are not in operation, producing countries may not sell more than [75 per cent]2 of their annual quota in the first two quarters or [95 per cent] in the first three quarters.

3. If the indicator price falls to 24–1/2 cents, the quotas set at the beginning of the year automatically come into operation. (A) When indicator price moves downwards from 24–1/2 cents, at 22 cents: the Council would meet to review the market situation and to decide, by special vote, on possible action to defend the minimum price (20 cents). (Footnote one: The possibility of a sales quota cut is not excluded.) At 21 cents (lower intervention price): automatic sales quota cut of 3–1/2 per cent unless the Council decides on a different figure under Article 33. At 20 cents: further automatic sales quota cut of 3–1/2 per cent. (B) When indicator price moves upwards from 20 cents, at 22 cents: restoration of the sales quota cut made at 20 cents. At 23 cents: restoration of the sales quota cut made at 21 cents. At 24–1/2 cents: if quotas are in operation and if the indicator price rises to 24–1/2 cents, the Council shall be convened and shall meet within 10 days. If the Council is not able, within 5 working days, to come to an agreement by special vote on whether to retain or increase or suspend quotas, then quotas shall be suspended automatically unless in the meantime the indicator price has declined below 24–1/2 cents. (C) When indicator price moves upwards from 24–1/2 cents to 29 cents, at 29 cents: Council meets to review market situation and to decide, by special vote, on possible action. (Footnote two: The possibility of sales from the buffer stocks is not excluded.) To defend the maximum price (29 cents), at 28 cents (upper intervention price): automatic suspension of sales quotas if any are in effect and commencement of mandatory sales from buffer stock.

4. It was also understood that a resolution or an explanatory note of the conference would provide that, during the consideration of a new agreement under paragraph (2) of Article 64, a study should be made of the desirability of authorizing the Council to take special measures to defend the minimum price in exceptional circumstances.

5. Basic quotas. It was agreed that the following criteria should apply in determining basic quotas: (1) for the first two years of the agreement, the highest annual production figures during the last eight years, including the 1959/60 crop year, for each producing country.”

2. Text also pouched major producer/consumer capitals by airgram.3

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Unclassified; Immediate.

2 All brackets in the source text.

3 Airgram A–183 from Geneva to the Department of State and 11 posts, October 5. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3)

354. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 354. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Rostow) to President Johnson 1

Washington, November 3, 1967.

SUBJECT

Authorization to Sign the International Grains Arrangement

At Tab A is Nick Katzenbach's memo recommending that you authorize the Secretary or Acting Secretary of Agriculture to sign the International Grains Arrangement.2 John Schnittker and Bill Roth concur in this recommendation. If you approve, a full power authorizing this is at Tab B for your signature.3

The International Grains Arrangement carries out the bargain on cereals we negotiated in the Kennedy Round. It will replace the International Wheat Agreement of 1962, which we signed. It is more advantageous to us than the old Wheat Agreement because: —It sets higher minimum and maximum prices for wheat moving in world trade—which could benefit us as wheat exporters.

—It obligates other countries, for the first time, to share responsibility with us for food aid. The Arrangement provides for an annual 4–1/2 million ton food aid program. Our share is 42% or 1.9 million tons, in grain. Others will supply 2.6 million tons a year—either in grain or cash.

The Arrangement is open for signature until November 30. Since we pushed it, we should sign as early as possible. Other countries are waiting for our lead.

The Arrangement would be sent to the Senate as a treaty. Katzenbach will probably recommend that this be done early this month, but this is for your later decision. (We will still have a separate memo for you setting forth the issues.)

Schnittker and Roth do not expect serious difficulty in getting Senate approval.

—They discussed the Grains Arrangement at various times with Senators Carlson, Church, McGovern, Mondale, Young and Burdick. (Carlson said Fulbright has no problem with it.)

—They met Tuesday with Senators McCarthy, Hickenlooper and Carlson (the only members of the Foreign Relations Committee who showed up for the session). Carlson again indicated his support; Hickenlooper didn't say no, and McCarthy told Schnittker afterward there would be no problem in the Senate.

—Only Senators Mundt, Curtis, Hruska and Miller are expected to actively oppose.

All the major farm organizations, except the Farm Bureau, support the Arrangement. The Farm Bureau opposes it—as they do all commodity agreements as well as domestic farm programs.

I recommend you authorize signing the Arrangement on behalf of the United States.

W. W. Rostow 4

(If you approve we need your signature on the Full Power at Tab B.)

No

Speak to me5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Fried Files, Chron September 1, 1967–November 30, 1967 [1 of 2], Box 2. No classification marking. Drafted by Fried.

2 To President Johnson, dated November 1, not printed.

3 Not found, but see footnote 5 below.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

5 None of the options is checked. A handwritten note in the margin reads: “11/6/67—Hopkins secy said President approved.” William J. Hopkins was Executive Assistant in the White House. Subsequently, on November 8, President Johnson announced that Acting Secretary of Agriculture Schnittker had that day signed the new International Grains Arrangement for the United States Government, and he summarized its provisions. Text in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1967, Book II, pp. 1000–1001. On January 25, 1968, he submitted the treaty to the Senate. Text of the President's statement is ibid., 1968–69, Book II, pp. 66–67. The Senate adopted a resolution of advice and consent on June 13, and the President signed the instrument of ratification on June 15. (Memorandum from Walt Rostow to the President, June 14; Johnson Library, National Security File, Fried Files, Chron May 2–July 31, 1968, Box 2) Text of the agreement is in 19 UST 5499.

355. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 355. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 1

Brussels, November 6, 1967, 1807Z.

2687. Subject: EC Poultry Levies. Ref: State 63715.2

1. Mission today conveyed to responsible Commission officials strong U.S. objections to Community action on poultry along lines State 63715. We emphasized particularly likely Congressional reaction, regrettable pre-holiday timing, discriminatory violation of GATT Art. 1 and fact that this sort of action plays into hands of forces in U.S. who want to restrict imports into U.S.

2. We called on Deniau who took note of U.S. protest. We saw Jonder, Mansholt's Chef de Cabinet, who appreciated serious political implications and promised to bring matter to Mansholt's attention soonest. We also talked to Hijzen this morning before he left for Geneva. Hijzen's answer was that EC had offered to mind these items in GATT but that U.S. has not been interested. We have requested appointments with Rabot and Mansholt and will follow up with Commission officials generally.

3. We did not bring matter directly to attention Council because Council did not take action to which we object. Management committee made recommendation to Commission which approved by written procedure.

4. Recommend Embassies in member states convey gist of State 63715 to host governments.

Vest

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY EEC. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

2 In telegram 63715 to Brussels, the Mission was instructed to make “urgent and strongest possible representation to Council” concerning its October 27 “announcement of increases in supplementary levies on chickens and chicken parts and introduction of supplementary levies on turkey parts,” and was given background on the issues and arguments to be made in presenting the U.S. demarche. (Ibid.)

356. Editorial Note 356. Editorial Note

In the fall of 1967 the Bureau of the Budget asked government agencies to review interagency and advisory committees associated in some manner with the National Security Council. This review resulted in the NSC Staff identifying two “quiescent” committees that “should be formally terminated in line with the President's wish that all unnecessary interagency committees and task forces be eliminated.” One of these was the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives, established by NSAM No. 321, which was created as a temporary committee to do a specific job. NSC Executive Secretary Bromley K. Smith, with the concurrence of Charles E. Johnson, Edward Fried, and Joseph Califano, recommended the termination of this Special Committee. (Memorandum from Smith to Walt Rostow, November 16; Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Action Memoranda, NSAM 321—Review of Strategic Stockpile Objectives, Box 6) On an undated note from Smith to Califano, Califano checked his approval of the “death sentence” of the Special Committee but wrote in the margin, “We are going to put together a new group.” (Ibid.) In a November 17 memorandum to holders of NSAM No. 321, Rostow wrote that because the Special Committee was “no longer the mechanism through which strategic stockpile objectives are currently being studied and reviewed,” he was formally terminating it, effective immediately. (Ibid.)

357. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 357. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 1

Brussels, November 29, 1967, 1715Z.

3211. Pass Agriculture and STR. Subject: Turkey Parts.

1. Malmgren, Katz, Renner, and Albrecht talked with Schlosser and Klein on November 28.

2. We again emphasized that the supplementary levies on turkey parts threatened our trade. It was our impression that the new supplementary levies had been set at a level much higher than necessary to achieve the purpose of the poultry regulations and that extra protection not envisaged in the regulations was included. We urged the Commission to look and look quickly at the figures to see whether the supplementary levies could not be reduced. We stressed that unless corrective steps were taken within a few days irreparable damage would be done to our holiday trade.2

3. Schlosser confirmed Deniau's willingness to re-examine the figures but did not hold out much hope that the Community would act. He said that many Europeans felt that, as a result of US retaliation at the end of the chicken war, the Community was legally free to act as it wished. Schlosser said that the political atmosphere favoring a pragmatic solution might be improved if the US were to make a gesture by rolling back some of its previous retaliation or some other such action. Schlosser made it clear that this was not an offer, but he did want us to think about the point.

4. We protested, asserting that the onus was on the side that disturbed the status quo not on the side that was injured. We claimed that our earlier retaliation was in response to damage done to our chicken exports. What we are now considering is new protection against our exports of turkey parts, a large part of which had been developed after the chicken war.3

5. We finished this dispute by agreeing that it would not be profitable to approach this problem in terms of GATT legalisms. Rather we should both seek a pragmatic solution, bearing in mind political realities on both sides.

6. Schlosser said he would be in touch with us soon. We reiterated the need for speed.

Schaetzel

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY 17 EEC. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

2 Telegram 71345 to Bonn and other missions in Europe, November 18, stressed among other things: “Timing is critical for US poultry industry, especially turkey producers, since industry will be obliged within next few days to make commitments for peak holiday season.” (Ibid., INCO–POULTRY EEC)

3 Documentation on an earlier “chicken war” is in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, volume IX.

358. Aide-Memoire From the Department of State to the British Embassy 358. Aide-Memoire From the Department of State to the British Embassy 1

Washington, November 30, 1967.

The Department of State acknowledges receipt of the British Embassy's Aide-Memoire of November 16, 1967,2 concerning a proposed amendment of Rule 36 under the Wool Products Labeling Act,3 as published in the Federal Register of November 2, 1967.4

The Department of State has carefully noted the views of Her Majesty's Government that the latest revision of the proposed Rule does not appear to take account of points raised in the Embassy's Aide-Memoire of July 21, 1967, that it would have the effect of discriminating against imports of wool products, that it would be contrary to the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and that if the Rule is implemented in its present form Her Majesty's Government would wish to reserve its right to seek redress under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

The Department of State wishes to assure Her Majesty's Government that, far from disregarding the points raised in the Embassy's Aide-Memoire of July 21, 1967, both the Department and the Federal Trade Commission gave long and searching consideration to the views contained therein as well as to the views expressed by other interested Governments.

The Department wishes to assure the British Embassy that Rule 36 is not intended to interfere with foreign trade. The Wool Products Labeling Act of 1939 has long required American wool products manufacturers to keep detailed and costly records of fiber content through all stages of manufacture. Regulations to assure the compliance of imported wool products have, however, been inadequate. The Rule, prompted by exportation of mislabeled wool products to the United States, is designed to provide substantial equality in the administration of the Wool Products Labeling Act as between domestic and imported wool products.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. No classification marking. Drafted by Mary E. McDonnell and Martin Y. Hirabayashi (E/OT/STA) on November 29, and cleared by Joseph K. Newman (EUR/BMI).

2 Attached but not printed.

3 See Document 339.

4  Federal Register, vol. 32, pp. 15180–15184.

359. Information Memorandum From the Acting Director, Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs (Katz) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon) 359. Information Memorandum From the Acting Director, Office of International Commodities, Bureau of Economic Affairs (Katz) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Solomon)1

Washington, December 6, 1967.

SUBJECT

Bill changing price support system for extra long staple cotton

On August 17, 1967, the Bureau of the Budget gave a qualified green light (Tab A)2 to the Ellender Bill, a bill intended to bring the price support system for ELS cotton more into line with that for upland cotton.3 BOB acted after receiving the somewhat conflicting views of the Department (our letter of August 2) and of USDA (Secretary Schnittker's letter of August 10).4 We found the result acceptable.

As Alex Schnee reports in his memorandum of December 1 (Tab B),5 Senator Hayden plans to introduce an ELS bill this week as an amendment to the Commodities Exchange Act.6 We have not seen the Hayden bill and apparently will not see it before it is introduced. Since it is being offered as a floor amendment, committee hearings presumably will not be held. Senator Hayden, unlike Senator Ellender, comes from a state producing ELS.

USDA informs us that this is essentially the Ellender Bill, with one substantive change: The Ellender Bill provided for a national marketing quota “not less than the amount of the (Section 22) import quota in effect for ELS cotton …” The Hayden version apparently provides for a national marketing quota of 82,480 bales, without mentioning the import quota. This is an improvement from our point of view. The arithmetic comes out the same unless the import quota is changed.

Since the Hayden amendment will specify a national marketing quota, it is clear that Point 2 in the BOB letter was rejected.7 Not having seen the amendment, I do not know whether BOB's other suggestions were adopted. I suspect that they were not.

USDA agrees with H that once the Hayden amendment becomes law, the Poage Bill (HR–10915, already passed by the House),8 will be dead. For this reason alone the Hayden amendment merits our support provided that we can live with it, as I believe we can. Peru objects to any bill lowering the support price for ELS; but we can handle this objection. As a practical matter, it would be very difficult for the Department to muster opposition to a bill, not tied to the import quota, specifying a national marketing quota for domestically-produced ELS. This is particularly true in view of the continuing upward movement of cotton prices and the impending shortage of the longer staples of upland cotton (with which domestic ELS is directly competitive). Opposition would be especially difficult if, as expected, the ELS proposal is offered as an amendment to the Commodities Exchange Act.

Recommendation

I recommend that the Department make no effort to block the Hayden amendment, barring unforeseen developments after it is introduced and its exact wording becomes known.9

1 Source: Department of State, EB/FTD Files: Lot 73 D 183, Ellender (Hayden) Bill 1967. Limited Official Use. Drafted by George H. Alexander (E/ORF/ICD/FTD) and cleared by Judith M. Denton (ARA/LA/EP), Jack R. Johnstone (NEA/UAR), Albert Post (AF/AFN), and Harry M. Phelan, Jr. (E/FTD). Katz changed this memorandum from “action” to “info” by hand on the source text.

2 Letter from Wilfred H. Rommel, Assistant Director for Legislative Reference, Bureau of the Budget, to Secretary of Agriculture Freeman, August 17, not printed.

3 The Ellender Bill, the contents of which are generally described in Rommel's letter (see footnote 3 above), has not been further identified.

4 Neither letter has been found.

5 Memorandum for the file by Alexander Schnee (H), December 1, not printed.

6 H.R. 13094, the Commodity Exchange Act, was passed by the House of Representatives on November 30, but the Senate did not complete action on it during 1967.

7 Point 2 in the BOB letter (see footnote 3 above) reads: “No commitment is made at this time as to the size of the 1968 acreage allotment or marketing quota. We believe it essential to get one or two years' experience before any significant upward adjustments are made.”

8 Over the opposition of the Johnson administration, the House of Representatives on October 30 passed H.R. 10915, which would have taken away the extra-long staple cotton quota from countries (i.e., UAR and the Sudan) that had severed diplomatic relations with the United States within a year prior to enactment and transferred these foreign quotas to U.S. producers. The Senate did not act on this legislation during 1967.

9  Katz crossed out this paragraph and the approval/disapproval lines and wrote the following note: “Tony: I'm sure you agree we should not take on this losing battle, even if we had reason to, which we don't. JLK.”

360. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 360. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 1

Brussels, December 7, 1967, 1746Z.

3434. Pass Agriculture. Subject: Supplementary Poultry Levies.

1. Commission official informed us that at December 6 Management Committee meeting no changes were recommended on the levies on turkeys or turkey parts.

2. He said that this lack of action should, in fact, be interpreted as action favorable to United States' interests, and we should recognize it as such. His explanation was that the price information the Management Committee had before it would have justified increased levies, e.g. an 80 percent increase in the supplementary levy on whole turkeys of about 5 cents.

3. Source reiterated that Commission should be given recognition for action it had taken which indicated that our views and representations had been taken into account.

4. Source urged U.S. officials to hold this information, especially paragraph 2, closely and to use it with great discretion in order to avoid a situation in which the Commission would be forced to impose the increases.

5. We hope to obtain tomorrow details concerning other recommendations that may have been made by Poultry Management Committee.

Schaetzel

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY EEC. Confidential; Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, London, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

361. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 361. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, December 19, 1967, 1605Z.

2112. Subject: Cocoa Conference.2 Ref: Geneva 2099,3 Dept 86440.4

1. Executive Committee met for final session Tuesday5 am. Chairman Ali in brief report outlined items under consideration for package deal by Group of 14. He said he had been optimistic until he was informed yesterday by one consumer that it could not accept two elements of the package. He pointed out that considerable progress had been made on administrative and legal articles, and enumerated a number of controversial points that were now agreed. He suggested that the Executive Committee adjourn at this stage and leave it to the discretion of Dr. Prebisch as to when conference should be reconvened. He also suggested the possibility of meetings of the Group of 14 in the interim, at the call of Dr. Prebisch, and said the Secretariat would prepare and circulate a new draft agreement showing the position as of the date of adjournment.

2. Eighteen countries then spoke, many at length, to the Chairman's report. The Ivory Coast, Nigeria and Ecuador were the most critical of the United States, all saying it would be senseless to schedule any more meetings until the United States gave some positive indication that it had the political will to join an international cocoa agreement. Others like Cameroon, Ghana, Brazil also singled the U.S. out as responsible for the lack of progress, but the tone of their remarks was less harsh. On the whole the reaction was not as strong as the USDel expected, with the possible exception of the Ivory Coast. All speeches were flavored with references to UNCTAD II, and U.S. failure to accept the principles of UNCTAD I.

3. Consumers all expressed disappointment at the outcome but emphasized progress made. They all expressed belief a cocoa agreement was negotiable and indicated willingness to cooperate in any future negotiations at any time.

4. USDel made low-key factual statement emphasizing impossibility do six weeks work in three and suggesting that when new draft circulated it would show that substantial amount of progress had been made at this meeting. We also reassured producers of our desire to resume negotiations at any time Prebisch considered opportune. To defuse any contention that conference had broken up on one single issue of sales quota mechanism we enumerated twelve additional problems with significant policy content which had not been settled or in some cases even discussed, and we noted two proposals we were unable to accept went beyond memorandum of agreement and that we had made our own proposals on them and were prepared to resume discussions at next session.

5. The meeting agreed to leave the decision as to whether and when working groups should be called or the conference reconvened to the discretion of Dr. Prebisch. There was no mention of the possibility of a January meeting—all references were to resuming work in April after UNCTAD II. Secretariat and Chairman will issue press release later today.6

6. Netherlands did not withdraw support of amendment on proc-essed cocoa. After talk with his Minister, Dutch Del got approval maintain support on grounds (1) they had asked for U.S. support initially and could not back down now (2) withdrawal would not lessen criticism of Dutch at UNCTAD II.

7. We had already or have carried out other suggestions Dept's 86440. Some delegations background statements to press used such words as “breakup” or “failure” but concluding tone meeting was more constructive and we believe Chairman's press release will be also, although U.S. will probably be spotted as obstacle to agreement on quota and buffer stock mechanism issues.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Abidjan, Accra, Bonn, The Hague, Lagos, London, Rio de Janeiro, Yaounde, and USUN.

2 The UNCTAD cocoa negotiating conference met in Geneva November 28–December 20.

3 Telegram 2099 from Geneva, December 18, summarized a package agreement made by Chairman Osman Ali that morning. Although several other “consuming” nations were prepared to abandon a previously agreed position and accept the package, the U.S. delegation objected that some of the proposals in it “went much too far and could not be accepted.” Despite producers' expected criticisms of the U.S. position, the U.S. delegation concluded that “we will maintain that an agreement acceptable to all is possible with further orderly negotiations.” (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3)

4 Telegram 86440 to Geneva, December 19, agreed that the United States could not accept the package “in view unsatisfactory nature several specific aspects Chairman's proposal” and supported the delegation's suggestion to explain to delegations “that certain progress has been made, that the issues are difficult and more time is needed, that we are committed to working out a viable agreement, and that we are prepared and hope to resume negotiations in near future.” (Ibid.)

5 December 19.

6 Text of the substantive paragraphs of this December 19 press release was transmitted in telegram 2116 from Geneva, December 20. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3)

362. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 362. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 1

Brussels, January 27, 1968, 1400Z.

4323. Subject: Poultry. Ref: Brussels 41282 and Geneva 2322.3

1. In a conversation with Hijzen on January 26 we reminded him that we were waiting for replies from the Commission on both aspects of our poultry problem with the Community. We noted that the Commission owed us a response to our previous indication that the U.S. would be prepared to listen to what the Commission might propose in regard to a possible roll back of some of our previous retaliation. We also pointed out that the U.S. had agreed to refrain for several days requesting the establishing of a GATT working party on poultry so that the Commission could consider the matter further.

2. Hijzen was fully aware that it was up to the Commission to respond on these two matters. He said that the Commission was reviewing these problems but had not yet decided what to do.

3. He described the policy problem before the Commission. On the [one] hand, the Community could not expect the U.S. to refrain from pressing for a GATT working party on poultry unless the Community was prepared to talk with us seriously on a bilateral basis. On the other hand, the Commission could not in all fairness begin bilateral talks with us unless the Community was prepared to offer the U.S. something worthwhile in regard to access. Continuing to think aloud, Hijzen said that in any bilateral talks it probably would be necessary to consider both aspects of the problem, access and subsidies. Hijzen's personal preference would be to talk informally with us about all aspects of the poultry problem.

4. We stressed the importance of beginning rapidly discussions that have good prospects of leading to constructive results. Hijzen promised to get in touch with us on Monday. He thought that he might then be in the position to suggest that a meeting between Commissioner Deniau and Ambassador Schaetzel take place early in that week.

Schaetzel

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY 17 EEC. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, Luxembourg for USEC, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

2 Dated January 18. (Ibid.)

3 Dated January 19. (Ibid.)

363. Memorandum of Conversation 363. Memorandum of Conversation1

Washington, February 7, 1968.

SUBJECT

Rey Visit, Agricultural Trade Problems

PARTICIPANTS

European Communities: Edmund Wellenstein, Director General for External Trade

Theodorus Hijzen, Director, Multilateral Political Commercial Aff.

Michel Hedreul, Asst. Chef de Cabinet to Vice President Barre

United States: John Evans, STR

Harald Malmgren, STR

Theodore Gates, STR

Morton Pomeranz, STR

John Ray, EUR/RPE

Mr. Malmgren explained that our willingness to review our “chicken war” retaliation is related to the conditions of access for our poultry into the Community. We could not now trade off reduction in our retaliation for a reduction in EC export subsidies. We would need something on access.

He said that in Brussels Mr. Schlosser had told us that the ball is now in our court on poultry. So we went ahead in Geneva. We are surprised and disappointed that the EC is not ready for an Article XXII consultation. If the EC's reservations are due to their having a better way to handle the poultry problem, Mr. Malmgren said he'd be happy to learn of it. So far we haven't heard of any other ideas.

He explained that we are under very strong political pressure to act. US poultry producers want unlimited export subsidies. Mr. Malmgren pointed out that the money and the authorization for such a program are available. He said that we could even give the birds away. The USG doesn't want to start such a program. It would be foolish to start competition in subsidies between the CCC and the FEOGA. But we must have some action. If not, we will be forced into a large subsidy program.

Mr. Malmgren said that both sides must give a little. He explained that to do so now would be easier than waiting until later when both sides are locked in. If we are forced to move on subsidies, everyone will become angry. Negotiations will have become just that much more difficult.

Mr. Evans underlined that, although Mr. Deniau had said that there wasn't much use in talking unless our “Chicken War” retaliations were also on the table, these are related to access and not to subsidies. The EC export subsidies on poultry were not involved in the “Chicken War.”

Mr. Hijzen replied that poultry is a political problem for both sides and hence very difficult.

He did not like the idea of discussing in the GATT a problem which involves only the United States, the EC and the Danes. He said it is very difficult to talk usefully in public. Although he strongly preferred bilaterals, he couldn't guarantee success. In fact, as we had failed to come to an agreement in the KR, where offsets in other sectors were possible, he feared that the chances of success in a negotiation limited to poultry are small. He wondered where we can now find counterbalancing offers?

Mr. Hijzen added that, unlike the dairy problem, he didn't feel that the poultry problem was of worldwide scope. An Article XXII consultation just risked exciting everybody's domestic public opinion to no avail.

Messrs. Evans and Malmgren replied that an Article XXII consultation doesn't need to be public, that the press can be kept out. The group doesn't need to meet too often, provided that substantive bilateral discussions are actually taking place and solutions are actively being sought. An Article XXII consultation would be a good place to formalize any agreements reached in such bilateral talks.

Mr. Evans explained the political need for us to take some visible action soon. Useful Article XXII consultations might provide a substitute for unfortunate unilateral action on our part. Although we're not subsidizing our exports now, we will be forced to do so in the near future in the absence of useful talks.

[Here follows discussion of the impact of EC regulations on U.S. exports of canned fruit and tobacco, and of demands by U.S. producers for countervailing duties on canned ham.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY 17 EEC. Confidential. Drafted by John E. Ray on February 26.

364. Editorial Note 364. Editorial Note

On February 6, 1968, the EC Commission approved an increase in the supplementary levy on turkey legs and thighs from third countries from $0.3125 to $0.375 per kilogram, effective February 10. On September 4, the Commission further revised its supplementary levies on poultry imports, eliminating those on whole chickens and chicken halves and quarters. Levies on whole turkeys were reduced from $0.0625 per kilogram to $0.04, and on boned poultry from $0.125 to $0.075. Levies on other poultry products, including turkey legs and thighs, remained unchanged. On October 18, the Commission left unchanged export subsidies for poultry and eggs. (Telegram 4582 from Brussels, February 8; Department of State, Central Files, INCO–POULTRY 17 EEC; telegram 9158 from Brussels, September 6; ibid., INCO–POULTRY EEC; and telegram 10060 from Brussels, October 22; ibid.)

365. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Goldstein) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach) 365. Memorandum From the President's Special Assistant (Goldstein) to the Under Secretary of State (Katzenbach)1

Washington, March 30, 1968.

Your Memcon 4999 of March 20, 1968 has been passed on to me since stockpile is among my areas of concern.2

At page 2 of the Memcon there appears the following: "Mr. Katzenbach observed that we very well might have objected to the industry plan tied to import quotas had we been given the opportunity, but the fact is that we hadn't.”

May I suggest that the statement is not accurate and does place GSA in a strange position.

The import quota aspect of the lead and zinc stockpile disposal deal was discussed on November 20 at a meeting in my office attended by Assistant Secretary Solomon.3

In a memorandum to the President on November 21, 1967,2 I reflected the Department of State's view as follows: The Department of State is concerned with the retaliation which would inevitably come, such as under the provisions of GATT. Of greater importance is the adverse effect the reimposition of quotas would have on your own relationship with the heads of state of Australia and Mexico, our major suppliers, not to mention Canada. In addition, such quotas would be directly contradictory to the position you took and the commitments you made at Punta del Este.

It would be appreciated if a correction were made to all those on your original distribution list. It would be desirable to advise Mr. Judelson as well.

It would facilitate matters if you were to advise me of any further activities of the Department affecting the stockpile.

Ernest Goldstein 4

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, CM (King Crab-Nickel). Confidential. A copy was sent to Solomon.

2 Not found.

3 No other record of this meeting has been found.

2 Not found.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

366. Editorial Note 366. Editorial Note

The United States signed the International Coffee Agreement on March 21, 1968. For text, see 19 UST 6333; TIAS 6584. The agreement, which replaced the 1962 International Coffee Agreement due to expire on September 30, 1968, was sent to the Senate for advice and consent to ratification on April 23. The Senate adopted its resolution advising and consenting to ratification on June 28, and the agreement was ratified on July 10. It entered into force provisionally on October 1 and definitively on December 30.

Legislation to implement the International Coffee Agreement was enacted on October 24. (P.L. 90–634, 82 Stat. 1348)

Documentation on the Johnson administration's role in the ratification process is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Fried Files, Chron, March 1–April 30, 1968, Box 2, and ibid., Memos to the President, Rostow, Vol. 106, Box 42R.

367. Position Paper Prepared for the Delegation to the London and Paris Rubber Meetings 367. Position Paper Prepared for the Delegation to the London and Paris Rubber Meetings1

Washington, undated.

The two attached position papers set forth the detailed positions which the US Delegate should take on various matters which will come up at the Natural and Synthetic Rubber Producers' Consultative Committee Meeting in London, May 22–23, and at the International Rubber Study Group Meeting in Paris, May 27–31.2 This memorandum describes in broader terms the basic position which he should take, the tactics which he should follow and the considerations on which that position and those tactics are based. Essentially, the basic position is similar to that taken in the rubber meetings of October and December, 1967.

The Problems Confronting Rubber Producers

Natural rubber prices are at the lowest level since 1949 (Table 1).3 Although a long-term price decline was anticipated, the sharp drop in 1967 (4 cents a pound and there has been no substantial recovery) pre-sents a serious problem to the principal natural rubber producers. While total export earnings of three of the five major natural rubber producing countries increased from 1960 to 1966 (Table 2), earnings from rubber decreased during the same period in the case of all five—even while total quantities of rubber exported were increasing (Table 3).

The situation in synthetic rubber is less clear because published price data are largely meaningless and prices at which synthetic rubber is sold are closely guarded commercial secrets. Synthetic rubber price data derived from US export statistics indicate, however, that synthetic rubber prices, especially for the major synthetic rubber, “SBR,” have also been declining (Table 4). These data, indicative but not conclusive, tend to bear out comments by synthetic rubber producers, at least those not integrated with rubber manufacturers, that they would also welcome a price rise.

But while certain aspects of the immediate situation are reasonably evident, others are not. Further, while natural rubber seems to be facing a long-term problem, the situation over the longer term (say, through 1975) is obscure.

Lack of Information

Total consumption of all rubber increased from 3.9 million tons in 1960 to 5.8 million tons in 1967 world-wide (except certain East European countries and the Asian communist countries). At what rate will rubber consumption continue to rise? Synthetic rubber's share of the total rubber market increased world-wide from 54% in 1960 to about 63% in 1967; at what rate will this trend continue? What will happen in the communist countries where the use of synthetic is expected to rise? What are the forces affecting the competitive positions of synthetic and natural rubber? What will be the supply/demand balance in both synthetic rubber and natural rubber in 1975? These are some of the major questions confronting producers—and consumers—questions which governments should make every effort to answer before deciding what, if any, international action should be taken on rubber. But while the IRSG has done a great deal of useful work in collecting data on rubber production and consumption it is clear that agreed data on long-term prospects are lacking on which governments, acting collectively or individually, might have to base policy decisions.

Position of LDC's at May Rubber Meetings

The natural rubber governments are going to meet in London just before the consultative meeting. It is difficult to say at this time what proposals will emerge from the meeting of natural rubber producers. The Malaysian Government has informed us, however, that they will want to talk about such matters as a buffer stock and greater cooperation between natural and synthetic producers.

Perhaps the best judgment that can now be made is that the chances are better than even that at London and Paris the natural rubber governments will make proposals for some sort of short-term action, although they may be unable to agree among themselves on, for example, temporary restrictions on production or exports, the establishment of a buffer stock, or some combination of these measures.

There would also appear to be a possibility that there will be proposals for some sort of long term action, for example, the establishment of an international rubber agreement covering both synthetic and natural rubber.

US Position

Regarding any short-term measure, the US Delegate should adopt essentially the position that has been adopted in the past. That is, even if he believes that such measures are unlikely to be successful, he should not object to them provided that they do not call for any commitments on the part of either the US Government or US industry or for any contributions by the US. He should be sympathetic to the problems of the natural rubber producers but at the same time he may point out that such meas-ures may not confer the benefits that their proponents desire.

The US Delegate should refrain from encouraging any proposals for international action over a longer term and should resist any which call for commitments by or contributions from the developed countries. He should note that while many opinions exist, the IRSG has not made a decision collectively as to whether a long-term problem exists. He should argue, in the manner that he deems most appropriate, that the first step is for the IRSG to see whether any problems exist by attempting to arrive at a consensus regarding the rubber situation in the mid-70's.

To buttress his argument the US Delegate may wish to tell other delegates about some preliminary forecasts which the USG has been making by using computer techniques. And clearly, to the extent he can do so, he should enlist support among other developed country governments for the theses that more information and accurate forecasts are needed and that, in the absence of such information and forecasts, any proposals for long term international action are premature. He may, however, wish to elicit informally some views on what forms long term, international action—if indicated—might take.

The US Delegate should be as forthcoming as possible to the wishes of the rubber producing countries regarding the nature and pace of the future work on rubber in the IRSG, in view of (a) the serious problems faced by these countries and (b) the ever-present threat that UNCTAD will preempt the IRSG role in rubber if the producing countries become disillusioned with the Study Group's ability and willingness to help them with their problems. The US Delegate, therefore, need not oppose proposals to study possible forms of international action, except those which the US Government clearly could not accept.

Further Meetings

It is unlikely that the IRSG will be able to complete at Paris basic studies, such as long-term forecasts. The US Delegate may suggest a special meeting of the IRSG Statistical Committee within several months to complete any such work.

He may also agree to another meeting of the Consultative Committee at a time approved by the IRSG Assembly. The US Delegate should note that it is important to have adequate reports so as to provide the bases for substantive discussion by the IRSG at its next session.

Greater Participation by the USSR

The USSR is a recent member of the IRSG but furnishes no statistics, is an observer but not a member of the Consultative Committee, and, in general, does not participate to any great extent in international rubber meetings. Because the Soviet Union is an important producer and consumer of rubber, because there is a need to know more about its activities in rubber, and because of general foreign policy considerations, the Soviet Union should play a greater part at rubber meetings. The US Delegate may give quiet encouragement to the Soviets' assuming a larger role, and he may, if he considers it advisable, urge in low-key that the Soviet Union become a member of the Consultative Committee.

1 Source: Department of State, EB/ICD Files: Lot 81 D 344, ISRG Assembly, London 1968. Limited Official Use. The source text is Tab A to a memorandum from Julius L. Katz (E/ICD) to Assistant Secretary Solomon, dated May 17.

2 The papers are attached to the Katz memorandum as Tabs B and C, not printed.

3 None of the tables is printed.

368. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 368. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, June 27, 1968, 1930Z.

3897. Subject: Cocoa Consultative Group. Ref: Geneva 3890.2

1. Chairman today submitted following five-point package to exporters and importers which he commended they accept subject to drafting changes but no changes in substance. Said he had put it together on basis extensive discussions with both sides. Scheduled plenary tomorrow morning to act on package:

"(I) Action if the indicator price remains below the minimum

33(7) proposed revision

(7) If, after one month following a reduction of quotas made in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (6) above, the indicator price is below 20 cents, the Executive Director shall convene a special meeting of the Council within four days, in order to review the situation and to take remedial action. The Executive Director shall present to the Council a report as to the reasons for the failure of the previous quota cuts to raise the price to 20 cents and shall make recommendations to the Council for action. Decision by the Council on any recommendation shall be by special vote. However, if a reduction in quotas is included in the Executive Director's proposal or in a proposal from any member and if the cuts already approved by the Council in dealing with the price decline total less than 9 percent of the annual quotas, then a cut to bring the total up to 9 percent may be made by a simple distributed majority vote. At no time would quotas in effect be more than 9 percent below the initial sales quotas unless decided otherwise by a special vote. If, one month after such action by the Council the indicator price remains below 20 cents per pound, the Executive Director shall present to the Council a further report and shall make new recommendations. Decisions by the Council on any further action, which may include a further quota cut, shall be by special vote. This action may be repeated so long as the price remains below 20 cents.

(7A) All reduction of annual sales quotas made under paragraph (7) would be automatically restored within two working days of the indicator price moving up to 20 cents per lb.

(II) Treatment of freight and other related changes proposed revision of Article 39 (5)

In purchasing cocoa from exporting members under the provisions of this article, the manager shall, subject to the provisions of the following paragraph, pay 10 cents on delivery of the cocoa. Upon sale of the cocoa to the market by the buffer stock manager for the purpose of defending the maximum, the manager shall subtract from the realized price 10 cents plus storage costs, carrying charges and other related costs. The balance shall be paid to the original source of the cocoa up to 20 cents F.O.B. if the profit is adequate to allow for this. If the profit is not sufficient the Council may, by special vote, decide to make up the difference from the buffer-stocks funds.

(III) Provisions for automatic establishment of quotas

Proposed paragraph for inclusion in Article 29

1A. If the Council is unable to reach an agreement after (-) working days, the Executive Director shall as soon as practicable thereafter submit to the Council his own proposals for annual sales quotas. The Council shall immediately proceed to a decision by special vote on these proposals and, subject to that decision, quotas for the ensuing year shall be determined accordingly.

(IV) Limitations of sales when quotas are not in effect

Percentage for first half year to be 85.

(V) Restoration of quota cut taken at 22 cents (Article 33 (8))

Cuts made at 22 cents are to be restored at 24 cents unless the Council decides, by special vote, to restore the cut at a point lower than 24 cents.

1. The place of delivery shall be decided by the buffer stock manager.”

2. Action requested: Pursuant to Brodie-Jacobs telecon June 27, request authority before 9:00 a.m. June 28 to approve package if it generally supported by exporters and importers. Do not feel we should hold out for unanimity on part all exporters since this might identify U.S. as blocking agreement.3

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Limited Official Use; Priority.

2 Dated June 27. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 192851 to Geneva, dated June 28, approved the package outlined, with the understanding that the United States would insist on its acceptance by major exporters. (Ibid.)

369. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 369. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, July 1, 1968, 1444Z.

3930. Subject: Cocoa Consultative Group. Ref: Geneva 3897 (Notal).2

1. Summary. Cocoa Consultative Group (CG) unable reach agreement on five-point package because of reservations by France and Ivory Coast over minor technical issue. As result planned resumption of cocoa conference this fall now somewhat in doubt. End summary.

2. At final meeting C.G. June 29 Chairman asked if all delegations would accept five-point package he circulated previous day (see reftel) if point of restoration of quota cuts made when price below minimum (paragraph 33(74)) included two figures, 20 cents and 21 cents (proposed by France), both bracketed. France (Janton) immediately agreed but demanded footnote explaining nature of problem, i.e., there danger if 20-cent figure accepted quota cuts could be restored even though on last day of fiteeen-day average, price was below 20 cents. Added he had been unable obtain instructions this point since high French officials preoccupied with more pressing matters.

3. U.S. announced it could accept package with 20 cents if all major producers supported it. U.S. del criticized French logic and pointed out same theoretical problem raised by Janton existed at all intervention points on way up and way down. He maintained Janton was introducing new problem which brought into question whole indicator price concept at time when package already agreed by several major producers. Ghana, Brazil, Nigeria, and Cameroons followed U.S. saying they prepared accept Chairman's original package with 20-cent figure.

4. Ivory Coast delegate said he had asked Abidjan to approve package on assumption 21 cents already agreed but had been unable obtain instructions. (We doubt he even called Abidjan, as his later remarks contradict this.) He therefore requested a footnote to indicate there was no final approval by his government. When Chairman noted two governments had now reserved their positions, Janton withdrew his 21-cent proposal and asked that 20 cents be footnoted to say Ivory Coast and France noted a problem existed with this figure and that a solution should be found at negotiating conference. This clearly was a ruse to let package go forward as if it were agreed but allowing them to re-open the issue. In any case, Ivory Coast refused this solution.

5. With Ivory Coast now isolated among the producers, Chairman stopped discussion of package and turned attention to new draft of a processed cocoa amendment. After comments by Nigeria, Ghana and Netherlands, it agreed draft could serve as basis for future discussion at negotiating conference. Meeting then adjourned for private discussions on five-point package.

6. Chairman talked to U.S. and Ghanaian delegations during recess and proposed his report say agreement had been reached on package deal with 20-cent figure subject to confirmation by Ivory Coast and France and that all delegations accepted the deal on understanding later confirmation by these two delegations would make it unanimous. In addition, he proposed a footnote which said that France and the Ivory Coast hoped that a solution could be found to problem they felt existed if 20 cents were the figure. When U.S. and Ghana agreed to a precise formulation, the Chairman then resumed the plenary. Note: We had previously informed Chairman privately we would not accept any brackets in package.

7. When Chairman read out language of his proposed report, France immediately objected and said he accepted package on understanding that all agreed a problem existed with 20-cent figure which must be solved before a negotiating conference. Chairman then noted that if French and Ivory Coast reservations stood there was no package deal. Brazil then made a slam-bang attack on France and the Ivory Coast, praised the United States for its cooperation, agreed with the Chairman there was no package deal and asked him to adjourn the meeting.

8. Switzerland agreed with Brazil and questioned Janton's motives. Janton then proceeded to attack Brazil and Swiss citing his long record in support of a cocoa agreement. Ghana tried hard to restore order and save the package by appealing to France not to wreck possibility of going to conference over a theoretical question. He reminded group of abuse that had been heaped on U.S. when last December it halted conference by only saying it already had far exceeded its instruction. Chairman also pressed France hard but Janton insisted there was a problem and he needed instructions from his government.

9. On suggestion of UK, Chairman tried to resolve matter by saying his report as previously read out would stand but that the two governments would have ten days to indicate to Prebisch whether or not they accepted the package. This led to another long debate with Ivory Coast and France. Ivory Coast del maintained he on a long business trip ahead and refused to guarantee a reply by any fixed date. U.S. del unable comprehend motives of Ivory Coast. Everything he said was in presence of Anet-Bile with whom he frequently conferred. Obviously, their motives were based on something more important than the narrow academic point described in para one above.

10. France asked if his government's reply will be considered constructive if it pointed out that a problem existed at 20 cents that had to be resolved. Chair replied if answer was not an unqualified yes, there no package deal.

11. The Chairman summed up by regretting that after long discussion last December followed by this intensive two-week meeting, it still was impossible to reach agreement. Said this meant that any chance of a cocoa agreement in foreseeable future now in jeopardy. His report will go forward showing two countries reserved on package, and he accepted that Ivory Coast and France could inform Prebisch of their yes or no as soon as possible.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–COCOA 3 UNCTAD. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Rio de Janeiro, Accra, Lagos, Yaounde, and Abidjan.

2  Document 368.

370. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 370. Telegram From the Mission to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Department of State 1

Paris, October 7, 1968, 1815Z.

22002. Ref: State 250536.2

1. Enactment of bill increasing duties on certain blended fabrics containing reprocessed or re-used wool to over 100 percent ad valorem would of course have irritant effect on US-European trade relations. If, as Italians allege, action inconsistent with US Kennedy Round undertakings, would further reduce already dim prospects European KR acceleration.

2. Exceptional height of proposed duty would be cited as example by European protectionists and used as argument that US practices not consistent with professed liberal trade policies. Duty increase by US inconsistent with obligations would also weaken basis our position that emergency French import restrictions inappropriate and should be eliminated.

Brown

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Rome, Geneva, and Brussels.

2 Telegram 250536, October 4, noted that a Senate-House Conference Committee agreed upon such a bill (H.R. 653). (Ibid.)

371. Memorandum From the Director of the White House Office of Emergency Planning (Daniel) to the National Security Council 371. Memorandum From the Director of the White House Office of Emergency Planning (Daniel) to the National Security Council 1

Washington, October 18, 1968.

RE

Report on Stockpile Criteria

The President on December 1, 1964 established a Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives chaired by a Special Assistant to the President,2 with representatives from the Departments and Agencies listed on Attachment A.3 Since that time the Committee has had under continuing review the criteria upon which the stockpile objectives are determined.

President Johnson specifically charged the Committee to give particular attention to: "(1) The major military and economic assumptions used in calculating existing conventional war stockpile objectives.

"(2) The assumptions, techniques, and goals used in the establishment of post-nuclear attack supply requirements.

"(3) The relationship of economic rehabilitation requirements to other post-nuclear requirements, such as those for food, shelter, medicine, and other resources required for the survival of the remaining population in the period of extreme emergency.”

The Committee has completed its Report,4 and the President has asked that it be considered in the National Security Council, especially its one major recommended change in the criteria concerning accessibility to and reliance upon certain Free World foreign sources of supply in the event of a war involving only the use of non-nuclear weapons.5

Criteria and assumptions governing stockpile objectives were set forth by an order of the Security Council (NSC Doc. 5810/1, May 5, 1958)6 and by the President's letter of February 24, 1964, addressed to the Director of the Office of Emergency Planning, copy of which is Attachment B.7

That portion of the President's letter which continued the policy of limiting consideration of emergency sources of supply to those foreign countries which are contiguous to the United States is the provision which the Committee recommends be changed so as to: Permit consideration of emergency supply sources from those countries listed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff as probably accessible during a wartime emergency, subject to discounts by the Joint Chiefs for possible losses in transit and additional discounts by the State Department and OEP based on political and economic reliability and other national security considerations.

Each of the participating members of the Committee shown on Attachment A has a complete copy of the Report for further reference.

It was originally intended that key members of the Armed Services Committees of the Congress be invited to attend the discussion. However, in light of the adjournment of Congress, the Committee will brief them at a later date if this basic change is approved by the President.

Price Daniel 8

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316. Secret. An attached covering memorandum from Bromley Smith to the National Security Council, October 28, indicated that this memorandum would serve as the basis of NSC discussion on October 31 of the proposed recommendation.

2 See Document 246.

3 Not printed.

4 Not found.

5 In an October 7 memorandum to President Johnson, Director Daniel noted that the special committee had completed its report, which he had discussed with Senators Russell and Symington and Congressmen Rivers and Philbin, chairmen and subcommittee chairmen of the Senate and House Armed Services Committees. Daniel went on to suggest that, following preliminary NSC discussion and the President's approval of the change, these four members of Congress, all of whom had expressed interest in a review of the matter, be invited to participate in a final NSC discussion of the revised policy. At the end of this memorandum, the President wrote: “OK. Proceed—L.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 5 Tab 74, 10/31/68, Stockpile Criteria)

6 For text, see Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, vol. III, pp. 98–116.

7  Document 202.

8 Printed from a copy that indicates Daniel signed the original.

372. Editorial Note 372. Editorial Note

President Johnson signed into law H.R. 653 (P.L. 90–638; 82 Stat. 1359), on October 24, 1968. Section 2 established a uniform tariff on reprocessed wool fabrics and blends based upon the chief weight of the principal component of the fabric. The changes were scheduled to take effect 60 days after enactment, and President Johnson directed the U.S. Tariff Commission to study alternatives. For text of the President's statement, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1968–69, Book II, pages 1071–1072.

The tariff changes were not well received in Europe. European Economic Community representatives said that textile trade arrangements negotiated in GATT were imperiled. The Italian Government was especially displeased since its textile trade with the United States was heavily impacted by the changes. (Telegram 9916 from Brussels, October 15, and telegram 9131 from Rome, October 26; both in Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US)

373. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 373. Telegram From the Embassy in Italy to the Department of State 1

Rome, October 29, 1968, 1640Z.

9184. Subj: Woolen fabric bill enacted. Ref: State 262292 (not sent Geneva).2

1. We gave copies Presidential statement today to Ferlesch and Garrone (DirGen and Deputy DirGen, Commercial Agreements, MinFonTrade). They described in detail political difficulties US measure will cause for GOI. Decision on nature of Italian reaction has not yet been taken. GOI will consult within EC on matter. In any case matter will be raised in GATT. In this connection, they asked what procedural route US intended to follow. They assumed we would request waiver prior to putting new tariffs into effect. If we did request waiver, this would provide opportunity for discussion of whole situation. If not, they indicated they would probably initiate discussion during November meeting of Contracting Parties. They believed strong reactions should at least be placed on record to avoid giving Congress impression that such meas-ures would be taken lying down.

2. We noted that Tariff Commission had been instructed study problem and determine tariffs which would afford reasonable degree of protection to US industry and we asked if GOI could not defer decision on reaction until after Congress had had opportunity to consider results of study. Ferlesch pointed out that any Congressional action would probably not be taken before next spring at earliest and he expressed pessimism that next Congress likely be favorably disposed to liberalizing measure. We said that President had taken unusual step of consulting with members of Congress who had agreed with procedure outlined and that this might facilitate possible favorable action. We stressed dangers of chain reaction of protectionism at present conjuncture, acknowledged that pressures in US were currently very high, and pointed out very valuable contribution Italy could make by exercising restraint. Ferlesch and Garrone seemed reasonably impressed by this line of thought but said they could not commit GOI to degree of restraint we were requesting. They again outlined political pressures that played, including fact that most affected Prato workers were Communist and that PCI could therefore be expected to exploit issue.

3. In any case, whatever ultimate decision GOI takes re counteractions, they want subject aired in GATT in near future. Preferably at our initiative, otherwise at theirs they specifically asked that we inform them our plans in this respect and we agreed seek guidance from Washington.

4. We took occasion mention to them US preoccupations with changes in market regulation for fats and oils and processed fruits and vegetables which seem to be germinating in Brussels and left with them informal working papers drawn respectively from State 2564773 and 262304.4 Garrone sardonically remarked that this was fine time for us to be talking about European protectionism. We again stressed importance of European restraint and avoidance own protectionist measures at present critical juncture, and point seemed have at least their theoretical acceptance. Italians did not seem knowledgeable about precise nature of regulations being considered; Ferlesch did remark that cap was generally under review since expense had become “intolerable burden” and he had earlier acknowledged that US preoccupation with cap protectionism was not entirely unjustified.

Ackley

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Limited Official Use. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels for USEC, Luxembourg, London, Paris, The Hague, Tokyo, and Geneva.

2 Telegram 262292 to Rome and Brussels, October 26. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 256477 to Brussels and five other European posts, October 16. (Ibid., INCO–FATS EEC)

4 Telegram 262304 to Brussels and 10 other posts, October 26. (Ibid.)

374. Summary Notes of the 592d Meeting of the National Security Council 374. Summary Notes of the 592d Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, October 31, 1968, 12:07–12:35 p.m.

Stockpile Criteria

The President: Read the order of business. (Copy at Tab A).2 He asked Governor Daniel to summarize the report of the committee3 which had reviewed the criteria upon which stockpile objectives are determined.

Governor Daniel: Presented several charts to illustrate his summary of the report.4 (At Tab B is Governor Daniel's presentation, including his account of the meeting, and copies of the charts he used.)2

The President: Expressed interest in the copper stockpile. Several persons, including Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Affairs Tony Solomon, responded. The copper stockpile is or soon will be in balance. The shortage will be met by production from a new Arizona mine which will be available shortly.

Governor Daniel: The only strategic material which causes us trouble on the Hill is copper. We can not take our copper stockpile to zero because Congress will not approve. We can sell the Congress if we have a conservative approach. We will be able to convince those interested Congressmen that we are not cutting our stockpile objectives down merely in order to obtain funds from sales to help balance the budget. We will not ask for any money to purchase materials for the stockpile. It is possible for us to sell some of the materials we don't want in order to buy what we need.

Under Secretary Katzenbach: No comment on the report. It gives us no problems in the foreign policy area which we don't already have.

Assistant Secretary Solomon: Approved the report. It gives us more rational criteria.

General Wheeler: The Joint Chiefs reviewed the committee's recommendations and found them sound and prudent.

Deputy Secretary of Defense Nitze: Suggested a modified approach. There could be criteria to use in determining what critical materials should be retained in the stockpile. Other criteria would be used in deciding what materials should be purchased to add to the stockpile.

Governor Daniel: The only purchase problem is copper. He argued strongly for one set of criteria and feared that if we singled out, in effect only one product, namely, copper, we would confuse the Congressional committees which traditionally follow the stockpile situation closely.

Secretary Clifford: Read paragraphs written by the Defense stockpile expert who made the same point mentioned by Mr. Nitze, i.e., acquisition for the stockpile would be made only on the basis of criteria for acquisition, but disposal would be based on separate retention criteria.

Governor Daniel: The Defense expert sounds more like a budget officer than an Assistant Secretary of Defense. Restated his opposition to two sets of objectives. There would be no meaningful difference if we give more consideration to retention objectives than we do to acquisition objectives. He said the letter he would send to the President for signature would represent the understanding reached at the meeting. (Copy of draft letter is at Tab C)5

The President: Welcomed Ambassador Wiggins to the meeting and said that he hoped he would be present when the Council had a more dangerous subject under discussion.

Bromley Smith

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Volume 5 Tab 74, Stockpile Criteria, Box 2. Secret/Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith. An attached list of attendees includes: Under Secretary of State Nicholas DeB. Katzenbach, Assistant Secretary of State Anthony M. Solomon, Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford, Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul H. Nitze, Treasury Secretary Henry H. Fowler, JCS Chairman General Earle G. Wheeler, OEP Director Price Daniel, USIA Director Leonard H. Marks, Walt Rostow, and Bromley Smith.

2 Not printed.

3 See footnote 5, Document 371.

4 Presumably Document 371.

2 Not printed.

5 The attached undated and unsigned memorandum (not letter) is not printed here, but for the signed text, dated October 31 and identical to the draft, see Document 375.

375. Memorandum From President Johnson to the Director of the White House Office of Emergency Preparedness (Daniel) 375. Memorandum From President Johnson to the Director of the White House Office of Emergency Preparedness (Daniel)1

Washington, October 31, 1968.

SUBJECT

National Stockpile Criteria

I have reviewed with the National Security Council2 the final report of the Special Committee on Stockpile Objectives.3 In view of the unanimous recommendation of all members of the Committee and of the NSC, I approve the recommendations contained in the report with respect to conventional and nuclear war objectives.

In the establishment of new conventional war objectives, sources of emergency supply may include those Free World nations listed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Department of Defense, as being militarily accessible, subject to discounts supplied by the Joint Chiefs of Staff for possible losses in transit, discounts by the Department of State based on political and economic reliability, and discounts by the Office of Emergency Preparedness based on other national security considerations. However, as a retention safety factor, stockpile objectives shall not be less than the U.S. import requirements from sources other than Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean area for the first year of the assumed emergency period.

At the earliest opportunity after Congress reconvenes, I direct that you, the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff brief the Armed Services Committees of the House and Senate on the results of this four-year study and the application of the present criteria for arriving at stockpile objectives.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, National Security Council File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 5 Tab 74, 10/31/68, Stockpile Criteria. Secret.

2 See Document 374.

3 See footnote 5, Document 371.

376. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Italy 376. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Italy 1

Washington, November 8, 1968, 1:50 p.m.

268884. Following based on uncleared memcon is Confidential Noforn/FYI subject to revision: 1. In presenting note on reprocessed wool bill (text transmitted septel) to Under Secretary Rostow November 7,2 Ambassador Ortona commented that while law regrettable, President's statement on signing bill and efforts to alleviate its impact are appreciated by Italians. Ambassador Ortona noted that GOI confronted by three options following signature of bill: 1) no response whatsoever; (2) prompt retaliatory action; or 3) preparations to do something in event no ameliorative action forthcoming after Tariff Commission study completed. Ortona said he had advised Foreign Office against taking retaliatory action now in order avoid danger of further reprisals and counselled that GOI should use intervening time to discuss what it might do in event matter not resolved favorably from GOI standpoint. He observed that note indicates GOI has taken third option and that language in final paragraph should not be regarded as threat but as meeting needed to take some kind of action now in order forestall adverse domestic reaction in Italy.

2. Under Secretary Rostow commented that this was wise approach. Fact that GOI not taking retaliatory action at this time greatly appreciated. Under Secretary referred to such positive factors as President's concern re possible escalation, short deadline for completion of Tariff Commission study, and indications from Congressional leadership of readiness to consider Tariff Commission recommendations, and said he hoped GOI will take advantage of hearing procedure to make maximum presentation its case to commission.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Confidential; Noforn. Drafted on November 7 by C.K. Johnson (EUR/AIS); cleared by Wells Stabler (EUR/AIS) and H. Quinn (S/S-O), and by Barraclough for substance; and approved by Alfred Puhan (EUR). Repeated to Geneva and Brussels for USEC.

2 In this note, the Italian Government expressed its “regret and disappointment” at the enactment of H.R. 653 in view of its probable adverse impact on Italy's textile trade in general and on the city of Prato in particular. Italy would therefore invoke its rights under GATT and reserved the right to take appropriate countermeasures. (Text in telegram 268761 to Rome, November 8; ibid.)

377. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 377. Telegram From the Mission in Geneva to the Department of State 1

Geneva, November 12, 1968, 1621Z.

GATT 5510. Subject: GATT Council discussion US wool-blend legislation. Ref: (A) State 269278.2

1. Summary: Nov. 11 Council heard and noted US and EC statements. US informed Council that when US Tariff Commission had completed its study (which has Dec. 21 deadline) and when necessary information is available for meaningful consideration, US “will take such measures as may be appropriate under GATT". EC welcomed USTC inquiry and Presidential willingness, if USTC determines lower duty more equitable, to request Congress take prompt action to establish appropriate tariff rate. EC hoped between now and Dec 23 (when provisions PL 90–638 take effect) US would “invoke the necessary provisions of GATT for this type of case". EC reserved its rights under GATT. End summary.

2. On Nov 10 Mission urged Italy make no statement (and USEC Brussels made similar point to EC Commission official). Morning Nov 11 EC and member state reps decided Commission should make low-key statement, which was prepared over luncheon interval. Impossible, therefore, for US have more than general indication contents statement before Council met.

3. According Italian GATT delegation (Guozzaroni and Vitale) the Six felt reply, for record, to US statement was necessary—particularly because of latter's references to “loophole” reason for changing US method assessing duties on wool blend fabrics.

4. Under “other business” item at conclusion Council session US made statement (para 4, reftel A).

5. EC spokesman's reply, reconstructed from our notes, was as follows. Thanks US for taking initiative place this item on Council agenda. Statement of interest to all CPs. Increases in bound duties requires compliance with certain procedures. Matter of particular interest to exporters—including EC. Regret US felt Dec 23 measures should be adopted. GATT provides rules for dealing with problems, when they arise. It may be necessary have recourse to those rules, as we witnessed today under another agenda item. (Note: We assume this is reference to item 3, renegotiation Israeli schedule.) EC considers its trade interest in affected wool fabric items in order magnitude $10 to 15 million per annum. Duty increases will occur in area where US duties already rather high. (Gave example effective duties silk-wool blends 34 per cent and 80 per cent.) Production of items affected concentrated in area where this is principal activity of workers affected. Social difficulties there are to be feared. US statement referred to “loophole". But US customs tariff after simplification act contains 160 wool fabric items. This range invites exporters to resort to most favorable item classification for entry. Some, but not all items affected were subject US tariff concessions. US documents showed trade trends in these items. Concessions thus did not open unexpected loophole. US mentioned former attempts close loophole and also previous negotiations on wool fabric rates. If EC and member states then accepted US offers, it was because EC took into account the possibilities in US tariff relating to entry EC wool fabric exports. EC welcomes USTC inquiry and Presidential willingness propose lower duties to Congress. This gives hope satisfactory solution. EC hopes between now and Dec 23 US will invoke necessary GATT provision for this type case. EC reserves its GATT rights.

6. Chair said Council not asked take decision. Council takes note of statements, which will be reflected in minutes. No further discussion, and Council adjourned.

Tubby

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, Brussels, The Hague, Luxembourg, Paris for USOECD, and Rome.

2 Telegram 269278, November 8, contained a statement to be presented at the November 11 meeting of the GATT Council. According to the statement, P.L. 90–638 was intended to close a “loophole” that allowed blended fabrics containing wool to escape the higher duties levied on wool fabrics. When he signed the law, President Johnson requested the U.S. Tariff Commission to study the question and to report to him by December 31. Should the Commission determine that a lower duty would be more equitable, the President would request appropriate action by Congress. The U.S. representative was therefore to urge the GATT Council to “exercise restraint” until the Tariff Commission had completed its study. (Ibid.)

378. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 378. Telegram From the Mission to the European Communities to the Department of State 1

Brussels, November 13, 1968, 1742Z.

10499. Subject: Commission Note Verbale on wool fabric bill (PL 90–638).

1. There follows informal Mission translation of Note Verbale received today from the Directorate General for External Trade.

2. The Directorate General for External Trade presents its compliments to the United States Mission and wishes to inform it of the concern and disappointment experienced by the Community over the promulgation in the United States on Oct. 26 of a law amending the general rule for tariff classification of certain fabrics containing wool. It recalls that the attention of the American Government had already been called to the damage which such a measure would cause to community export interests and to the balance of concessions resulting from the Kennedy Round negotiations.

It regrets that the considerations furnished in support of these representations could not be taken into consideration in order to avoid creating such damage. The Community, faced by the situation created by the promulgation in the law in question, will be obliged to protect its interests at the appropriate time in the framework of GATT.

Complimentary closing, dated November 13, Brussels.

Schaetzel

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INCO–WOOL 17 US. Limited Official Use; Priority. Repeated to Bonn, The Hague, Luxembourg, Paris for USOECD, Rome, and Geneva for GATT.

379. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Policy, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Palmer) to the Deputy Coordinator for the Alliance for Progress, Agency for International Development (Fowler) 379. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Economic Policy, Bureau of Inter-American Affairs (Palmer) to the Deputy Coordinator for the Alliance for Progress, Agency for International Development (Fowler)1

Washington, December 19, 1968.

SUBJECT

A.I.D. Policy and the Coffee Agreement

1. Attached is a joint memo from you and me to Paul Clark clearing the revised proposal on A.I.D. policy towards the International Coffee Agreement.2

2. I should point out to you that Phil Glaessner declined to be associated with the clearance memo but indicated that he would not oppose an affirmative attitude should you and I decide that this proposal was beneficial. This Bureau, of course, initiated the proposal in a somewhat stronger form several months ago.

3. You may recall Phil's memo to you dated December 6, in which he spelled out his objections. (Copy attached for your reference.)3 In its revised form, the draft action memo and airgram, I believe, should satisfy most of Phil's objections. In fact, the present proposal is, in many ways, less harsh than Phil's alternative proposal. In the first place, Phil seems to relate export quota violations to the proposed policy. Actually, export quotas are not mentioned because it was realized that the responsibility for quota enforcement is hard to pinpoint as between exporters and importers. This policy is directed only at the establishment of production goals (Article 48) and diversification efforts (Article 54) where appropriate. In this regard, we would seek self-help performance commitments which would evidence the recipient country's intent to comply with the ICA requirements under those articles. These conditions would apply to program loans and other loans related to the agriculture sector, including PL-480, if possible. (Note that Agriculture did not object to commitments along these lines in the Ecuador PL-480 case.)

4. While it is hoped that the proposed policy would facilitate better enforcement of the ICA, the intent is not to set ourselves up in a police role. Obviously, we could not go beyond the standards set by the ICO. The most important objective of this policy would be to assure ourselves that we are not providing assistance to countries which are benefiting from the resource transfer the ICA represents while refusing to cooperate in making the ICA work. Regarding Phil's question as to whether we could refuse assistance to Guatemala or other “politically hot” countries simply because they flaunt Articles 48 and 54 of the ICA, I think it is also fair to ask whether it would be politically (not to mention economically) wise for us to provide new assistance to such countries if the ICO indicated its dissatisfaction with their performance under these articles, or if it were invoking the sanctions called for in the agreement.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID(US) 1. Limited Official Use. Drafted by J. Krizay (ARA/ECP). The source text bears a handwritten note from Fowler that reads: “Agree—I've cleared memo to PPC.”

2 Not printed.

3 In this memorandum, not printed, Glaessner examined the question of what actions should be taken against countries that exceeded their export quotas under the International Coffee Agreement. Although he believed that “overriding reasons of a political nature” made U.S. sanctions against such countries unlikely, Glaessner suggested that authorization of future development loans and P.L. 480 agreements could be linked to compliance with Articles 48 and 54.

Index Index

Abaca fiber, 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Abdel-Rahman, 271–273 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 98]

Abie (British), 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 131]

Abramowitz, Morton, 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 346]

Ackley, Gardner, 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 734–736 [Pgs. 734–736 include portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 743–745 [Pgs. 743–745 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 301], 770–771 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 313], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 334]

Afghanistan, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106],

AFL/CIO position on East-West trade, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 171], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Africa: Foreign assistance, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 127–128 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 169–170 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59], 176–177 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 60], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 65], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 70], 234–236 [Pgs. 234–236 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Military assistance policy, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38]

African Development Bank, 169–170 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 60], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 70], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Agency for International Development (AID), 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 35], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 111–112 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 53], 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 70], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 122] Administration and staffing, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 21], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 23], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 113–114 [Pgs. 113–114 include portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 168–169 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 59], 173–174 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 59]

Budget, 62–70 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 21], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 70]

Countries, number of, limitation, 175–178 [Pgs. 175–178 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

UN programs, coordination with, 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 271–273 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 98], 284–286 [Pgs. 284–286 include portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Albert, Carl, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 10]

Albrecht, Anthony C., 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 128], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Albright, Raymond J., 532–533 [Pgs. 532–533 include portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

Alexander, George H., 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Algeria, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 106]

Ali, Osman, 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 320], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 321], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361]

Aliber, Robert, 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94]

Allen, Arthur P., 521n [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Allen, Patten D., 476n [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 163]

Alliance for Progress, 17–20 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 146–147 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 52], 149–150 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 53], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 57], 186–187 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 83]

Aluminum, 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 296], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 297], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Anderson, Robert, 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216]-587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Andreas, Dwayne O., 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 120]

Arai, Shinichi, 692–693 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 272], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Argentina, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 48–49 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 77] Grains and cereals, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 211], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 333]

Armstrong, Willis C., 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 184]

Asia, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 170–171 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 59], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 70]

Asia Development Bank, 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 75], 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Atlas, Liane, 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Auchincloss, Kenneth, 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Australia, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 131], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 203] Foreign assistance policy, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 86], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 143]

Grains and cereals, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 211], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 270], 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 276], 703–704 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 278], 764–765 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 309], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 324], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 800–802 [Pgs. 800–802 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 804–805 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 333], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 335]

Austria, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 131], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327] Foreign assistance policy, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 86], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 110], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 110], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 112], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 143]

IDA funds replenishment, 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Ayub Khan, Mohamed, 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Ball, George W. East-West trade, 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 454–457 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 154], 474–475 [Pgs. 474–475 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 490–494 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 170], 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Foreign assistance policy, 21–22 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 38n [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

International investment and development policy, 257–258 [Pgs. 257–258 include portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 264–265 [Pgs. 264–265 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96]

Strategic stockpile, 729–730 [Pgs. 729–730 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294]

Sugar policy, 559n [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 615–616 [Pgs. 615–616 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Wool textiles imports, 569–571 [Pgs. 569–571 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–590 include portions of Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 609–611 [Pgs. 609–611 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 617–619 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 230]

Barnett, Robert W., 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 275], 797n [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Barr, Joseph W., 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 10], 436n [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Bashkin (Commerce), 772n [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 318], 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 346], 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Bator, Francis, M., 96n [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 167–174 [Pgs. 167–174 include portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 60], 179–182 [Pgs. 179–182 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 264n [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 406–409 [Pgs. 406–409 include portions of Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 167], 496n [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 172]-497n [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 172], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 220], 598n [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 222]-599n [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 223], 609n [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 226], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 238], 640–641 [Pgs. 640–641 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 646–650 [Pgs. 646–650 include portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 662n [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 253], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 769–772 [Pgs. 769–772 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 806–807 [Pgs. 806–807 include portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Bauman, Arthur C., 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294]

Bauxite, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 305]

Beheiry, Mamoun, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 70]

Behrman, Jack N., 463n [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 159]-464n [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 160]

Beirne, Joseph A., 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 80]

Belgium, 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178] Foreign assistance policy, 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 86], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 110], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 141], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 147]

Bell, David E.: Foreign assistance policy, 1–4 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 6–9 [Pgs. 6–9 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 6], 23–24 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 11], 25n [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 29–34 [Pgs. 29–34 include portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 19], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 71–89 [Pgs. 71–89 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, Doc. 26, Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29], 93–101 [Pgs. 93–101 include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 103–109 [Pgs. 103–109 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 114–116 [Pgs. 114–116 include portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 42], 123–129 [Pgs. 123–129 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, and Doc. 45], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 50], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 122]

International investment and development policy, 240–242 [Pgs. 240–242 include portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86], 249n [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 258–265 [Pgs. 258–265 include portions of Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 271–286 [Pgs. 271–286 include portions of Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 286n [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 290–301 [Pgs. 290–301 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, and Doc. 105], 308–310 [Pgs. 308–310 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 313n [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 110], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110], 328–329 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 110], 331–332 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 110], 342–347 [Pgs. 342–347 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 362–366 [Pgs. 362–366 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 124]

Belman, Murray, 534n [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 188]

Bismuth, 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Black, Eugene R., 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 42], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 42], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 50], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 56], 163–164 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 56]

Black, Robert B., 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Blackman, Herbert N., 637–639 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 238], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 709n [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317]

Blau, Clarence, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 98]

Blumenthal, W. Michael, 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 207], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 224], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 233], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 233]

Boggs, Hale, 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

Bohlen, Charles E., 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 192]

Bolivia, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 350]

Bot, Theodorus, 318–319 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 326–327 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 110], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 131]

Bowman, Joseph M., 436n [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Brand, Robert A., 541–542 [Pgs. 541–542 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Brandon, Howard R., 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Brazil, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 44], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 113], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 288] Cocoa, 833–834 [Pgs. 833–834 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361]

Coffee, 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Debt burden and service problems, 48–49 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20]

Brodie, Henry, 559n [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Broomfield, William S., 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 27]

Brosolette, Pierre, 345n [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 115]

Brown, W. M., 316n [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 110]

Brownell, Herbert, 746–747 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 301]

Bruce, David K. E., 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Brunet, Jacques, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 191]

Budget, U.S. and foreign assistance. See under Foreign assistance policy; Military assistance policy.

Buffum, William B., 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Bulgaria, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 157], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 508–509 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 178]

Bullitt, John C., 6n [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 249n [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 220]

Bundy, McGeorge, 445n [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 148], 485n [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 713n [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 286] Cotton textiles, 597–598 [Pgs. 597–598 include portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 599n [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 223]

East-West trade, 449–451 [Pgs. 449–451 include portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 455–457 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 154], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 481–482 [Pgs. 481–482 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 167], 495–505 [Pgs. 495–505 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176], 511–512 [Pgs. 511–512 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180]

Foreign assistance policy, 1–4 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 5n [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2]-6n [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 13–14 [Pgs. 13–14 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 35n [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 24], 82–84 [Pgs. 82–84 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 27], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 105–109 [Pgs. 105–109 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 114–122 [Pgs. 114–122 include portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 129–131 [Pgs. 129–131 include portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Strategic stockpile, 651–652 [Pgs. 651–652 include portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 653n [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 246], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249], 729–730 [Pgs. 729–730 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 738–740 [Pgs. 738–740 include portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 750–752 [Pgs. 750–752 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 760n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 23], 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 344]

Sugar policy 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 212], 640–641 [Pgs. 640–641 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 711–712 [Pgs. 711–712 include portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Bundy, William P., 6n [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Bunting, John, 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 335]

Burke, James P., 684n [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Busby, Horace, 85n [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26]

Button, Jack B., 701n [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 277], 710n [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 310], 793n [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Bymes, Paul J., 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125]

Califano, Joseph A., Jr., 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 167–174 [Pgs. 167–174 include portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 62], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 69], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 213–215 [Pgs. 213–215 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 298], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 303], 752–758 [Pgs. 752–758 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 798–799 [Pgs. 798–799 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 334], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Callanan, Paul F., 669n [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 701n [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 277], 772n [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 318], 793n [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 810n [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Cameroon, 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 369]

Canada, 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 144], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 160], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 306] Cocoa, 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Foreign assistance policy 244, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 89], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 97], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 99], 311–312 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 110], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 110], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 110], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 141], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 144], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 147]

Grains and cereals, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 211], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 249], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 276], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 309], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 804–805 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 333]

IDA funds replenishment, 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Sen agricultural fund proposal, 378–380 [Pgs. 378–380 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127]

World food problem, 393–394 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 131]

Caribbean, Canadian assistance, 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 144]

Carlson, Frank, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 285], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

Carter, Marshall S., 485–487 [Pgs. 485–487 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169]

Castle, Barbara, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 105], 318–320 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 110], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 110]

Cater, Douglas, 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

Ceylon, 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68]

Chadwick, John, 663–664 [Pgs. 663–664 include portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Chenery, Hollis B., 32–34 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 92], 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 264n [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97], 293n [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 103]

Chile, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 44], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 106] Copper prices, 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Debt burden and service problems, 48–49 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20]

China, People's Republic of, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 161], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 182], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 189]

China, Republic of, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 110] Cotton textiles, 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 306], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317]

Military assistance, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–35 [Pgs. 32–35 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 30], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 77]

Christensen, Don T., 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 275]

Christopher, Warren M., 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 224], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 224], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 225], 617n [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 230], 620–623 [Pgs. 620–623 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 259], 689–695 [Pgs. 689–695 include portions of Doc. 271, Doc. 272, and Doc. 273]

Chromite, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 305], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Clifford, Clark M., 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 548–550 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 374]

Cobalt, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 305], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Cocoa (see also Commodities and strategic materials policy), 669–671 [Pgs. 669–671 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 778–779 [Pgs. 778–779 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 816–817 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 341], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 349], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 353] Brazilian position, 833–834 [Pgs. 833–834 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361]

British position, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 369]

Buffer stock, 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 321], 830–835 [Pgs. 830–835 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348]

Cameroon position 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 369]

Canadian position, 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Ecuador position, 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361]

European Economic Community position, 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348]

French position 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 833–834 [Pgs. 833–834 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 351], 864–866 [Pgs. 864–866 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

German position, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348]

Ghana position, 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 828–829 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 345], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 348], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361], 865–866 [Pgs. 865–866 include portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Industry position, 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 341], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 351], 840n [Pg. 840 is part of Doc. 352]

International agreement negotiations, 781–785 [Pgs. 781–785 include portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, and Doc. 323], 810–811 [Pgs. 810–811 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 827–836 [Pgs. 827–836 include portions of Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 838–842 [Pgs. 838–842 include portions of Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 852–853 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361], 862–866 [Pgs. 862–866 include portions of Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

Ivory Coast position, 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361], 864–866 [Pgs. 864–866 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

Netherlands position, 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 361]

Nigerian position, 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361]

Prices, 783–784 [Pgs. 783–784 include portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 827–828 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 345], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 834–835 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348], 841–842 [Pgs. 841–842 include portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 862–863 [Pgs. 862–863 include portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Swiss position, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 369]

Tariffs, 834–835 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348]

Togo position, 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

UN meeting, 701–702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

U.S.-Ghana agreement, 827–829 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 345], 836 [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 349], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Coffee (see also Commodities and strategic materials policy), 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 772–773 [Pgs. 772–773 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 326], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 351], 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 877–878 [Pgs. 877–878 include portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Coffee Diversification Fund, 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 326]

Coffin, Frank M., 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 97], 274–283 [Pgs. 274–283 include portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 286–295 [Pgs. 286–295 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 313–315 [Pgs. 313–315 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109], 316n [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 110], 335n [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]

Colbert, James L., 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287]

Coleman, John C., 411n [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 136]

Collins, John R., 464n [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 160]

Colombia, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 44], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

Columbite, 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 305]

Commodities and strategic materials policy (see also Cocoa; Cotton textiles; Grains and cereals; Strategic stockpile policy; Sugar; Wool textiles), 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 203], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 280], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 359] Australia-New Zealand meat agreement, 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 203]

Coffee, 708–709 [Pgs. 708–709 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, and Doc. 283], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 772–773 [Pgs. 772–773 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 326], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 351], 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 877–878 [Pgs. 877–878 include portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Commodity Exchange Act, 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Kennedy Round Agriculture Subcommittee talks, 578–579 [Pgs. 578–579 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Poultry, 845–847 [Pgs. 845–847 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 360], 854–857 [Pgs. 854–857 include portions of Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365]

Rubber, 756–757 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 305], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 308], 797–799 [Pgs. 797–799 include portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 350], 859–862 [Pgs. 859–862 include portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Turkey parts, 846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365]

Congo, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66], 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 305]

Congress, U.S.: Commodities and strategic materials policy, 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 816–817 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 341], 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366] Cocoa, 779 [Pg. 779 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 816–817 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 341], 838–839 [Pgs. 838–839 include portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Cotton textiles, 849–850 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

International Grains Arrangement, 843–844 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

Strategic stockpile, 747–748 [Pgs. 747–748 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Sugar, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 212], 630–632 [Pgs. 630–632 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 285]

East-West trade, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 162], 478–482 [Pgs. 478–482 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 496–503 [Pgs. 496–503 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 511–512 [Pgs. 511–512 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 192]

Foreign assistance policy, 71–72 [Pgs. 71–72 include portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 82–84 [Pgs. 82–84 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 105–109 [Pgs. 105–109 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 42], 140n [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 49], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 50], 157–158 [Pgs. 157–158 include portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 393–394 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 131] Budget, 21–22 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 101–103 [Pgs. 101–103 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 217–224 [Pgs. 217–224 include portions of Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77]

Countries, number of, limitation 181–185 [Pgs. 181–185 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

Department of Defense budget transfer, 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73]

IDA funds replenishment, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 76], 364–368 [Pgs. 364–368 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 436–439 [Pgs. 436–439 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

Javits amendment, 143–145 [Pgs. 143–145 include portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Symington amendment, 197n [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70]

Legislation: Agricultural Trade Development Act, 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3]

Commodity Exchange Act, 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Cuban Claims Bill, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 20]

East-West Trade Act, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 161], 473–475 [Pgs. 473–475 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 173], 501–505 [Pgs. 501–505 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176]

East-West Trade Relations Act of 1966, 516–517 [Pgs. 516–517 include portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 192]

Ellender Bill, 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Export Control Act, 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 161], 499–500 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 173], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 174]

Export-Import Bank Act of 1945, 224n [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Export-Import Bank Bill, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 70]

Foreign Aid and Related Agencies Appropriation Act of 1964, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 157]

Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, 8–9 [Pgs. 8–9 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 14–15 [Pgs. 14–15 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 20], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 20], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 33], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 35], 178n [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 61], 367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 120], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 178]

Foreign Assistance Act of 1966, 235n [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

Foreign Assistance and Related Agencies Appropriations Act of 1967, 366–367 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 120]

Foreign Assistance Appropriations Act, 159–160 [Pgs. 159–160 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

International Education Act of 1966, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 53]

Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

Mutual Defense Assistance Control Act of 1951, 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 470n [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161], 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 178]

P.L. 88–638, 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

P.L. 89–273, 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

P.L. 480, 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Sugar Act, 613–616 [Pgs. 613–616 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 235], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Trade Agreements Extension Act of 1951, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 161]

Trade Expansion Act, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 161], 530–531 [Pgs. 530–531 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 241, Doc. 242, and Doc. 243]

Trade Expansion Act of 1962, 530–531 [Pgs. 530–531 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

Wool Act, 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 238]

Wool Products Labeling Act of 1939, 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 358]

Military assistanee policy, 123–124 [Pgs. 123–124 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 211–213 [Pgs. 211–213 include portions of Doc. 72, Doc. 73, and Doc. 74], 224–225 [Pgs. 224–225 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

World food problem, 393–394 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 131]

Connor, John T., 485–487 [Pgs. 485–487 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 172], 500–504 [Pgs. 500–504 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 279], 713–714 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 286], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 286], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 313], 785–788 [Pgs. 785–788 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Conte, Silvio O., 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Cook, P. R., Jr., 335n [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 339n [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 113], 424n [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Cooley, Harold D., 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 212], 613–614 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 228], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Coordinating Committee of the Paris Consultative Group (COCOM), 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 163], 535–542 [Pgs. 535–542 include portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, and Doc. 191], 544–546 [Pgs. 544–546 include portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195]

Copper, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 240], 734–737 [Pgs. 734–737 include portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 298], 743–748 [Pgs. 743–748 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 305], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344], 871–872 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 374]

Costa Rica, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Cotton textiles (see also Commodities and strategic materials policy), 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 209], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 241, Doc. 242, and Doc. 243], 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 302], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 306], 769–770 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 313], 795–796 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 327], 806–807 [Pgs. 806–807 include portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359] EEC Community position, 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 302], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 327]

Extra long staple cotton, 592–599 [Pgs. 592–599 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, and Doc. 223], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 849–850 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Hayden Amendment, 849–850 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Herter procedure, 770–772 [Pgs. 770–772 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Hong Kong position, 724–725 [Pgs. 724–725 include portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 302], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 327]

Indian position, 725–726 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 290], 730–733 [Pgs. 730–733 include portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 759–760 [Pgs. 759–760 include portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 317], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 319], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

International agreement negotiations, 632–635 [Pgs. 632–635 include portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 723–727 [Pgs. 723–727 include portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 758–760 [Pgs. 758–760 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, and Doc. 307], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312], 776–777 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317], 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 785–788 [Pgs. 785–788 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 795–797 [Pgs. 795–797 include portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

International conference proposal, 623–629 [Pgs. 623–629 include portions of Doc. 232, Doc. 233, and Doc. 234]

Japanese position, 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 302]

Long-Term Agreement. See International agreement negotiations above.

Long-Term Agreement administration, 724–727 [Pgs. 724–727 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291], 731–733 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 294]

Pakistani position, 725–729 [Pgs. 725–729 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 306], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317]

Peruvian position, 593–594 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 220], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 227], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 359]

Prices, 593–595 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 220]

Spanish position, 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

Sudan sales, 611–612 [Pgs. 611–612 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Taiwan position, 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 306], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317]

Trade Expansion Act, 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 241, Doc. 242, and Doc. 243]

United Arab Republic position, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 227], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 290]

US. legislation, 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 241, Doc. 242, and Doc. 243]

U.S. stockpile sales, 611–612 [Pgs. 611–612 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

White proposal, 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Courtney, William F., 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 128]

Cuba, 11–12 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5], 456–457 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 154], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 161], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161]

Sugar, 665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 288], 722–723 [Pgs. 722–723 include portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Current Economic Developments issues: No. 706, 242–244 [Pgs. 242–244 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87]

No. 711, 253–255 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 91]

No. 744, 347–349 [Pgs. 347–349 include portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

No. 766, 380–383 [Pgs. 380–383 include portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

No. 771, 401–406 [Pgs. 401–406 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

No. 789, 535–537 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 189]

No. 800, 427–428 [Pgs. 427–428 include portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

No. 804, 545–546 [Pgs. 545–546 include portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195]

No. 819, 439–444 [Pgs. 439–444 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Czechoslovakia, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 157], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178], 535–537 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 189]

Dahl, Edward, 813n [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Daniel, Price, 867–868 [Pgs. 867–868 include portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 872–873 [Pgs. 872–873 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

Daniels, Michael P., 587–589 [Pgs. 587–589 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218]

Darman, Morton, 569–571 [Pgs. 569–571 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 233], 713–714 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 286]

Daspit, Alex B., 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 316n [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 110], 339n [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 113]

Davenport, Philip M., 709n [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

Dean, Arthur, 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 46]

Debre, Michel, 392–393 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 131]

DeFelice, A. R., 668n [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 257], 684n [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

DeLattre, Andre, 251–252 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 90], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105]

DeMartino, John J., 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Demirel, Suleyman, 126–127 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 44]

Deniau, Jean Francois, 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 355], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 357]

Denmark, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 110], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 147], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

Denton, Judith M., 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 281–282 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 99], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 103], 342–344 [Pgs. 342–344 include portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 416–421 [Pgs. 416–421 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139] Aid-perfonnance standards, 244–248 [Pgs. 244–248 include portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 90], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97], 327–330 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110], 339–340 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 113]

Annual Aid Review, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 88], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 110], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 115], 398–400 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 132], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 144]

Assistance needs assessment, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 110], 319–320 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 110], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 111], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 112], 344–345 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 115]

Austrian position, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 110], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 110], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 112], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113]

Belgian position, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 110], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 141]

Big vs.little DAC doctrines, 339–340 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 113]

Bilateral cooperation, 299–300 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 105]

British position, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 90], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 97], 297–299 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 106], 311–312 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 110], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 110], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 110], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 112], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 361–362 [Pgs. 361–362 include portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

British zero interest policy, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 110], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110]

Canadian position, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 89], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 97], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 99], 311–312 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 110], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 110], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 110], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 141]

Chairman, permanent position, 278–279 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 99], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 99], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 103]

Consultative groups approach 298–301 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 124]

Country reviews, 340–341 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 129]

Danish position, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 110], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113]

Data collection and assessment, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 105], 353–355 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 117]

Debt rescheduling and consolidation, 304–305 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 105]

EEC position, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110]

Financial flow, 245–247 [Pgs. 245–247 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

French position, 251–252 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 90], 297–298 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 106], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 110], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110], 332–333 [Pgs. 332–333 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 115], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 425–426 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 141]

Future directions, 331–332 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 110]

Gap theory, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 89]

German position, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 90], 268–269 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97], 297–300 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 106], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110], 329–330 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 110], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 110], 340–341 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 425–426 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 141]

Greek position, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97]

Group of Experts on Private Capital proposal, 354–355 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 117], 360–361 [Pgs. 360–361 include portions of Doc. 117 and Doc. 118]

High-level meetings, 244–247 [Pgs. 244–247 include portions of Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 314–316 [Pgs. 314–316 include portions of Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110], 373–374 [Pgs. 373–374 include portions of Doc. 122, Doc. 123, and Doc. 124], 439–444 [Pgs. 439–444 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

Horowitz proposal, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 132]

IBRD relationship, 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 266–270 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 275–276 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 99], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 99], 286–289 [Pgs. 286–289 include portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 294–295 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 103], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 105], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 110]

Indebtedness issue, 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 88], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 90], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 94], 300–301 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 303–305 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 105], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 110], 323–324 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 113], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 115], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 124], 386–388 [Pgs. 386–388 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 131], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 131], 399–400 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 132], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 144], 441–442 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 147]

International conference proposal, 290–292 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 102]

Investment conferences, 356–357 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 117]

Italian position, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 110], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 110]

Japanese position, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 325–326 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 112], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 118]

Ministerial meeting proposal, 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 89], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 90], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 105]

Multilateral cooperation and program coordination, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 90], 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 99], 294–295 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 103], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Netherlands position, 311–312 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 318–319 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 326–327 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 110], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 112], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113]

Norwegian position, 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 110], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 141]

Organization, procedure, and personnel, 274–275 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 99], 277–281 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 99], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 103], 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Population growth, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 147]

Portuguese position, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110]

Private sector participation, 333–338 [Pgs. 333–338 include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 115], 352–360 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 117], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 131], 422–426 [Pgs. 422–426 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Role, 256–258 [Pgs. 256–258 include portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 99], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105]

Science and technology, 431–432 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 144]

Self-help principle, 303–304 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 105]

Soviet Bloc participation, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 144], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 147]

Swedish position, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110]

Swiss position, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 118]

Tax incentives, 358–359 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 117]

Technical assistance programs, 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 89], 269–270 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 97], 310–313 [Pgs. 310–313 include portions of Doc. 106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108], 321–322 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 110], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 110], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 117], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 131], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 144]

Terms of aid, 245–246 [Pgs. 245–246 include portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 90], 305–306 [Pg. 305 is part of Doc. 105], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 106], 319–321 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 110], 324–327 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 110], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 113], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 124], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 132], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 147]

Turkish position, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97]

UN Conference on Trade and Development recommendations, 247–250 [Pgs. 247–250 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 92], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 147]

Unanimity rule, 279–280 [Pg. 279 is part of Doc. 99]

US.-German future works proposal, 302–307 [Pgs. 302–307 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Watson report recommendations, 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Woods proposal, 430–431 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 144]

Working Group on Private Investment, 333–338 [Pgs. 333–338 include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

Working Party on Requirements and Performance report, 327–328 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110]

World food problem, 362–364 [Pgs. 362–364 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 368–373 [Pgs. 368–373 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 375–377 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 124], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 131], 392–396 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 131], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 132], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 139], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 144], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 147]

Developmental assistance. See under Foreign assistance policy.

Diamonds, 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 305]

Dillon, C. Douglas, 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 253–254 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 91], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 154]

Dixon, Richard C., 544n [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 193]

Dominican Republic, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311] Military assistance, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 123n [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 43]

Donovan, C. R., 684n [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Draper, Frederick G., 271–273 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 98], 283–286 [Pgs. 283–286 include portions of Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

Dulles, John Foster, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 170]

Duncan, Enoch S., 593–594 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 220], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Dungan, Ralph A., 6n [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 220]

Dutton, Jack B., 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 275]

East-West trade, 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 149], 467–474 [Pgs. 467–474 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 491–492 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 183], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194] AFL/CIO position, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 171], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Agricultural production machinery sales, 446–451 [Pgs. 446–451 include portions of Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 459–460 [Pgs. 459–460 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

AlIies-Soviet Bloc trade, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 154], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161], 507–511 [Pgs. 507–511 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179]

Battle Act administration, 512–515 [Pgs. 512–515 include portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Beet harvester machinery sales, 446–447 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 149], 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 154], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 159]

British-Soviet Bloc trade, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 154], 509–510 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178], 525–528 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 184], 535–537 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 189], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196]

Bulgaria, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 157], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173], 508–509 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 178]

China, People's Republic of, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 161], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 189]

Color television technology standards, 482–483 [Pgs. 482–483 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

Computer technology control, 535–542 [Pgs. 535–542 include portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, and Doc. 191], 548–550 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196]

Coordinating Committee of the Paris Consultative Group, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 163], 535–542 [Pgs. 535–542 include portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, and Doc. 191], 544–546 [Pgs. 544–546 include portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195]

Credit policy 469–470 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 161], 489–490 [Pgs. 489–490 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 494–495 [Pgs. 494–495 include portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 195]

Cuba, 456–457 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 154], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 161], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161]

Czechoslovakia, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 157], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178], 535–537 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 189]

Czechoslovakia, invasion of, effect on, 546–547 [Pgs. 546–547 include portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Embargo, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 161], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 161], 491–493 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170], 507–515 [Pgs. 507–515 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180]

Export Control Review Board, 446–448 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 149]

Export-Import Bank guarantees, 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 148], 461–462 [Pgs. 461–462 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161]

Extraterritorial jurisdiction issue, 527 [Pg. 527 is part of Doc. 184]

Fertilizer plants sales, 446–447 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 149], 454–455 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 154], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 159]

Foodstuffs, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 154]

French position, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 191], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

French-Soviet Bloc trade, 507–508 [Pgs. 507–508 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 521–524 [Pgs. 521–524 include portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 535–537 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 189], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196]

German-Soviet Bloc trade, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 178]

Germany, Democratic Republic of, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170]

Hungary, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 157], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178]

Italy-Soviet Bloc trade, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 178], 517–521 [Pgs. 517–521 include portions of Doc. 181, Doc. 182, and Doc. 183]

Japan-Soviet Bloc trade, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161], 508–509 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 178]

Licensing, 452–453 [Pgs. 452–453 include portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 169], 532–534 [Pgs. 532–534 include portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188]

Miller Committee, 479–482 [Pgs. 479–482 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 484–485 [Pgs. 484–485 include portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 495–505 [Pgs. 495–505 include portions of Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176]

Most favored nation status, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 161], 489–490 [Pgs. 489–490 include portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 170], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 175]

Nuclear reactors sales, 512–516 [Pgs. 512–516 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181]

Objectives, 487–489 [Pgs. 487–489 include portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Patents protection, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 150], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 154]

Poland, 461–462 [Pgs. 461–462 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 491–493 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178]

Private sector position, 477–478 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 163], 502–503 [Pgs. 502–503 include portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Quid pro quo stipulation, 448–450 [Pgs. 448–450 include portions of Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 154], 458–459 [Pgs. 458–459 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 159]

RCA color television sales, 464–466 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 160], 482–483 [Pgs. 482–483 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 485–487 [Pgs. 485–487 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169]

Romania, 461–462 [Pgs. 461–462 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 163], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 170], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173], 547–550 [Pgs. 547–550 include portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Soviet lend-lease account issue, 493–494 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173]

Soviet-U.S. trade negotiations, 493–494 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 500–501 [Pgs. 500–501 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Special Committee on East-West Trade, 479–482 [Pgs. 479–482 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166]

Strategic controls, economic and political price of, 526–528 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 184]

Strategic controls administration, 513–515 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 180], 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Strategic controls list, 476–477 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 163], 545–546 [Pgs. 545–546 include portions of Doc. 193, Doc. 194, and Doc. 195]

Subsidiaries, U.S. controned, sales by, 519–520 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 182], 523–524 [Pg. 523 is part of Doc. 183]

Sweden-Soviet Bloc trade, 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Tariffs, nondiscriminatory, 530–532 [Pgs. 530–532 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187]

Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy report, 467–474 [Pgs. 467–474 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Technology control, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 161], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 169], 535–537 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 189], 548–550 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196]

U.S. legislation, 498–503 [Pgs. 498–503 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 511–512 [Pgs. 511–512 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186] East-West Trade Act, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 161], 473–475 [Pgs. 473–475 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 173], 501–505 [Pgs. 501–505 include portions of Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176]

East-West Trade Relations Act of 1966, 516–517 [Pgs. 516–517 include portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 192]

Export Control Act, 499–500 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 173], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 174]

Trade Expansion Act of 1962, 530–531 [Pgs. 530–531 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

Video tape recorder sales, 465–466 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 160], 485–487 [Pgs. 485–487 include portions of Doc. 167, Doc. 168, and Doc. 169], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 178]

Vietnam conflict, effect on, 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 175], 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

Yugoslavia, 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 148], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 161], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 161], 491–493 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170]

Eaton, Edgar I., 662n [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 253]

Economic defense policy. See East-West trade.

Ecuador, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361]

Egypt. See United Arab Republic.

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 56], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 170], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 344]

El Salvador, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Elbert, Edwin, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

Ellington, Buford, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 297], 750–752 [Pgs. 750–752 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Elson, 330–331 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 110]

Emmerson, John K., 659n [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 251]

Enders, Thomas O., 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287]

Engelhard, Charles, 497n [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 172]

Engholm, (British), 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 208], 660–661 [Pgs. 660–661 include portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 763–765 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 309]

Engstrom, Elmer W., 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 166]

Erdkarnp, Sharon, 683n [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268]

Eskildsen, Clarence R., 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125]

Ethiopia, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

European Economic Community (EEC), 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348] Cotton textiles, 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 302], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 327]

Grains and cereals, 572–574 [Pgs. 572–574 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 686–687 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 270], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 276], 789–791 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 324]

Wool textiles, 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 876–877 [Pgs. 876–877 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]

European Monetary Fund, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 59]

Evans, John, 855–856 [Pgs. 855–856 include portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

Evens, 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 105], 323–324 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110]

Export-Import Bank, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 19], 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 20], 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 20], 69–70 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 21], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70], 201–202 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 70], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 148], 461–462 [Pgs. 461–462 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161]

Farmer, Tom, 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]

Faure, Edgar, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 131]

Fei, Edward C., 424n [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Feldman, Meyer, 592–596 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 220], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 223], 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 224], 607n [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 228], 644n [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Ferlesch, 622 [Pg. 622 is part of Doc. 232], 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Finkel, 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 128]

Finland, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

Fleischer, Jack M., 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Focke, Arthur B., 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

Food assistance. See under Foreign assistance policy.

Food for Freedom Program, 131n [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 46]

Food for Peace Program, 110–111 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]

Ford, Alan W., 517n [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Foreign assistance policy (see also Agency for International Development; International Bank for Reconstruction and Development; International Development Association; International investment and development policy; Military assistance policy), 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 144] Absorptive capacity, raising, 57–58 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 20]

Africa, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 127–128 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 169–170 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59], 176–177 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 60], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 65], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 70], 234–236 [Pgs. 234–236 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

African Development Bank, 169–170 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 60], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 70]

Alliance for Progress, 17–20 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 146–147 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 52], 149–150 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 53], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 57], 186–187 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 83]

Asian Development Bank, 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 75]

Balance of payments concern, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 47], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 56], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 70], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 70]

Bilateral assistance programs, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 20], 53–55 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 20], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 21], 73–74 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 60], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 65]

Bolivia, 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Brazil, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 44], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82]

Budget, U.S., 1–5 [Pgs. 1–5 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 13–14 [Pgs. 13–14 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 16–24 [Pgs. 16–24 include portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 29–31 [Pgs. 29–31 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 101–103 [Pgs. 101–103 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 124–128 [Pgs. 124–128 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 142–143 [Pgs. 142–143 include portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 146–150 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 52], 159–160 [Pgs. 159–160 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 186–190 [Pgs. 186–190 include portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 217–224 [Pgs. 217–224 include portions of Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 232–237 [Pgs. 232–237 include portions of Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83] AID funds transfer, 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Cuban refugees assistance funding, 226–227 [Pgs. 226–227 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79]

Department of Defense budget transfer, 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73]

Economic and military budgets, separation of, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 21], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 22], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 23], 209–211 [Pgs. 209–211 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 84]

IBRD disbursement, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 20], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 50], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 55]

IDA funds replenishment, 79–80 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 23], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 196–197 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 70], 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 364–368 [Pgs. 364–368 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121]

Multi-year funding authorization, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 21], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 22], 75–76 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 23], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 25], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 37], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 39], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 47], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 50], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 53]

Planning, future, 36–38 [Pgs. 36–38 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 44–48 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 67–69 [Pg. 67 is part of Doc. 21], 72–74 [Pgs. 72–74 include portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Chile, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 44], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82]

Colombia, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 44], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68]

Contingency Fund, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 17–20 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9], 23–24 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 11], 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 19], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 27], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 55], 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Countries, number of, limitation, 175–178 [Pgs. 175–178 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 180–185 [Pgs. 180–185 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

Debt burden and service, 48–49 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 21], 97–98 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 35], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 47], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70], 200–201 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 70]

Developmental assistance, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 17–20 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 65–67 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 53];160, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 57], 171–172 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 59], 175–178 [Pgs. 175–178 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 184–188 [Pgs. 184–188 include portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 70], 227–229 [Pgs. 227–229 include portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 389–390 [Pgs. 389–390 include portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

Development Cooperation Fund proposal, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 79]

Dominican Republic, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Educational programs, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 42], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 47], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 53], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 79]

Ethiopia, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

European Monetary Fund proposa1, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 59]

Expending obligated balances, 18–20 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 9]

Export-Import Bank and, 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 20], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 69–70 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 21], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70], 201–202 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 70]

Food assistance and agricultural programs, 36–37 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 20], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 20], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 21], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 23], 107–108 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 39], 110–111 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40], 114–117 [Pgs. 114–117 include portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 42], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 42], 129–133 [Pgs. 129–133 include portions of Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 135–136 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 47], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 53], 191–193 [Pgs. 191–193 include portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 70], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 70], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 75], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 79], 364–368 [Pgs. 364–368 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

Foreign policy goals, relationship to, 42–43 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 20], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 39], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 42], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 47], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 83]

General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs. See Perkins committee below.

Ghana, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 70], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

Greece, 6–7 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23]

Growth rates, impact on, 44–50 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 52–54 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 20], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20]

Guinea, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21]

IMF drawing rights, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 79]

India, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 20], 49–50 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 20], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 42], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 42], 149–150 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 192–193 [Pgs. 192–193 include portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 196–200 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 70], 205–206 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 70], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

Indonesia, 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 70]

Indus project, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

Inter-American Development Bank, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 20], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 23], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 73], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 75], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 79]

Interest rate, 141–142 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 50]

International Education Act of 1966, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 53]

International Finance Corporation disbursement, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 20]

Israel, 6–7 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23]

Jordan, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66]

Korea, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 148–150 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

Laos, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52]

Latin America, 1–2 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 65–66 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 27], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 143–147 [Pgs. 143–147 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, and Doc. 52], 174–175 [Pgs. 174–175 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 70], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 83]

Liberia, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21]

Military expenditures of AID funds, 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 70]

Multilateral aid coordination, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 66–67 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 40], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 42]

Multilateralism, 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 20], 51–54 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20], 102–103 [Pgs. 102–103 include portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 39], 136–137 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 47], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 56], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 59], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 60], 197–198 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 79], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 84]

NATO infrastructure, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66]

Near East, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44]

New look for, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 54], 161–164 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 56]

Nigeria, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Objectives, 42–44 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 20], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 21], 65–67 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 133–137 [Pgs. 133–137 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Overseas Development Corporation proposal, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 79], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 84]

Pakistan, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 20], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 42], 149–150 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 70]

Perkins committee, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 31], 116–123 [Pgs. 116–123 include portions of Doc. 41, Doc. 42, and Doc. 43], 151–157 [Pgs. 151–157 include portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 56], 213–216 [Pgs. 213–216 include portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 227–232 [Pgs. 227–232 include portions of Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 238–239 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 84]

Peru, 65–66 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 21], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

Philippines, 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66]

P.L. 480 program. See food assistance and agricultural programs above.

Population growth control, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 20], 77–78 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 23], 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, and Doc. 35], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 42], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 47], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 53], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 56], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 133], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 147]

Private sector participation, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 37–38 [Pgs. 37–38 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 45 [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 20], 51–52 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20], 58–60 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 20], 78–79 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 23], 109–110 [Pgs. 109–110 include portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 152–153 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 53], 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 163–164 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 56], 172–173 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 59], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 70], 228–229 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 79] Federal loan guarantees, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 70], 202–204 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 70]

Program review, 105–109 [Pgs. 105–109 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40]

Regional approach, 161–162 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 56], 169–171 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59], 205–206 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 70]

Research and institutional grants, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

Self-help encouragement, 171–172 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 59]

Social Progress Trust Fund, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 21]

South Asia, 170–171 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 59], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 70]

Southeast Asia development, 111–112 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40]

Supporting assistance, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 9], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 44], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 55], 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66]

Task Force on Foreign Aid report, 195–206 [Pgs. 195–206 include portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

Task Force on Foreign Economic Policy reports, 42–61 [Pgs. 42–61 include portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Technical assistance programs, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 9], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 20], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 57], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 60], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 65], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66], 188–189 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 74]

Thailand, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

Turkey, 126–127 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 44], 149–150 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 181–188 [Pgs. 181–188 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 70], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

United Arab Republic, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 42]

Upper Volta, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 53]

U.S. legislation, 28–29 [Pgs. 28–29 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 143n [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 157–158 [Pgs. 157–158 include portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 167–174 [Pgs. 167–174 include portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 70] Export-Import Bank Bill, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 70]

Fulbright proposal, 76–77 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 23], 82–84 [Pgs. 82–84 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 56]

Javits Amendment, 143–145 [Pgs. 143–145 include portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 364 [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]ft Latin America democracy stipulation, 144–145 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 51]

Multi-year funding authorization 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 21], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 22], 75–76 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 23], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 25], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 37], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 39], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 47], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 50], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 53]

Strategy, 175–176 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 60], 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 75], 219–220 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 75], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 76]

Symington amendment, 197n [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70]

Whitten Proviso, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]

Venezuela, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23]

Vietnam and, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 44], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 70], 233–235 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 82]

World food problem, 368–371 [Pgs. 368–371 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122]

Foster, Luther H., 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 120]

Fowler, Henry H., 96–100 [Pgs. 96–100 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 52], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68], 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 76], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 406n [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 134], 437–439 [Pgs. 437–439 include portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 298], 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 329], 877–878 [Pgs. 877–878 include portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

France: Cocoa, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 833–834 [Pgs. 833–834 include portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 839 [Pg. 839 is part of Doc. 351], 864–866 [Pgs. 864–866 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

Color television technology standands, 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 160], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 168], 487n [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

East-West trade, 507–508 [Pgs. 507–508 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 521–524 [Pgs. 521–524 include portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 535–537 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 189], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 191], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196]

Foreign assistance policy, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 251–252 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 90], 296–298 [Pgs. 296–298 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 106], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 110], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110], 332–333 [Pgs. 332–333 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 345 [Pg. 345 is part of Doc. 115], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 138], 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 138], 425–426 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 141], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 143], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 147]

IDA funds replenishment, 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

International investment and development policy, 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 106]

Wool textiles, 570–571 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 207], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 219]

World food problem, 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 131], 392–393 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 131], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 131]

Franks, Oliver, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 144]

Freedman, Selma, 521n [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Freeman, Orville, L., 85n [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26], 129–130 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 45], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 122], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 149], 454–457 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 154], 459–460 [Pgs. 459–460 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 613–614 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 228], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

Frelinghuysen, Peter H.B., 86 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 27]

Fried, Edward R., 231n [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 436n [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 167], 497n [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 172], 511n [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 701n [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 277], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 710n [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 310], 772n [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 318], 792–793 [Pgs. 792–793 include portions of Doc. 324, Doc. 325, and Doc. 326], 800n [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 346], 843n [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Fried, Milton, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 233]

Friedman, Alvin, 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 238]

Friedman, Gerald A., 668n [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 257], 686n [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 270], 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 275]

Friedman, Irving, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 103]

Friedman, Meyer, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 238], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Fukuda, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 234]

Fulbright, J. William, 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 71–72 [Pgs. 71–72 include portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 23], 82–84 [Pgs. 82–84 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 42], 140–141 [Pgs. 140–141 include portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 181–185 [Pgs. 181–185 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 76], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 496–497 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 172], 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 285], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

Funari, John, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

Garber, 813n [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Garrison, Mark J., 512n [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Garrone, 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Gaud, William S., 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 146–150 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 52], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 53], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 53], 159–160 [Pgs. 159–160 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 60], 179–182 [Pgs. 179–182 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 185–189 [Pgs. 185–189 include portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 68], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 231–236 [Pgs. 231–236 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 249n [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 290n [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 342n [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 120], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 134], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 135], 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 420–421 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 139]

General Advisory Committee on Foreign Assistance Programs. See Perkins committee under Foreign assistance policy.

Germany, Federal Republic of, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107] Cocoa, 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 318], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348]

COCOM membership, 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 163]

East-West trade, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 178]

Foreign assistance policy, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 90], 268–269 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97], 296–300 [Pgs. 296–300 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 106], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110], 329–330 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 110], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 110], 340–341 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 425–426 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 141], 443–444 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 147]

IDA funds replenishment, 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

U.S.-German Development Assistance Committee proposal, 302–307 [Pgs. 302–307 include portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Wool textiles, 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 207]

World food problem, 394–395 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 131]

Getzin, E. E., 753n [Pg. 753 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Ghana, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 70], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82] Cocoa, 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 827–829 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 345], 835–836 [Pgs. 835–836 include portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361], 865–866 [Pgs. 865–866 include portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Ghiardi, John F., 411n [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 136]

Gilbert, E. M., 316n [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 110], 335n [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 339n [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 113]

Giscard d'Estaing, Valery, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 110]

Glaessner, Phil, 878 [Pg. 878 is part of Doc. 379]

Glazer, Harry B., 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Gold, Ruth S., 408n [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Goldberg, Arthur J., 347–348 [Pgs. 347–348 include portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 341], 817 [Pg. 817 is part of Doc. 341], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 345]

Goldfinger, Nathaniel, 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170]

Goldstein, Ernest, 857–858 [Pgs. 857–858 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

Goodwin, Dick, 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 10]

Gordon, Kermit, 6n [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 24], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26], 85n [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 27], 94n [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 33], 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 653n [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 246]

Gornnan, Jannes, 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 98]

Grains and cereals (see also Commodities and strategic materials policy, 557–559 [Pgs. 557–559 include portions of Doc. 199, Doc. 200, and Doc. 201] Argentine position, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 211], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 333]

Australian position, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 211], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 270], 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 276], 703–704 [Pg. 703 is part of Doc. 278], 764–765 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 309], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 324], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 800–802 [Pgs. 800–802 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, and Doc. 332], 804–805 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 333], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 335]

British position, 551–554 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 197], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 198], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 208], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 211], 699–700 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 276], 763–765 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 309], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 333], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 338]

Canadian position, 555 [Pg. 555 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 211], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 249], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 276], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 309], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 804–805 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 333]

Cereals consultative group negotiations, 563–568 [Pgs. 563–568 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 572–574 [Pgs. 572–574 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 576–580 [Pgs. 576–580 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 584–586 [Pgs. 584–586 include portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216], 683–684 [Pgs. 683–684 include portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 686–688 [Pgs. 686–688 include portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 698–700 [Pgs. 698–700 include portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 702–704 [Pgs. 702–704 include portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287], 789–792 [Pgs. 789–792 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 800–806 [Pgs. 800–806 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

EEC position, 572–574 [Pgs. 572–574 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 686–687 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 270], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 276], 789–791 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 324]

Food aid, 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 687–688 [Pgs. 687–688 include portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 324]

International Grains Arrangement, 843–844 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

International investment and development, 300–301 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

International Wheat Agreement extension, 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 818–819 [Pgs. 818–819 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344]

Japanese position, 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 276], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Montant de Soutien approach, 572–573 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 208], 577–580 [Pgs. 577–580 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 276]

Prices, 552–554 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 197], 565–566 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 204], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 210], 656–658 [Pgs. 656–658 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, and Doc. 250], 680–681 [Pgs. 680–681 include portions of Doc. 265, Doc. 266, and Doc. 267], 686–687 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 270], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 278], 802–806 [Pgs. 802–806 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334]

Soviet participation, 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287]

U.S.-U.K. grains agreement, 551–559 [Pgs. 551–559 include portions of Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, and Doc. 201], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216], 654–655 [Pgs. 654–655 include portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 660–661 [Pgs. 660–661 include portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 663–664 [Pgs. 663–664 include portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 666–669 [Pgs. 666–669 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 673–676 [Pgs. 673–676 include portions of Doc. 260, Doc. 261, and Doc. 262], 681–682 [Pgs. 681–682 include portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 684–685 [Pgs. 684–685 include portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 763–765 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 309], 774–775 [Pgs. 774–775 include portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 811–813 [Pgs. 811–813 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339]

Greece, 6–7 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97] Military assistance, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–35 [Pgs. 32–35 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 30]

Greenwald, Joseph A., 422–424 [Pgs. 422–424 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 512n [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 529–530 [Pgs. 529–530 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 532–534 [Pgs. 532–534 include portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 574n [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 683n [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268]

Gromyko, Andrei, 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Grounouski, 85n [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26]

Gruenther, A. I., 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 120]

Guatemala, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311]

Guinea, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21]

Guozzaroni (Italian), 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 377]

Hadraba, Theodore J., 517n [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Hallack, Charles, 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10]

Hamilton, Edward K., 146–147 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 52], 167–174 [Pgs. 167–174 include portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 179–182 [Pgs. 179–182 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 193n [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 209–211 [Pgs. 209–211 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 221–224 [Pgs. 221–224 include portions of Doc. 75, Doc. 76, and Doc. 77], 713–716 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 286]

Harary, J.A., 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Harb (Egyptian) 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Harding, George R., 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 113]

Harlech, Lord, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Harper, John, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 297]

Harriman, W. Averell, 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 559–560 [Pgs. 559–560 include portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202]

Hartman, Arthur A., 236n [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 184], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Harvey, Bartlett, 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 99], 293n [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 103], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 103]

Hayden, Carl, 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Hayme, William A., 521n [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Heath, Edwin, 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Hedges, Irwin R., 654n [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 663n [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 668n [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 257], 673n [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 680n [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 683n [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268]-684n [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 686n [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 270], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287], 774n [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 315],BOOn, 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Herera, Felipe, 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25]

Herter, Christian A., 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 154], 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 567n [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 609–611 [Pgs. 609–611 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 241, Doc. 242, and Doc. 243], 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 666–668 [Pgs. 666–668 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257], 770–771 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 313], 774n [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 315]

Hewlett, William R., 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 42]

Heyman, I. A., 424n [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Hickenlooper, Bourke, B., 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 63], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 172], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 285], 843–844 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

Hijzen, Theodorus, 845 [Pg. 845 is part of Doc. 355], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

Hilliard, John F., 271n [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 98], 283n [Pg. 283 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Hilliker, G., 581n [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 212]

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Hinton, Deane R., 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216]

Hirabayashi, Martin Y., 848n [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 358]

Hirschfield, T.J., 568n [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Hirschtritt, Ralph, 293n [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 103], 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125]

Hitch, C. J., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Hockersmith, F. D., 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 160], 476n [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 163]

Hodges, Luther H., 446–450 [Pgs. 446–450 include portions of Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153], 454–455 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 154], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 154], 459–460 [Pgs. 459–460 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 159], 464n [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 160], 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 224], 609n [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 226], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 234], 644–647 [Pgs. 644–647 include portions of Doc. 241, Doc. 242, and Doc. 243]

Hoffman, Paul, 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 116]

Hohenberg, Bernard, 587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

Holt, Harold E., 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 335]

Home, Lord, 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Honduras, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Hong Kong, cotton textiles imports, 724–725 [Pgs. 724–725 include portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 302], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 327]

Hoopes, Townsend, l05n, l07

Hopkins, William J., 844n [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 354]

Hopp, Henry, 730n [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317]

Hornig, Donald, 488n [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 169]

Horowitz, David, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 132]

Hosmer, Craig, 512–516 [Pgs. 512–516 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181]

Hughes, Thomas L., 416–419 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 138]

Humphrey, George, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 56]

Humphrey, Hubert, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 50], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 73], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 122], 375–376 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 124], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Hungary, 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 157], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178]

Ignatius, Paul R., 819–826 [Pgs. 819–826 include portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

Ikeda, Hayato, 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

India, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 122], 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 305] Cotton textiles, 725–726 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 290], 730–733 [Pgs. 730–733 include portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 759–760 [Pgs. 759–760 include portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 317], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 319], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

Food assistance and agricultural programs, 192–193 [Pgs. 192–193 include portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 70]

Foreign assistance, 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 20], 49–50 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 20], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 20], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 42], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 42], 149–150 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 192–193 [Pgs. 192–193 include portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 196–200 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 70], 205–206 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 70], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

International investment and development, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106] Keban Dam, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Military assistance, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

Indonesia, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 15], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 70], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 131], 756–757 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 305], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 308], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 350]

Indus project, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

Inter-American Development Bank, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 20], 79 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 23], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 73], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 75], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 79], 384–386 [Pgs. 384–386 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 252–255 [Pgs. 252–255 include portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 293–294 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 103], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 110], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 110], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 115], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 128], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 136] British position, 298–299 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 110]

Consultative groups approach, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 106], 319–320 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 110], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 110]

DAC relationship, 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 266–270 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 275–276 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 99], 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 99], 286–289 [Pgs. 286–289 include portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 293–295 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 103], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 105], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 110]

East African consultative group, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 105], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 106]

IDA relationship, 254–255 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 91]

Indebtedness issue, 264–265 [Pgs. 264–265 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 129]

Multilateral cooperation and program coordination, 266–270 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 294–295 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 103]

International Coffee Agreement, 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]

International Development Association (IDA), 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 86], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 143] Financial contributions, 243–244 [Pgs. 243–244 include portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

Funds replenishment, 79–80 [Pg. 79 is part of Doc. 23], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 196–197 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 70], 216–217 [Pgs. 216–217 include portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 106], 364–368 [Pgs. 364–368 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 384–386 [Pgs. 384–386 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 406–415 [Pgs. 406–415 include portions of Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137], 427–428 [Pgs. 427–428 include portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 436–439 [Pgs. 436–439 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

International Finance Corporation (IFC), 253–254 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 91], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 128]

International Grains Arrangement, 843–844 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

International investment and development policy (see also Development Assistance Committee; Foreign assistance policy; Inter-American Development Bank; International Bank for Reconstruction and Development; International Development Association), 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 85], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 91], 296–301 [Pgs. 296–301 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 108], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 112], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116], 403–404 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 133], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 144], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 145] Asian Development Bank, 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Assistance needs assessment, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 108], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 110]

High Commission territories, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 105], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 106]

IBRD funds transfer issue, 364–368 [Pgs. 364–368 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121]

Loan terms, 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Multilateral cooperation and program coordination, 240–241 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 85], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105], 299–300 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 105], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 433–436 [Pgs. 433–436 include portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Private sector participation, 418–419 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 138], 422–424 [Pgs. 422–424 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 433–434 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 145]

Sen agricultural fund proposal, 378–380 [Pgs. 378–380 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127]

Social Progress Trust Fund, 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Soviet Bloc assistance, 416–417 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 138]

Stiller report on private sector participation, 422–424 [Pgs. 422–424 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

UN Capital Development Fund, 349–350 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 116]

UN Committee for Industrial Development consultations, 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 271–273 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 98], 283–286 [Pgs. 283–286 include portions of Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

UN economic actions, 401–406 [Pgs. 401–406 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Watson report recommendations, 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

World food problem, 368–373 [Pgs. 368–373 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 375–377 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 124], 380–383 [Pgs. 380–383 include portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 390–395 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 131]

International Monetary Fund, drawing rights, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 79]

International Sugar Agreement, 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 678–680 [Pgs. 678–680 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

International Sugar Council, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 265]

International Wheat Agreement extension, 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 818–819 [Pgs. 818–819 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344]

International Wheat Council, 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

International Wool Study Group, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

loanes, Raymond, 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 220], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 238], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 238], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 238], 656n [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 673n [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 800n [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Iran, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–34 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21]

Ireland, 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 131]

Israel, 6–7 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

Italy, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 131] East-West trade, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 178], 517–521 [Pgs. 517–521 include portions of Doc. 181, Doc. 182, and Doc. 183]

Foreign assistance policy, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 110], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 110], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 147]

IDA funds replenishment, 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Wool textiles, 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 207], 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 620–623 [Pgs. 620–623 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 625–626 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 233], 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 874–875 [Pgs. 874–875 include portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

Ivory Coast, 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361], 864–866 [Pgs. 864–866 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

Izaki (Japanese), 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 272], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 273]

Jackson, Henry, 186n [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66]

Jacobs, George R., 662n [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 253], 669n [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]-710n [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 718–723 [Pgs. 718–723 include portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 310], 772n [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 716n [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 286], 784n [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 833n [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Jacobson, Dorothy H., 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125], 379–380 [Pgs. 379–380 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127]

Jacobson, Jerome J., 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 581n [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 212], 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 228], 615n [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 229], 630n [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 21]-631n [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 643–644 [Pgs. 643–644 include portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 669n [Pg. 669 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 275]

Jamaica, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 305]

Janton (French), 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348], 864–865 [Pgs. 864–865 include portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Japan, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 131], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 160] Cotton textiles, 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 302]

East-West trade, 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161], 508–509 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 178]

Foreign assistance policy, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 325–326 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 112], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 118], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 147]

Grains and cereals, 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 276], 792 [Pg. 792 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

IDA funds replenishment, 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Wool textiles, 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 207], 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 589–591 [Pgs. 589–591 include portions of Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 224], 616–619 [Pgs. 616–619 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 628–629 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 234], 658–660 [Pgs. 658–660 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252], 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 263], 688–696 [Pgs. 688–696 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 707–710 [Pgs. 707–710 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Jarvis, Francis G., 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 275]

Javits, Jacob, 143–144 [Pgs. 143–144 include portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Jenkins, Walter, 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 220]

Johnson, C. K., 874n [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 376]

Johnson, Chadwick, 422n [Pg. 422 is part of Doc. 140], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Johnson, Charles E., 651–652 [Pgs. 651–652 include portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 750–752 [Pgs. 750–752 include portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Johnson, G. Griffith, 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 482n [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 220], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 613–616 [Pgs. 613–616 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 630–632 [Pgs. 630–632 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 238], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 238], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 662n [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 253], 669–671 [Pgs. 669–671 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Johnson, James T., 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 155–156 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 53] Commodities and strategic materials policy: Aluminum, 736–737 [Pgs. 736–737 include portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Cocoa, 778–779 [Pgs. 778–779 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Coffee, 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 314]

Copper, 734–736 [Pgs. 734–736 include portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Cotton textiles, 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 241, Doc. 242, and Doc. 243], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 323], 806–807 [Pgs. 806–807 include portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Grains and cereals, 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 335], 843–844 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

Rubber, 797–798 [Pgs. 797–798 include portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329], 799n [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 329], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 350]

Strategic stockpile, 560–561 [Pgs. 560–561 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 641–643 [Pgs. 641–643 include portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241], 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 303], 761–762 [Pgs. 761–762 include portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 857–858 [Pgs. 857–858 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366], 867–868 [Pgs. 867–868 include portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 375]

Sugar, 559–563 [Pgs. 559–563 include portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 613–616 [Pgs. 613–616 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 235]

U.S.-U.K. grains agreement, 555–556 [Pgs. 555–556 include portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

Wool textiles, 574–575 [Pgs. 574–575 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 607–611 [Pgs. 607–611 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 691–692 [Pgs. 691–692 include portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 376]

Cuban refugees assistance, 226–227 [Pgs. 226–227 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79]

East-West trade, 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 148], 455–458 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 154], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 156], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 161], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 161], 474–475 [Pgs. 474–475 include portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 163], 495–497 [Pgs. 495–497 include portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 503–505 [Pgs. 503–505 include portions of Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176] Agricultural production equipment sales, 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 159]

Embargo shipments report, 507–511 [Pgs. 507–511 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179]

Foreign assistance policy, 105–106 [Pgs. 105–106 include portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 133–137 [Pgs. 133–137 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 139–140 [Pgs. 139–140 include portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 157–159 [Pgs. 157–159 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55], 161–164 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 56], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 83], 325–326 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110] Africa, 184–185 [Pgs. 184–185 include portions of Doc. 65 and Doc. 66]

Agency for International Development, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 40], 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Asian Development Bank, 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 40]

Budget, U.S., 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 13–14 [Pgs. 13–14 include portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 16–18 [Pgs. 16–18 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 21–24 [Pgs. 21–24 include portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 26n [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 29–31 [Pgs. 29–31 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 72–80 [Pgs. 72–80 include portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 85n [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 26], 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 28, Doc. 29, and Doc. 30], 109–114 [Pgs. 109–114 include portions of Doc. 39, Doc. 40, and Doc. 41], 124–128 [Pgs. 124–128 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 159–160 [Pgs. 159–160 include portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59], 185–191 [Pgs. 185–191 include portions of Doc. 65, Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 82]

Countries, number of, limitation, 181–185 [Pgs. 181–185 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

Developmental loan programs, 175–178 [Pgs. 175–178 include portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

Educational programs, 119n [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 42]

Food assistance and agricultural programs, 131–132 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 46], 179–180 [Pgs. 179–180 include portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 191–193 [Pgs. 191–193 include portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69]

Latin America, 8–12 [Pgs. 8–12 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 15–16 [Pgs. 15–16 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

Perkins committee, 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 151–157 [Pgs. 151–157 include portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 193–195 [Pgs. 193–195 include portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70], 213–216 [Pgs. 213–216 include portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 230–232 [Pgs. 230–232 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 238–239 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 84]

Population growth, 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, and Doc. 35]

Symington amendment, 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

U.S. legislation, 28–29 [Pgs. 28–29 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 101–103 [Pgs. 101–103 include portions of Doc. 36, Doc. 37, and Doc. 38], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 39], 140–141 [Pgs. 140–141 include portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 154–156 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 53], 216–221 [Pgs. 216–221 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76], 364–368 [Pgs. 364–368 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 516–517 [Pgs. 516–517 include portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182]

International investment and development policy, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 119], 406–409 [Pgs. 406–409 include portions of Doc. 133, Doc. 134, and Doc. 135], 420–421 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 139], 436–437 [Pgs. 436–437 include portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146]

Military assistance policy, 8–12 [Pgs. 8–12 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 11], 138–139 [Pgs. 138–139 include portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, and Doc. 49], 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74] Budget, U.S., 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 14–15 [Pgs. 14–15 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 29–31 [Pgs. 29–31 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 81–82 [Pgs. 81–82 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 89–90 [Pgs. 89–90 include portions of Doc. 28, Doc. 29, and Doc. 30]

Contingency funds transfer, 93–95 [Pgs. 93–95 include portions of Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34]

Export-Import Bank funds transfer, 224–226 [Pgs. 224–226 include portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78]

Latin America, 123–124 [Pgs. 123–124 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Miller Committee, 479–482 [Pgs. 479–482 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 503–505 [Pgs. 503–505 include portions of Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176]

RCA color television sales, 482–483 [Pgs. 482–483 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

Tariffs, 530–531 [Pgs. 530–531 include portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

Vietnam conflict, 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 166–167 [Pgs. 166–167 include portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

World food problem, 371–373 [Pgs. 371–373 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 124]

Johnson, Tom, 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 574–575 [Pgs. 574–575 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Johnston, Eric A., 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 56]

Johnstone, Jack R., 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (OCS), 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Jordan, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66]

Kanberg (German), 268–269 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97]

Kaplan, Jacob J., 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 85]

Karaulov (Soviet), 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 168]

Katz, Abraham, 541–542 [Pgs. 541–542 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Katz, Julius L., 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216], 774n [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 315], 800n [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 836n [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 349], 849–850 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Katzenbach, Nicholas DeB., 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 59], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 62], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 211–213 [Pgs. 211–213 include portions of Doc. 72, Doc. 73, and Doc. 74], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 83], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 134], 538–541 [Pgs. 538–541 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 743–745 [Pgs. 743–745 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 748n [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 798–799 [Pgs. 798–799 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 816–817 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 341], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354], 857–858 [Pgs. 857–858 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

Kaysen, Carl, 42n [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 20], 467n [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 161]

Keams, James M., 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Keban Dam, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]

Kennedy, John F., 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 450n [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 20], 452–453 [Pgs. 452–453 include portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

Kikuchi, Kiyoaki, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 271]

Killion, George, 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 127]

Kling, William, 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 706n [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 280], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 346], 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347]

Knapp, Burke, 286–289 [Pgs. 286–289 include portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 411–412 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 136], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Knowlton, Winthrop, 411n [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 136], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 136]

Koehring, J. W., 424n [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Kofi, Abraham B. B., 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 346]

Kohler, Foy D., 486–489 [Pgs. 486–489 include portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Komer, Robert W., 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 2], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, and Doc. 35], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 222]

Korea, People's Republic of, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 161]

Korea, Republic of, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–35 [Pgs. 32–35 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 30], 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 148–150 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 105], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 306]

Korp, R. V., 517n [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Korry, Ed, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 60]

Kramish, Arvin, 316n [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 110], 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Krause, Theodore, 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 238], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 238]

Kristensen, Thorkil, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 90], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 99], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 110], 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 390–391 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 131]

Krizay, J., 877n [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Kuwait, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

Lachman, Alexis E., 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 339n [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 113]

Lahr, Rolf, 394–395 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 131]

Lall (Indian), 724–727 [Pgs. 724–727 include portions of Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291], 730–733 [Pgs. 730–733 include portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

Lamby (German), 335–338 [Pgs. 335–338 include portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 117], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 118]

Langley Jim, 282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 99]

Laos, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 24], 89–92 [Pgs. 89–92 include portions of Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52]

Latin America, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 91], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110] Alliance for Progress, 17–20 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 146–147 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 52], 149–150 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 53], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 57], 186–187 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 83]

Foreign assistance, 1–2 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 65–66 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 27], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 143–147 [Pgs. 143–147 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, and Doc. 52], 174–175 [Pgs. 174–175 include portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 70], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 83]

Military assistance, 3–4 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 8–12 [Pgs. 8–12 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 14–15 [Pgs. 14–15 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 123–124 [Pgs. 123–124 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Lead, 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Leddy John M., 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 93], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 101], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 103]

Lee, Robert E., 631n [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Leffingwell, William M., 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 24]

Levine, Melvin H., 517n [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Liard, Melvin, 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 185]

Liberia, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21]

Libya, 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

Linder, Harold F., 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Lindsay, Phillip M., 476n [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 163]

Linen, James, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 140]

Linowitz, Sol M., 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 56], 186n [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66]

Lloyd, G. H., 684n [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Long, Richard, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 172], 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 521n [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Long, Russell B., 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

Love, James S., 607n [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 632–639 [Pgs. 632–639 include portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 662n [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 253], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 259]

Lundstrom (Swedish), 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110]

Luxembourg, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

Lynn, Martin, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 233]

MacArthur, Douglas,II, 529–532 [Pgs. 529–532 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187], 785–787 [Pgs. 785–787 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

McCarthy, Eugene J., 843–844 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

McCone, John A., 455–457 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 154]

McCormack, John W., 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 10], 38n [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

McDermott, Ed, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 154], 560–561 [Pgs. 560–561 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 244]

McDonnell, Mary E., 848n [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 358]

McGann, Paul G., 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 98]

McNamara, Robert S., 455–456 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 154], 485n [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168] Foreign assistance policy, 3–14 [Pgs. 3–14 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 25–27 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 19], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 23], 86–87 [Pg. 86 is part of Doc. 27], 91–92 [Pgs. 91–92 include portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 33], 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Strategic stockpile, 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 736–737 [Pgs. 736–737 include portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 303], 819–826 [Pgs. 819–826 include portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

McNaughton, John T., 25–27 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 35n [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 22], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36]-l0l, 103–105 [Pgs. 103–105 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

McPherson, Harry C., Jr., 713n [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 286], 769–772 [Pgs. 769–772 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

McQuaid, Lawrence C., 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 187], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 192]

Magnesium, 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Macy, John, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 23]

Mahon, George H., 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 42], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 75]

Malawi, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 105]

Malaysia, 756 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 305], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 308], 797–798 [Pgs. 797–798 include portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329]

Malmborg, Knute, 512n [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Malmgren, Harald B., 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 662n [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 253], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317], 855–856 [Pgs. 855–856 include portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

Manatos, Mike M., 157–159 [Pgs. 157–159 include portions of Doc. 53, Doc. 54, and Doc. 55]

Manganese, 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Mann, Thomas C., 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25], 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 362–364 [Pgs. 362–364 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 170], 496n [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 172], 498–502 [Pgs. 498–502 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 504–511 [Pgs. 504–511 include portions of Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179], 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 669–671 [Pgs. 669–671 include portions of Doc. 257, Doc. 258, and Doc. 259], 701–702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 279], 708–712 [Pgs. 708–712 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 286], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 286], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 297], 761–762 [Pgs. 761–762 include portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 313], 778–779 [Pgs. 778–779 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

Mansfield, Mike, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 25], 496–497 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 172], 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Marcy, Carl, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 75], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 76]

Martin, Edwin M., 429–432 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 144], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 147], 443–444 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 147]

Mason, Edward S., 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 53], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 120]

Mattarella,Bernardo, 620–621 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 231], 624–625 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 233]

May, Alice, 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 316n [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 110], 335n [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 339n [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 113]

Meany, George, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 80], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Medici, Giuseppe, 622–626 [Pgs. 622–626 include portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

Meeker, Leonard, 38n [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

Mellen, Sydney L.W., 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 233]

Menzies, Robert Gordon, 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 275]

Merchant, Livingston, 411n [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 136]

Mercury, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 298], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Mexico, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 327]

Meyer-Burckhardt, 567–568 [Pgs. 567–568 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206]

Meyers,Howard, 38n [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 24]

Mica, 755–756 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 305]

Military assistance policy, 3 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 19], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 35], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 47], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 77] Budget, U.S., 1–5 [Pgs. 1–5 include portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 17–20 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 9], 23–27 [Pgs. 23–27 include portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 29–35 [Pgs. 29–35 include portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 19], 61–62 [Pgs. 61–62 include portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 55], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66], 189–190 [Pgs. 189–190 include portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67] AID funds transfer, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 19], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 166–167 [Pgs. 166–167 include portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

Contingency funds transfer, 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 81–82 [Pgs. 81–82 include portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 27], 90–95 [Pgs. 90–95 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, Doc. 32, Doc. 33, and Doc. 34], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38]

Department of Defense budget transfer, 38–40 [Pgs. 38–40 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 28], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 159 [Pg. 159 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 207–211 [Pgs. 207–211 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 228–229 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 79]

Economic and military budgets, separation, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 70]

Export-Import Bank funds transfer, 224–226 [Pgs. 224–226 include portions of Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78]

Future planning, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 63–65 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 21], 74–75 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23]

Supplemental funding for, 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 31], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 103–105 [Pgs. 103–105 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, and Doc. 39]

Chile, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Colombia, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Congo, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21]

Conte/Long Amendment limitations, 211–213 [Pgs. 211–213 include portions of Doc. 72, Doc. 73, and Doc. 74], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 77]

Costa Rica, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Credit revolving fund, 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

Credit sales, 96–100 [Pgs. 96–100 include portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 44], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 70], 203–204 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 70], 218–219 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 75], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 76]

Cuban subversion policy influence, 11–12 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 5]

Dominican Republic, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 123n [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 43]

Ecuador, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

El Salvador, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Forward defense countries, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 33]

Fulbright Amendment, 123–124 [Pgs. 123–124 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Germany, Federal Republic of, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21]

Greece, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–35 [Pgs. 32–35 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 30]

India, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

Iran, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–34 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21]

Korea, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–35 [Pgs. 32–35 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 30], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38]

Laos, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 24], 89–92 [Pgs. 89–92 include portions of Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38]

Latin America, 3–4 [Pg. 3 is part of Doc. 1], 8–12 [Pgs. 8–12 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 14–15 [Pgs. 14–15 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8], 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 123–124 [Pgs. 123–124 include portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Libya, 33–34 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

NATO infrastructure, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

Objectives, 63–65 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 21]

Pakistan, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23]

Peru, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Reuss Amendment, 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Symington Amendment limitations, 211–213 [Pgs. 211–213 include portions of Doc. 72, Doc. 73, and Doc. 74]

Taiwan, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–35 [Pgs. 32–35 include portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 21], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 30], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 77]

Turkey, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–34 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 30]

Uruguay, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Vietnam and Southeast Asia, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 74–75 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 24], 86–92 [Pgs. 86–92 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

Miller, J. Irwin, 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 479–482 [Pgs. 479–482 include portions of Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, and Doc. 166], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 167], 496–497 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 172], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

Miller, John, Duncan, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 90]

Mills, Wilbur D., 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 186]

Molybdenum, 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Mondale, Walter F., 530–532 [Pgs. 530–532 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 191]

Mondello, (Italian), 622–624 [Pgs. 622–624 include portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 233]

Moore, George, 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Moore, Roger, 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 278]

Morabito, Ugo, 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Morgan, Thomas E., 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 23], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 42], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 42], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 63], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 72], 219–220 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 75], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 76], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]

Morocco, 66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 21], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 106]

Morris, Roger P., 231n [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Morse, Wayne, 83–84 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 42], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 54], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 63]

Moyers, Bill, 72n [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 95n [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 51]

Mulliken, Jean H., 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Multilateralism. See under Development Assistance Committee; Foreign assistance policy; International Bank for Reconstruction and Development; International investment and development policy.

Murphy, Charles S., 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 20], 121–122 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 42], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 84], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 592–596 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 220], 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 224]

Murphy, Thomas O., 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Nakagawa, Susumu, 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

Nakayama, Yoshihiro, 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 234], 659–660 [Pgs. 659–660 include portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 690–691 [Pgs. 690–691 include portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 693–695 [Pgs. 693–695 include portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 281]

Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 42], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 45]

National Security Action Memoranda (NSAM): No. 276, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

No. 294, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 196]

No. 297, 15–16 [Pgs. 15–16 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, and Doc. 9]

No. 321, 653–654 [Pgs. 653–654 include portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 299]

No. 324, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 167]

No. 333, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 173]

National Security Council (NSC): Action No. 2481, 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Meetings: 527th (April 16, 1964), 454–458 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 154]

562d (July 19, 1966), 371–373 [Pgs. 371–373 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123]

567th (October 11, 1967), 191–193 [Pgs. 191–193 include portions of Doc. 67, Doc. 68, and Doc. 69]

581st (February 7, 1968), 211–213 [Pgs. 211–213 include portions of Doc. 72, Doc. 73, and Doc. 74]

592d (October 31, 1968), 871–872 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 374]

Nehmer, Stanley, 574n [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216]-587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 607n [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 230], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 238], 654n [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 662n [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 253]-663n [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 668n [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 257], 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 259], 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 688n [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 693 [Pg. 693 is part of Doc. 272], 694n [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 273], 701n [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 277], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317]

Netherlands, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 131], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 144], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 318], 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 361] Foreign assistance policy, 311–312 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 318–319 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 326–327 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 110], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 112], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 147]

IDA funds replenishment, 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Newman, Joseph K., 848n [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 358]

New Zealand, 378–380 [Pgs. 378–380 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 203]

Niblock, Tom, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 76]

Nicaragua, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Nigeria, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94], 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 305]

Cocoa, 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 361]

Nitze, Paul H., 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 190], 872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 374]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 66]

Norway, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 110], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 131], 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 141], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 147], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

Norwood, Bernard, 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 238]

Novotny, D., 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Nuclear war stockpile, 741–742 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 299], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

O'Brien, Lawrence, 21n [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]

Ockrent, Roger Albert, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110]

O'Colla (Irish), 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 131]

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (see also Development Assistance Committee), 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 342 [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 352n [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 117], 354–355 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 117], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Ortona, 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 376]

Otsuka, Shigen, 582–583 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 213]

Overseas Development Corporation, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 79], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 84]

Owen, Henry, 372n [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 122]

Pakistan, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 115] Cotton textiles, 725–729 [Pgs. 725–729 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, and Doc. 292], 748–749 [Pgs. 748–749 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 306], 756n [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 305]

Foreign assistance, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 20], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 20], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 42], 149–150 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 70]

Palmer, Joseph, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 42], 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 318], 810–811 [Pgs. 810–811 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 871–878 [Pgs. 871–878 include portions of Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]

Palmer, Richard, 260n [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94], 296n [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 316n [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 110]

Panama, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66]

Paraguay 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Parsons, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 97], 311–312 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107]

Passman, Otto E., 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 1], 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 53], 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 54], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 120]

Pastore, Joe, 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Patman, Wright, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 172]

Peart, Fred, 666–668 [Pgs. 666–668 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, and Doc. 257], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 315]

Perkins, James A., 117–120 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 42], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 42], 151–156 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 53], 213–216 [Pgs. 213–216 include portions of Doc. 73, Doc. 74, and Doc. 75], 227n [Pg. 227 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 231–232 [Pgs. 231–232 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, and Doc. 82], 313–315 [Pgs. 313–315 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109]

Peru, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 65–66 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 21], 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 82], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 359] Cotton textiles, 593–594 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 220], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 227], 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 359]

Petree, Richard W., 616n [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Phelan, Harry M., Jr., 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Philbin, Philip J., 868n [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 371]

Philippines, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 181–188 [Pgs. 181–188 include portions of Doc. 63, Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

Philips, Ruth, 293n [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 103], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 128], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Pierre-Brossolette, Claude, 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

Platinum, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 298], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Poage, W.R., 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 285]

Poats, Rutherford M., 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3]

Poland, 461–462 [Pgs. 461–462 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 491–493 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178]

Population growth control, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 20], 77–78 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 23], 95–96 [Pgs. 95–96 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, and Doc. 35], 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 42], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 47], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 53], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 56], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 133], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 147]

Portugal, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 144], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

Post, Albert, 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Powell, Richard, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 233]

Prebisch, Raul, 781–784 [Pgs. 781–784 include portions of Doc. 320, Doc. 321, and Doc. 322], 830n [Pg. 830 is part of Doc. 346], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Presidential Determinations: No. 64–8, 14–15 [Pgs. 14–15 include portions of Doc. 6, Doc. 7, and Doc. 8]

No. 65–11, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]S

No. 67–14, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 61]

No. 68–12, 226–227 [Pgs. 226–227 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79]

Private sector. See under Foreign assistance policy; International investment and development policy.

Puhan, Alfred, 874n [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 376]

Quinn, H., 874n [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 376]

Ranis, Gustav, 342n [Pg. 342 includes portions of Doc. 114 and Doc. 115], 410n [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 135]

Ray, John E., 855n [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 363]

Razak bin Hussain, Tun Abdul, 797–798 [Pgs. 797–798 include portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329]

Read, Benjamin H., 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 45], 445n [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 148], 450n [Pg. 45 is part of Doc. 20], 511–512 [Pgs. 511–512 include portions of Doc. 178, Doc. 179, and Doc. 180], 574n [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 221], 655–656 [Pgs. 655–656 include portions of Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 784–785 [Pgs. 784–785 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Rehm, John B., 632–633 [Pgs. 632–633 include portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Rehman, M. L., 728–729 [Pgs. 728–729 include portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292]

Reischauer, Edwin O., 628–629 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 234]

Reston, James, 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]

Reuss, Henry S., 224n [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 77], 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]

Rice, E., 411n [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 136]

Rickett, Denis, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 90]

Ridley, Philip W., 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 315]

Rivers, L. Mendel, 868n [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 371]

Roberts, Juanita, 406n [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

Rockefeller, David, 121–122 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 42], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 53], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 59], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 120]

Rogers, Stephen H., 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125], 538n [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 190]-539n [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 190]

Rommel, Wl1frid H., 849n [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Root, Wl1liam A., 534n [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 188], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 190], 539n [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 190]

Rostow, Eugene V., 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 59], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 391–392 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 131], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 335], 809n [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 336], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Rostow, Walt W., 36–38 [Pgs. 36–38 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 139–141 [Pgs. 139–141 include portions of Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 53], 159n [Pg. 159 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 161–164 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 56], 166–177 [Pgs. 166–177 include portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, and Doc. 60], 119n [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 42], 180–182 [Pgs. 180–182 include portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 190–191 [Pgs. 190–191 include portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 193–195 [Pgs. 193–195 include portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70], 209–211 [Pgs. 209–211 include portions of Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 213–215 [Pgs. 213–215 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 221–226 [Pgs. 221–226 include portions of Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78], 238–239 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 84], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 420n [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 139], 436–437 [Pgs. 436–437 include portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 474n [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 784–785 [Pgs. 784–785 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 827n [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 345], 843–844 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 376]

Roth, William M., 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 646–650 [Pgs. 646–650 include portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 663 [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 680n [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268], 686n [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 270], 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 275], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 286], 716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 286], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 313], 786n [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 323], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 323], 800n [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 334], 843 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

Rowe, David, 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216]

Rubber, 756–757 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 305], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 308], 797–799 [Pgs. 797–799 include portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 350], 859–862 [Pgs. 859–862 include portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Rubel, D. M., 684n [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Rubin, Seymour J., 240–242 [Pgs. 240–242 include portions of Doc. 85 and Doc. 86]

Rumania, 461–462 [Pgs. 461–462 include portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 163], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 170], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173], 509–510 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178], 547–550 [Pgs. 547–550 include portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

Ruser, Claus W., 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 213], 709n [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

Rusk, Dean, 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13] Commodities and strategic materials policy, 697–698 [Pgs. 697–698 include portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

Strategic stockpile, 799n [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 329], 837–838 [Pgs. 837–838 include portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Sugar, 561–563 [Pgs. 561–563 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 613–614 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 228], 630–632 [Pgs. 630–632 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238], 665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Wool textiles imports, 568–569 [Pgs. 568–569 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 226]

East-West trade, 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 482n [Pg. 482 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 485n [Pg. 485 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 175], 511n [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 187], 548n [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196] Agricultural production equipment sales, 447–448 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 149]

Foreign assistance policy, 6–7 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 36–38 [Pgs. 36–38 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 133–138 [Pgs. 133–138 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 236–237 [Pgs. 236–237 include portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83] Food assistance and agricultural programs, 129n [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 45], 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

IDA funds replenishment, 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Supplemental funding for, 86–89 [Pgs. 86–89 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29]

US. legislation, 71–72 [Pgs. 71–72 include portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Vietnam and Southeast Asia, 88–89 [Pgs. 88–89 include portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

International investment and development policy, 407–410 [Pgs. 407–410 include portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 416–419 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 138]

Military assistance policy, 38–40 [Pgs. 38–40 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 86–89 [Pgs. 86–89 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, and Doc. 29], 90–92 [Pgs. 90–92 include portions of Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 33], 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 73]

World food problem, 371–373 [Pgs. 371–373 include portions of Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 124]

Russell, Richard B., 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 25], 868n [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 371]

Ruttenberg, Stanley H., 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 238], 672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 259]

Sachs, Hans-Georg, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 90]

St. John, John J., 525n [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 184]

Sakurauchi, Yoshio, 628–629 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 234]

Salinger, Pierre, 462n [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]

Sanderson, Fred H., 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125], 643n [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 654n [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 656n [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 668n [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 257], 673n [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 683n [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 268], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287], 774n [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 315], 800n [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Sarnoff, David, 482–483 [Pgs. 482–483 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

Sato, Eisaku, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Saunders, Harold, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 146]

Saxe, Jo W., 342–347 [Pgs. 342–347 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 374n [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 128], 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Schaetzel, J. Robert, 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 93], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 99], 290n [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 102], 293n [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 103]

Schaffner, Hans, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 131]

Scheel, Walter, 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 105], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110]

Schertz, L., 654n [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 663n [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Schilling, (German), 571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 207]

Schlosser, 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 357], 855 [Pg. 855 is part of Doc. 363]

Schmidt, Carl W., 663n [Pg. 663 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 668n [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 257], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287]

Schmucker, Kurt, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 105]

Schnee, Alexander, 512n [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 849 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359]

Schnittker, John A., 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 131], 697n [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 275], 774n [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 315], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 786n [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 323], 800n [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330], 843–844 [Pg. 843 is part of Doc. 354]

Schultze, Charles L., 103n [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 105–109 [Pgs. 105–109 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 131–133 [Pgs. 131–133 include portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 146–150 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 52], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 60], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 62], 210–211 [Pgs. 210–211 include portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 134], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 738–739 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 298], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 303], 770–771 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 313], 785–788 [Pgs. 785–788 include portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 334]

Schwartzman (Canadian), 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 309]

Seers, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 103]

Selden, Armistead I., Jr., 143n [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Sen, Binay Ranjan, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 119], 378–380 [Pgs. 378–380 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127]

Shaw, John F., 813n [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Sherman, Robert C., 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 220]

Shertz, L., 668n [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 257]

Shiina, Etsusaburo, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 325–326 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110], 688–690 [Pgs. 688–690 include portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Shoaf, William W., 813n [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Shooshan, Harry, 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Silberstein, Joseph A., 665n [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 255], 708n [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 718n [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 288], 793n [Pg. 793 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Silicon carbide, 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Simmons, Frederick F., 28n [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 13]

Sisco, Joseph, 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125]

Smith, Bromley K., 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 454n [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 154], 548n [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196], 775 [Pg. 775 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 799n [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 329], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 867n [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 871n [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 374]

Smith, Carleton D., 464–465 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 160]

Smith, Fred B., 786n [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 323]

Smith, Robert S., 511n [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Social Progress Trust Fund, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 21]

Solomon, Anthony M., 264n [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 408–410 [Pgs. 408–410 include portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 506n [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 177], 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 178], 511n [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 512–516 [Pgs. 512–516 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 188], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 190], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 192], 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 701–702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 280], 708–711 [Pgs. 708–711 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285], 753–758 [Pgs. 753–758 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 310 and Doc. 311], 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 318], 784n [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 334], 809n [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 336], 810–811 [Pgs. 810–811 include portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 827n [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 345], 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 836n [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 349], 849–850 [Pg. 849 is part of Doc. 359], 857n [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 859n [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 367]

Somalia, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 113]

South Africa, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 305]

Soviet Bloc (see also East-West trade), 416–417 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 138], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 144], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 147]

Soviet Union (see also East-West trade), 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287] African assistance, 169–170 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 59]

Agricultural production equipment sales, 446–451 [Pgs. 446–451 include portions of Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151]

Beet harvester machinery sales, 446–447 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 149]

Color television technology standards, 486n [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 168]-487n [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 168 and Doc. 169]

Lend-lease debt issue, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 162], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 173]

Military goals prioritization, 471–472 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 161]

Rubber, 861–862 [Pgs. 861–862 include portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Trade negotiations with the U.S., 493–494 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 170], 500–501 [Pgs. 500–501 include portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

Video tape recorder sales, 465–466 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 160]

Spain, 758–759 [Pgs. 758–759 include portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

Sparkman, John J., 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 25]

Sparks (British), 763–764 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 309]

Springsteen, George S., 445n [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 148]

Stabler, Wells, 874n [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 376]

Stahnke, Paul K., 709n [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

Starkey, W. N., 656n [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Stedman, Ralph, 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 288]

Stevenson, Adlai E., 455–458 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 154]

Stibravy, William J., 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125]

Stikker, Dirk, 422–424 [Pgs. 422–424 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Stoessel, Walter J., 372n [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 122], 506n [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 177]

Stoner, J. David, 809n [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 336]

Stookey, Robert W., 611n [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Strategic stockpile policy (see also Commodities and strategic materials policy), 560–561 [Pgs. 560–561 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 641–643 [Pgs. 641–643 include portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241], 754–755 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 305], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365] Aluminum, 729n [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 291 and Doc. 292], 735 [Pg. 735 is part of Doc. 296], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 297], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Conventional war stockpile, 742–743 [Pgs. 742–743 include portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

Copper, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 240], 734–737 [Pgs. 734–737 include portions of Doc. 295, Doc. 296, and Doc. 297], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 298], 743–748 [Pgs. 743–748 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 305], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344], 871–872 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 374]

Criteria, 867–868 [Pgs. 867–868 include portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 871–873 [Pgs. 871–873 include portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375] Disposal, 560–561 [Pgs. 560–561 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 240], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 746–748 [Pgs. 746–748 include portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 753–758 [Pgs. 753–758 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 761–762 [Pgs. 761–762 include portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 798–799 [Pgs. 798–799 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 857–858 [Pgs. 857–858 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, and Doc. 366]

Mercury, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 298], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Mica, 755–756 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 305]

Nickel, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Nuclear war stockpile, 741–742 [Pg. 741 is part of Doc. 299], 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

Objectives, 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 240], 651–656 [Pgs. 651–656 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249], 738–743 [Pgs. 738–743 include portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300], 750–753 [Pgs. 750–753 include portions of Doc. 303, Doc. 304, and Doc. 305], 760–761 [Pgs. 760–761 include portions of Doc. 306, Doc. 307, and Doc. 308], 819–826 [Pgs. 819–826 include portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 846 [Pg. 846 includes portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357]

Platinum, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 298], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Rubber, 756–757 [Pg. 756 is part of Doc. 305], 762 [Pg. 762 is part of Doc. 308], 798–799 [Pgs. 798–799 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 350], 859–862 [Pgs. 859–862 include portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Tin, 798–799 [Pgs. 798–799 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 350]

Tungsten, 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 305], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Zinc, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Sudan, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94], 611–612 [Pgs. 611–612 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Sugar (see also Commodities and strategic materials policy), 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 255], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 288] Cuban bilateral agreement proposal, 722–723 [Pgs. 722–723 include portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Cuban position, 665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 288], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 288]

Cuban quota, 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 228], 711–712 [Pgs. 711–712 include portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Domestic farmers share, 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 561–563 [Pgs. 561–563 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 613–616 [Pgs. 613–616 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 640–641 [Pgs. 640–641 include portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

International agreement negotiations, 665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 679–680 [Pgs. 679–680 include portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 711–712 [Pgs. 711–712 include portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 718–723 [Pgs. 718–723 include portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

International Sugar Agreement, 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 678–680 [Pgs. 678–680 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

International Sugar Conference. See international agreement negotiations above.

International Sugar Council, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 265]

Latin American producers, 710–711 [Pgs. 710–711 include portions of Doc. 283, Doc. 284, and Doc. 285] Multilateral approach, 719–721 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 288]

Quotas, 643–644 [Pgs. 643–644 include portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Sugar Act extension, 613–616 [Pgs. 613–616 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 235], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

U.S. legislation, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 212], 613–614 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 228], 630–632 [Pgs. 630–632 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238]

Sullivan, William, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 233]

Surinam, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 305]

Swarup (Indian), 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 319]

Sweden, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110], 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327] Foreign assistance policy, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 110], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110], 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 147]

Switzerland, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 118], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 131], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 348], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 369]

Symington, Stuart, 211n [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 868n [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 371]

Szabo-Pelsoczi, Miklos, 643–644 [Pgs. 643–644 include portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, and Doc. 242], 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 710n [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 718–723 [Pgs. 718–723 include portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Taiwan. See China, Republic of.

Takashima, Setsuo, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Takeuchi, Ryuji, 589–590 [Pgs. 589–590 include portions of Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 616–619 [Pgs. 616–619 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Technical assistance programs. See under Development Assistance Committee; Foreign assistance policy.

Tendler (Commerce), 709n [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294]

Tenzer (Belgian), 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 144]

Thailand, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 97], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 350]

Thau, Theodore L., 459n [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Thomas, William W., 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Thompson, Llewellyn E., 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 17], 38–40 [Pgs. 38–40 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 154], 658n [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Thompson, Thomas, 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 175]

Thomson, Barbara F., 662n [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 253], 686n [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 270], 772n [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Thorp, Willard L., 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 88], 249–252 [Pgs. 249–252 include portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 103], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 310–312 [Pgs. 310–312 include portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 110], 327–328 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 110], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 118], 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

Tin, 798–799 [Pgs. 798–799 include portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 350]

Togo, 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Towe (Canadian), 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 110], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 110]

Trezise, Phillip H., 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 119], 446n [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 149], 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 157], 491–494 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170], 574n [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216]

Triboulet, Raymond, 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 105]

Trowbridge, Alexander B., 511n [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 539–541 [Pgs. 539–541 include portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Trued, Merlyn W., 264n [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Tucker, Frank M., 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 668n [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 257]

Tungsten, 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 305], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 344]

Tunisia, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 44], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94]

Turkey, 48–49 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 20], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 94], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327] Foreign assistance, 126–127 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 44], 149–150 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 52], 187–188 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 70], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 82]

Military assistance, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 12], 32–34 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 30]

Turkey parts, 846–847 [Pgs. 846–847 include portions of Doc. 356 and Doc. 357], 856–857 [Pgs. 856–857 include portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365]

UN Committee for Industrial Development, 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 271–273 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 98], 283–286 [Pgs. 283–286 include portions of Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101], 347–349 [Pgs. 347–349 include portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 247–250 [Pgs. 247–250 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, and Doc. 90], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 92], 350–351 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 116], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 133], 422–424 [Pgs. 422–424 include portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 147]

UN Development Program (UNDP), establishment, 347–349 [Pgs. 347–349 include portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 133]

United Arab Republic, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 42], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 105], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 227], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 290]

United Kingdom, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 154], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 160], 749 [Pg. 749 is part of Doc. 302] African consultative group, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 105], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 106]

Cocoa, 778n [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 318], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 322], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 369]

East-West trade, 447 [Pg. 447 is part of Doc. 149], 509–510 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 178], 525–528 [Pg. 525 is part of Doc. 184], 535–537 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 189], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196]

Foreign assistance policy, 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 90], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 97], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 97], 296–299 [Pgs. 296–299 include portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 308–309 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 106], 311–312 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 107], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 110], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 110], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 110], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 112], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 113], 361–362 [Pgs. 361–362 include portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 144], 443–444 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 147]

Grains and cereals, 551–554 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 197], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 198], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 208], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 211], 699–700 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 276], 763–765 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 309], 791–792 [Pgs. 791–792 include portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 333], 812 [Pg. 812 is part of Doc. 338] U.S.-U.K. grains agreement, 551–555 [Pgs. 551–555 include portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 557–559 [Pgs. 557–559 include portions of Doc. 199, Doc. 200, and Doc. 201], 586 [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216], 654–655 [Pgs. 654–655 include portions of Doc. 246, Doc. 247, and Doc. 248], 660–661 [Pgs. 660–661 include portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 663–664 [Pgs. 663–664 include portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 666–669 [Pgs. 666–669 include portions of Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 673–676 [Pgs. 673–676 include portions of Doc. 260, Doc. 261, and Doc. 262], 681–682 [Pgs. 681–682 include portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 684–685 [Pgs. 684–685 include portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 763–765 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 309], 774–775 [Pgs. 774–775 include portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 811–813 [Pgs. 811–813 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339]

High Commission territories, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 105], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 106]

IDA funds replenishment, 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 131], 412–414 [Pgs. 412–414 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, 298–299 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 105], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 110]

Malawi mission, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 105], 308 [Pg. 308 is part of Doc. 106]

Sugar, 665 [Pg. 665 is part of Doc. 255], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 288]

Wool textiles, 569–571 [Pgs. 569–571 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 224], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 230], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 233]

World food problem, 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 394 [Pg. 394 is part of Doc. 131]

Zero interest policy, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 110], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 110]

United Nations, 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 115], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 116], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 116] AID programs, coordination with, 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 271–273 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 98], 284–286 [Pgs. 284–286 include portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Capital Development Fund, 349–350 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 116], 401–403 [Pgs. 401–403 include portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Cocoa, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 133], 701–702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Committee for Industrial Development consultations, 260–264 [Pgs. 260–264 include portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 271–273 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 98], 283–286 [Pgs. 283–286 include portions of Doc. 99, Doc. 100, and Doc. 101]

Economic actions, 401–406 [Pgs. 401–406 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), 378–383 [Pgs. 378–383 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127]

Resolutions: No. 1113, 404n [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 1710, 440n [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 147]

No. 1995, 256n [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 92]

No. 2029, 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 116]

No. 2042, 349n [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 116]

No. 2084, 351n [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 116]

No. 2085, 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 116]

No. 2088, 343n [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 115]

No. 2089, 348n [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 116]

No. 2095, 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 116]

No. 2096, 350n [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 116]

No. 2152, 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2158, 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2172, 404n [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2173, 404n [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2186, 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2205, 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2206, 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2209, 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2210, 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 133], 816n [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 341]

No. 2211, 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2212, 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2215, 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 133]

No. 2218, 406n [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

Sen agricultural fund proposal, 378–380 [Pgs. 378–380 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127]

UN Development Program establishment, 347–349 [Pgs. 347–349 include portions of Doc. 115 and Doc. 116]

World food problem, 378–383 [Pgs. 378–383 include portions of Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127]

World Food Program, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 116]

Upper Volta, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 53]

Uruguay, 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Valenti, Jack, 496n [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 172]

Vance, Cyrus, 446–448 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 149], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 154], 501n [Pg. 501 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 750n [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 303]

Van Nort, Leighton, 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125]

Vamoux (French) 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 191]

Venezuela, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 23]

Vettel, Thelma E., 589n [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 662n [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 253]

Vietnam: Foreign assistance policy and, 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 20], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 44], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 52], 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 66], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 67], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 70], 233–235 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 82]

Military assistance, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 32–33 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 21], 74–75 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 23], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 24], 86–92 [Pgs. 86–92 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, and Doc. 31], 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 35, Doc. 36, and Doc. 37], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 38], 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

Vitale (Italian), 875 [Pg. 875 is part of Doc. 377]

Wada, Haruo, 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Walker, Ronald, 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 131]

Walsh, John P., 548n [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 196], 803n [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 827n [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 345]

War Against Hunger, 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 39]

Warker, Peter F., 461n [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 157]

Warnke, Paul, 207–210 [Pgs. 207–210 include portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 190]

Warren, George L., 38n [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

Watanabe, Yaegi, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Waters, Herbert, 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125]

Watson, Arthur K., 333n [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Weaver, George, 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

Weiss, Harry, 633–634 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 238], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 238], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 286]

Westerfield, Samuel Z., 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 280], 836n [Pg. 836 is part of Doc. 349]

Westerman (Australian), 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 330]

Wexler, Arthur, 613n [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 228]

Whiting, Albert W., 386n [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Whitten, Jamie L., 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]

Whitten Proviso, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 40]

Williams, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 98]

Wilson, Geoffrey, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 94], 266–267 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 99], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 154]

Wilson, Helen A., 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 125]

Wirtz, W. Willard, 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 600n [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 224], 786n [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 323]

Wolfe, Thomas C., 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 776n [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 317]

Wolff, Hugh W., 586n [Pg. 586 includes portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, and Doc. 216]-587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 590n [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

Wood, C. Tyler, 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 151n [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 53], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 74], 364n [Pg. 364 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Wood, George, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 16]

Woodbury, Wendell W., 671n [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 709n [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

Woods, George, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 42], 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 42], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 50], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 59], 249n [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 91], 264–265 [Pgs. 264–265 include portions of Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 103], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 110], 329–330 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 110], 332–333 [Pgs. 332–333 include portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 119], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 124], 406n [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 136], 414–415 [Pgs. 414–415 include portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 428 [Pg. 428 is part of Doc. 143], 430–431 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 144]

>Woods, Gen. Robert J., 25n [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Wool textiles (see also Commodities and strategic materials policy), 568–569 [Pgs. 568–569 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 574–575 [Pgs. 574–575 include portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 586–587 [Pgs. 586–587 include portions of Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, and Doc. 217], 600–601 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 224], 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 279], 713–716 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 286], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 313], 771–772 [Pgs. 771–772 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 806–807 [Pgs. 806–807 include portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 874–876 [Pgs. 874–876 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378] Blended fabrics, 874–876 [Pgs. 874–876 include portions of Doc. 376, Doc. 377, and Doc. 378]

British position, 569–571 [Pgs. 569–571 include portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 224], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 230], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 233]

EEC position, 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 876–877 [Pgs. 876–877 include portions of Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379]

French position, 570–571 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 207], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 219]

Herter procedure, 770–772 [Pgs. 770–772 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Industry position, 587–589 [Pgs. 587–589 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 714–716 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 286]

International agreement negotiations, 607–611 [Pgs. 607–611 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, and Doc. 227], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 230]

International Wool Study Group, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

Italian position, 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 207], 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219], 620–623 [Pgs. 620–623 include portions of Doc. 231, Doc. 232, and Doc. 233], 625–626 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 233], 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 874–875 [Pgs. 874–875 include portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

Japanese position, 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 207], 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214], 589–591 [Pgs. 589–591 include portions of Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 224], 616–619 [Pgs. 616–619 include portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 628–629 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 234], 658–660 [Pgs. 658–660 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252], 662–663 [Pgs. 662–663 include portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 263], 688–696 [Pgs. 688–696 include portions of Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, and Doc. 274], 707–710 [Pgs. 707–710 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Labeling and testing, 813–815 [Pgs. 813–815 include portions of Doc. 338, Doc. 339, and Doc. 340], 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 358]

Prices, 714–715 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 286]

Special Textile Mission report, 603–607 [Pgs. 603–607 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

Study proposal, 715–716 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 286]

Synthetics, 635–636 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 238]

Tariffs, 601–602 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 224], 635–639 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 238], 645–650 [Pgs. 645–650 include portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 866–867 [Pgs. 866–867 include portions of Doc. 369, Doc. 370, and Doc. 371], 869–870 [Pgs. 869–870 include portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

White proposal, 601–605 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 224], 713–727 [Pgs. 713–727 include portions of Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291]

Wool Act, 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 238]

Wool Products Labeling Act of 1939, 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 358]

Wool Textile Mission 617–619 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 230], 623–627 [Pgs. 623–627 include portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

World Bank. See International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

World food problem, 362–364 [Pgs. 362–364 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, and Doc. 120], 368–373 [Pgs. 368–373 include portions of Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, and Doc. 123], 375–377 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 124], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 131], 392–396 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 131], 400 [Pg. 400 is part of Doc. 132], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 139], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 144], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 147]

Worthington, 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287]

Wright, Robert B., 511n [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-512n [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 532n [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 534n [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 188]

Wyatt, Wilson W., 600 [Pg. 600 is part of Doc. 224], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 224], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 225]

Wyndam White, Eric, 567–568 [Pgs. 567–568 include portions of Doc. 204, Doc. 205, and Doc. 206], 571–572 [Pgs. 571–572 include portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 601–605 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 224], 610 [Pg. 610 is part of Doc. 226], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 287], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 779–780 [Pgs. 779–780 include portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 324], 796 [Pg. 796 is part of Doc. 327]

York, Charles T., 730n [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294]

Yoshioka (Japanese), 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]

Yost, Robert L., 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 97]

Yugoslavia, 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 148], 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 161], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 161], 491–493 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 170]

Zagari (Italian), 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 131]

Zambia, 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Zimmermann, Edward, 384n [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 128]

Zinc, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 292, Doc. 293, and Doc. 294], 857 [Pg. 857 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Zwick, Charles J., 213–215 [Pgs. 213–215 include portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 231–237 [Pgs. 231–237 include portions of Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, and Doc. 83]
