Foreign Relations of the United States, Diplomatic Papers, 1942, The Near East and Africa, Volume IV (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1963)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1942v04).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

The Near East and Africa (Foreign Relations of the United States: Diplomatic Papers, 1942, Volume IV)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States: Diplomatic Papers, 1942

Volume IV

The Near East and Africa

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 28, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

The Near East and Africa (Foreign Relations of the United States: Diplomatic Papers, 1942, Volume IV)Contents

Preface

General:Decision of the United States to participate in the Middle East Supply Center (Documents 1-12)

Exchange of notes between the United States and the United Kingdom regarding air services in the Near and Middle East (Documents 13-16)

Concern of the United States at the impact of Axis victories and propaganda on the political stability of the Near East; dispatch of the Hoskins Mission (Documents 17-26)

Consideration by the Department of State of proposal to appoint American representative as counterpart of British Minister Resident in West Africa (Documents 27-32)

Afghanistan:Establishment of an American Legation in Afghanistan (Documents 33-49)

Efforts by the United States to effect closer relations with Afghanistan (Documents 50-58)

Expression of regret by the United States regarding the accidental flight of an American Army plane over Afghan territory (Documents 59-65)

Egypt:Unwillingness of the United States to interfere with British activities concerning Egyptian political crisis (Documents 66-77)

Concern of the United States regarding effect of Axis military advance into Egypt; plans for evacuation of American diplomatic and consular personnel from Egypt (Documents 78-98)

Problems arising from presence in Egypt of American military personnel: Post-war demobilization and criminal jurisdiction (Documents 99-107)

Representations by the Egyptian Government regarding effect on Egyptian cotton trade of reciprocal trade agreement between the United States and Peru (Documents 108-109)

Representations by the Egyptian Minister regarding an article in Time alleged to be derogatory to the King of Egypt (Documents 110-113)

Ethiopia:Consideration by the Department of State of the resumption of diplomatic representation in Ethiopia (Documents 114-126)

Exchange of messages between President Roosevelt and the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I); adherence of Ethiopia to the United Nations Declaration (Documents 127-132)

Representations by the United States regarding certain exclusive features of the Anglo-Ethiopian Treaty of January 31, 1942 (Documents 133-137)

Iran:Concern of the United States regarding danger of food shortages in Iran threatening famine and internal disorder:I. Participation of the United States in decisions regarding supply and distribution of food for Iran (Documents 138-144)

II. Iranian appeals for direct American aid; complaints by Iranians and by American Minister in Iran concerning British economic policies in Iran (Documents 145-173)

III. Negotiation of agreement between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Iran regarding food supply for Iran, signed December 4, 1942 (Documents 174-219)

IV. Representations by the United States regarding British policy in Iran (Documents 220-238)

Assistance by the United States in securing for the Iranian Government American advisers (military, financial, police, gendarmerie, etc.) (Documents 239-298)

Reservation of American rights regarding certain provisions of Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty of Alliance; unwillingness of the United States to make declaration concerning integrity of Iran (Documents 299-314)

Negotiations respecting a trade agreement between the United States and Iran (Documents 315-325)

Extension of Lend-Lease aid to Iran and desire of Iran to deal directly with the United States in Lend-Lease matters (Documents 326-340)

Efforts of the United States to facilitate a settlement of the dispute between the United Kingdom and Iran regarding exchange rates (Documents 341-351)

Agreement with the United Kingdom for American operation of the southern section of the Trans-Iranian Railroad and conditional consent of the Iranian Government (Documents 352-360)

Concern of the United States regarding Kurdish disorders in Soviet-occupied province of Azerbaijan (Documents 361-372)

Insistence by the United States that the Japanese Legation be expelled from Iran (Documents 373-391)

Iranian request for American support in regard to British demands for arrest of certain suspected persons in Iran (Documents 392-399)

IraqAnnouncement of Iraq’s eligibility for Lend-Lease aid; procedures for effecting Lend-Lease aid to Iraq (Documents 400-404)

Insistence by the United States that American war materials sent to or through Iraq be exempt from Iraqi customs and transit dues (Documents 405-416)

Unwillingness of the United States to request exemption for Americans from Iraqi residence tax (Documents 417-418)

Liberia:Defense agreement and arrangements between the United States and Liberia (Documents 419-492)

Extension of Lend-Lease aid to Liberia by the United States (Documents 493-497)

Discussions regarding British proposal for use of American air bases in Liberia (Documents 498-516)

Insistence by the United States on the expulsion of Germans from Liberia (Documents 517-539)

Negotiations concerning the replacement of British currency in Liberia by American currency (Documents 540-555)

Morocco:Negotiations between the American Chargé at Tangier and the Spanish High Commissioner regarding American economic aid to Spanish Zone of Morocco and Tangier (Documents 556-602)

Informal cooperation between the Diplomatic Agency and Spanish authorities regarding taxes and price controls in the Tangier Zone without prejudice to American treaty rights (Documents 603-607)

Representations by the United States regarding attempts by the Spanish customs officials at Tangier to open official packages addressed to the American Legation (Documents 608-615)

Policies and actions of the United States regarding Spanish Morocco in connection with the invasion of French North Africa by American forces (Documents 616-646)

Muscat and Oman:Negotiations concerning use by the United States of air bases in Muscat and Oman (Documents 647-648)

Palestine:Attitude of the United States toward Zionist and Arab agitation regarding British policy in the Middle East and the future status of Palestine (Documents 649-664)

Saudi Arabia:Establishment of an American Legation at Jidda (Documents 665-667)

American agricultural mission to Saudi Arabia (Documents 668-674)

Negotiations regarding air transit rights over certain parts of Saudi Arabia for American planes (Documents 675-685)

Consideration by the United States of means for protection of oil fields in Saudi Arabia and for denying the enemy the use of them (Documents 686-700)

Syria and Lebanon:Concern of the United States regarding British-Free French differences in Syria and Lebanon; attempts to effect settlement (Documents 701-752)

Limited recognition of Syria and Lebanon by the United States by the appointment of a Diplomatic Agent (Documents 753-789)

Turkey:Negotiations regarding handling of Lend-Lease supplies for Turkey (Documents 790-824)

Policy of the United States regarding the pre-emptive buying of Turkish goods (Documents 825-834)

Favorable response by the United States to Turkish requests for additional wheat (Documents 835-853)

Efforts by the American and British Governments to acquire Turkish chrome and to prevent its sale by Turkey to Germany (Documents 854-885)

Expression of regret by the United States for the landing of American bombers on neutral Turkish territory; internment of planes and crews; escape of one plane and crew (Documents 886-914)

Representations by the United States regarding application of Straits Convention to passage of Axis vessels through Straits (Documents 915-926)

Clarification of statement by Ambassador Mac Murray regarding Turkish-Soviet relations (Documents 927-932)

Willingness of the United States to assist in the improvement of relations between the Soviet Union and Turkey; explanation of Turkish-Soviet relations by the Turkish Foreign Minister (Documents 933-935)

Misuse by the Soviet Government of information furnished by the United States regarding the attempted assassination of German Ambassador von Papen in Ankara (Documents 936-951)

Representations by the United States regarding taxation of American colleges in Turkey (Documents 952-953)

Index

Preface Preface

The principles which guide the compilation and editing of Foreign Relations are stated in Department of State Regulation 1350 of June 15, 1961, a revision of the order approved on March 26, 1925, by Mr. Frank B. Kellogg, then Secretary of State. The text of the current regulation is printed below:

1350 Documentary Record of American Diplomacy

1351 Scope of Documentation

The publication Foreign Relations of the United States, Diplomatic Papers, constitutes the official record of the foreign policy of the United States. These volumes include, subject to necessary security considerations, all documents needed to give a comprehensive record of the major foreign policy decisions within the range of the Department of State’s responsibilities, together with appropriate materials concerning the facts which contributed to the formulation of policies. When further material is needed to supplement the documentation in the Department’s files for a proper understanding of the relevant policies of the United States, such papers should be obtained from other Government agencies.

1352 Editorial Preparation

The basic documentary diplomatic record to be printed in Foreign Relations of the United States, Diplomatic Papers, shall be edited by the Historical Office, Bureau of Public Affairs of the Department of State. The editing of the record shall be guided by the principles of historical objectivity. There shall be no alteration of the text, no deletions without indicating where in the text the deletion is made, and no omission of facts which were of major importance in reaching a decision. Nothing shall be omitted for the purpose of concealing or glossing over what might be regarded by some as a defect of policy. However, certain omissions of documents are permissible for the following reasons: a. To avoid publication of matters which would tend to impede current diplomatic negotiations or other business.

b. To condense the record and avoid repetition of needless details.

c. To preserve the confidence reposed in the Department by individuals and by foreign governments.

d. To avoid giving needless offense to other nationalities or individuals.

e. To eliminate personal opinions presented in despatches and not acted upon by the Department. To this consideration there is one qualification—in connection with major decisions it is desirable, where possible, to show the alternatives presented to the Department before the decision was made.

1353 Clearance

To obtain appropriate clearances of material to be published in Foreign Relations of the United States, Diplomatic Papers, the Historical Office shall: a. Refer to the appropriate policy offices of the Department and of other agencies of the Government such papers as appear to require policy clearance.

b. Refer to the appropriate foreign governments requests for permission to print as part of the diplomatic correspondence of the United States those previously unpublished documents which were originated by the foreign governments.

The responsibilities of the Historical Office, Bureau of Public Affairs, for the preparation of this Foreign Relations volume were entrusted, under the general supervision of the Director of the Office, William M. Franklin, to the Foreign Relations Division under the direction of the Chief of that Division (Editor of Foreign Relations), E. B. Perkins. The compiler of Foreign Relations, 1942, Volume IV, The Near East and Africa was Francis C. Prescott, a former member of the Foreign Relations staff.

The Division of Publishing Services is responsible with respect to Foreign Relations for the editing of copy, proofreading, and preparation of indexes. Under the general direction of the Chief of the Division, Jerome H. Perlmutter, the editorial functions mentioned above are performed by the Foreign Relations Section in charge of Elizabeth A. Vary, Chief, and Ouida J. Ward, Assistant Chief.

For 1942, the arrangement of volumes is as follows: Volume I, General, The British Commonwealth, the Far East; Volume II, Europe; Volume III, Europe; Volume IV, The Near East and Africa; Volume V, The American Republics; Volume VI, The American Republics. The Foreign Relations series for 1942 also includes the unnumbered volume on 1942, China, previously published.

E. R. Perkins
Editor of Foreign Relations
March 11, 1963.

General:General:

Contents

Decision of the United States to participate in the Middle East Supply CenterDecision of the United States to participate in the Middle East Supply Center

[1] Memorandum by the Adviser on International Economic Affairs (Feis)

[Washington,] February 24, 1942.

800.24/269

[2] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, March 11, 1942—6 p.m.

841.24/1227: Telegram

[3] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, March 19, 1942—8 p.m. [Received March 22—2:47 a.m.]

841.24/1268: Telegram

[4] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, March 21, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 9:40 p.m.]

800.24/298²⁄₁₁: Telegram

[5] Memorandum by Mr. Frederick Winant of the Division of Exports and Defense Aid to the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson)

[Washington,] April 17, 1942.

800.24/342½

[6] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, April 30, 1942—8 p.m.

800.24/294a: Telegram

[7] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 6, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 4:08 p.m.]

800.24/349¹⁄₁₂: Telegram

[8] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, May 6, 1942—11 p.m.

800.24/298²⁄₁₁: Telegram

[9] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 7, 1942—9 a.m. [Received May 7—8:17 a.m.]

800.24/349²⁄₁₂: Telegram

[10] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, May 8, 1942—midnight.

800.24/349¹⁄₁₂a: Telegram

[11] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 16, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 9:26 a.m.]

800.24/3493/12: Telegram

[12] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 18, 1942—1 p.m.

883.24/57: Telegram

Memorandum by the Adviser on International Economic Affairs (Feis) 800.24/269

[Document 1]

Memorandum by the Adviser on International Economic Affairs (Feis)1

[Washington,] February 24, 1942.

Mr. Thorold2 of the British Embassy came in this morning to discuss the question of American representation on the Middle East Supply Council. This organization is now really taking in hand the work of deciding on the important needs of that whole area, on a monthly basis; and decisions also are becoming the basis of the allocation of shipping space from the United States (this is worked out through the British Purchasing Mission in Washington and the Maritime Commission). Mr. Thorold said they understood our Embassy in Cairo was maintaining fairly good liaison with the Supply Council, and our own reports show that to be the fact. However, Mr. Thorold said he thought it would serve an important purpose if an American would have a place on the Council, actively participating in the Council’s decisions for the purpose of showing joint decision and full cooperation. Under the circumstances, the advantages—in fact, the necessity—of such an arrangement seem to me evident.

If this is agreed, I presume the first step is to discuss the question with other interested branches of the Government (particularly lend-lease and Maritime Commission) and to have the selection made by joint agreement. It might well be that someone from General Maxwell’s3 staff working in close cooperation with the Legation would be the logical appointment.

Mr. Thorold says he is definitely of the opinion that the British authorities would be glad to have such American membership on the Council. He states that when and as we might be able to indicate to the British Government our wish to have such membership and make a designation, he will undertake to have the arrangements completed.

H[erbert] F[eis]

1 Addressed to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) and the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson).

2 G. F. Thorold, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

3 Gen. Russell L. Maxwell, Chief of the United States Military Mission in North Africa with headquarters at Cairo.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 841.24/1227: Telegram

[Document 2]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, March 11, 1942—6 p.m.

204. The Lend-Lease Administration has sent the following cable to Harriman4 in London.

“1. In view of situation disclosed in your 883 of February 24,5 concur in view that Egypt should not be represented on Middle East Supply Council at this time and will so advise British.

2. Considering size of the Council (14 or 15 members) and character of its functions, we think American representation should consist of one military representative from the Maxwell Mission and a civilian representative of the Legation. Consideration is being given to attaching Lend-Lease assistants to Kirk to be sent from here.

3. Propose that requests originating in Middle East be approved by M. E. S. C. before transmittal, and that all requisitions providing for retransfer name the specific transferee country, it being agreed that in any emergency American representatives on M. E. S. C. or Lend-Lease representative shall take responsibility for effecting a retransfer to another country without prior Washington approval, of course advising Washington promptly after the fact. Believe this procedure provides adequate flexibility without disadvantages of retransfer covering all the countries in the Middle East area.”

The Department is awaiting concurrence in this recommendation of the War Shipping Administrator and the War and Navy Departments. Do you concur in the joint representation and would you propose to sit yourself or to designate a representative? The Lend-Lease Administration, which now deals only with requisitions for non-military items under Lend-Lease, will provide any assistants to be attached to the Legation whom you may need for this work. It also desires to send a man to survey the situation so far as non-military requirements of Lend-Lease aid are concerned and report back. Your views are requested as to the number, if any, and type of assistants you might require and upon the usefulness of the survey trip referred to.

Welles

4 W. Averell Harriman, Special Representative of the President in the United Kingdom to facilitate Lend-Lease aid to the British Empire.

5 Not printed.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 841.24/1268: Telegram

[Document 3]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, March 19, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received March 22—2:47 a.m.]

434. Department’s 204, March 11, 6 p.m. In respect to American representation at meetings of the Middle East Supply Council I consider that, since Chipman6 and Jones7 of the Legation staff maintain daily contact with both the M. E. S. C. and the British Embassy here in connection with following Egypt’s supply problems and since Chipman attends as an observer meetings of the Nitrate Control Committee and Jones likewise attends meetings of the Anglo-Egyptian Supply Committee sent to change the actual arrangements. Moreover, it should be borne in mind that the Egyptian authorities have not approached thus far either the British authorities or the Legation in respect to Lend-Lease except in the case of nitrates about which the Legation is being fully informed. If the Department desires, however, that a member of the Legation staff be designated to represent the Government on the M. E. S. C., I suggest that Chipman be so designated. General Maxwell states that in such a case he would designate Captain Jones of his staff.

As for sending here a representative of the Lend-Lease Administration for the purpose of making a survey of the situation so far as non-military requirements are concerned, I consider that this would not serve a useful purpose, at least not at present, owing to the fact that the Center has attached to it or at its ready disposal a considerable number of agricultural and economic experts long familiar with the basic requirements of the entire Near East area. The Legation enjoys easy access to these experts as well as to those connected with the Egyptian Government and certain private organizations here and I feel that unless or until there is reason to amplify the information available to the M. E. S. C. no useful purpose would be served by endeavoring to duplicate the latter’s work. The Legation will obtain any information along the foregoing lines which the Department may request.

General Maxwell who maintains close contact with the M. E. S. C. through the Office of the Minister of State agrees with the foregoing.

In the event that developments prove the necessity for additional assistance especially clerical, I shall inform the Department.

Kirk

6 Norris B. Chipman, Second Secretary of Legation in Egypt.

7 George Lewis Jones, Jr., Second Secretary of Legation in Egypt.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 800.24/298²⁄₁₁: Telegram

[Document 4]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, March 21, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 9:40 p.m.]

443. My 434, March 19, 8 p.m. A letter has been received from the Director General of the Middle East Supply Center7a reading in part as follows: “I have received a telegram from London which indicates that there is a possibility of cereals being sent in future to the Middle East under lease-lend terms. It would help us greatly if it could be agreed that the allocation of lease-lend cargoes would be made by Middle East Supply Center in full consultation with the American Legation taking into consideration the other supplies and cereals which are being imported into the area and also having regard to the actual cereals being harvested in the various territories.

If your Minister could agree with this procedure it would help us and the Ministry of War Transport in several ways. If the Minister agreed in principle I understand that it would facilitate discussions which are at present taking place in London if [he] could inform the representatives of the Government of the United States in London that he would be in agreement with a procedure by which cereals imported into the Middle East under lease-lend were distributed by the Middle East Supply Center in consultation with the American Legation. Of course when the allocations were eventually made care would be taken to indicate clearly to the territories those cargoes which were being shipped under the Lend Lease Act.”8

Both General Maxwell and I do so agree and so inform the Department for such action as may be considered appropriate. I should appreciate advices as to action taken.

Kirk

7a R. G. A. Jackson.

8 Approved March 11, 1941; 55 Stat, 31.

Memorandum by Mr. Frederick Winant of the Division of Exports and Defense Aid to the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson) 800.24/342½

[Document 5]

Memorandum by Mr. Frederick Winant of the Division of Exports and Defense Aid to the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson)

[Washington,] April 17, 1942.

Civilian Supply Requirements of the Near East Countries and The Middle East Supply Centre

Mr. Acheson: The procedure for handling the civilian supply requirements of the countries comprising the Near East must be reexamined in the light of the procedure now established for that area by the British, the combined controls now existing in Washington and London, the effect on the civilian population of present and potential military developments in that theater of war, and the political influences that may be brought to bear on the general situation.

The present manner of handling Near East supplies from the United States sources has evolved from a normal export practice through a period of ever increasing regimentation, the consequence of growing war pressure. Foreign trade as a private enterprise has changed so that today there is foreign trade of either governmental undertakings or of private enterprise under strict governmental controls. The shift has not eliminated the general machinery of foreign trade; nor has it eliminated the private importer or exporter, but it has very definitely curtailed his activities and has subordinated his interests to those of the national governments. The practical effect of the shift, therefore, is that our Government deals in fact with other Governments. It is the procedure between governments that is under discussion at this time.

The controls in effect in the United States and the United Kingdom and in the countries of the Near East do not mean an arbitrary assumption of power; rather they reflect a realistic understanding of the present life and death struggle for survival, with all the dislocations incidental to such a struggle. Strategic and essential materials suddenly become surprisingly scarce, in some instances to the point of non-availability, and their handling becomes further circumscribed by a shortage in facilities for shipping, unloading and distribution. The application of governmental controls indicates an effort to bring order out of chaos to the end that the materials which are available may be put to their optimum use.

In the Near East there are at the moment two different systems of controls governing civilian supplies required by the countries of that area. The British have carried the controls of the individual countries into a broader control for the entire area, embodied in the Middle East Supply Centre (“M. E. S. C.” or “the Centre”). The Americans have been satisfied to leave the controls at the country level. As the two systems have not been correlated there is a dual administrative authority, accompanied by the inevitable complications of such a situation.

The Near East presents a peculiar problem in that, generally speaking, it is not a theater of war of actual fighting but a theater of war of potential fighting, and in the interim a service of supplies area on a grand scale. Materials of war pass through here to the fighting fronts in Russia and Libya. The civilian supply problems become acute as they become of secondary importance.

Although this paper is concerned principally with the civilian supply problem, it cannot ignore the logistical situation. Iran happens to combine both types of supply problem to a marked degree and therefore deserves some special consideration.9 The primary purpose is to get war materials on up to the Russians. To accomplish this successfully, the civilian side of the equation must be kept in some sort of reasonable balance. Add to this difficulty the British concept for control by subordinating Iran to the broader aspects of the area as a whole and the problem assumes challenging proportions. Whatever conclusions are reached for a joint or combined authority for the administration of civilian supplies in each country of the area, or for the area in its entirety, it is a matter of cardinal importance and fundamental necessity that that portion of the area through which supplies travel to reach the Russian front be kept intact and in complete independence of the surrounding territory. The area might be termed a “Russian corridor.” For a clear cut segregation, Iran and the necessary Persian Gulf ports and their facilities might be separated from the Near East group and set up as a service of supply area for the Russian theater of war in so far as United States supplies, their controls and their administration are concerned.

A neat case in support of this theory (and admittedly still trespassing on military territory) is found in the dispute now going on between the British and United States military authorities regarding the use of two cargoes of lumber now awaiting unloading at the port of Basra. The lumber was sent out to increase the berthing facilities across the river from Basra, that is for improving the facilities for handling Russian supplies. The British authorities had, and apparently still have, other ideas. Their plan is to erect some piers further down the river to supplement the port facilities of Basra. To sum up the dispute: The Americans wish to improve the facilities for handling supplies through Iran; the British desire to enlarge the facilities for handling supplies for Iraq. And in the meantime, the two vessels lie idle with only the prospect ahead of three weeks’ time spent in unloading after the dispute is settled.

The complications of a dual authority are manifest in most of the countries from which the United States receives requests for civilian supplies. The British have established a program for the individual countries through their control system for the area. A good deal of programming has been done without consultation with the United States authorities concerned. The Americans in turn have acted upon requests of each given country without consultation with the British authorities concerned. The inevitable result has been a collision of ideas at some point in the process of procurement, generally at the final stage of export clearance. The answer, of course, is simple. While joint or combined boards and committees have been established at the two chief control centers, Washington and London, application of the joint authority has not had time to permeate the system to its peripheral points. The question for correct answer is, of course, how best to install a joint authority for practical working throughout the system. Before attempting to answer the question it might be well to have a look at the organization set up by the British to exercise control over the area as a whole—the Middle East Supply Centre.

The M. E. S. C. was created in April 1941 to deal with civilian requirements. The need for such an organization was primarily due to shipping difficulties which followed the fall of France, with consequent loss of effective control in the Mediterranean. The main functions of the Centre are: “(i) ‘to review and co-ordinate the joint resources and civilian requirements in essential commodities of the territories (including raw materials required for their war industries) in order to make the Group as self-supporting as possible; and to exchange relevant information with corresponding control organizations in each territory;’ and

“(ii) ‘to estimate the balance of any essential requirements which must be imported from outside the Group and make recommendations accordingly to the authorities concerned, with a view specially to the best possible use of available shipping …’.”10

The organization consists of: (1) Director General.

(2) Three Departments: Supplies: Sections dealing with areas and with groups of commodities.

Economics: Encourages self-sufficiency; research data sent to appropriate sections of Supplies Department.

Administrative: Executive action on imports, movements of ships, loading program.

(3) Representatives in the several countries.

M. E. S. C. maintains liaison with the war effort through the Supply and Transportation Sub-Committee of the Middle East War Council, which is partly civilian in membership and of which the Minister of State is chairman, and through other smaller executive committees.

The Centre is not authorized to perform commercial transactions, which are thus reserved for established private companies or for the United Kingdom Commercial Corporation (U. K. C. C.).

The area of jurisdiction may be defined as all non-enemy territories bordering the Mediterranean (from Malta eastward), Iraq and Iran. Turkey is included only in the matter of cereals and like commodities.

The Centre, as indicated under its functions, passes on essentialities and assigns priorities to the approved material; it prepares programs for the individual countries on a six month basis; and it studies local economies and offers improved planned economies. A noteworthy example of this was the problem of cotton versus wheat in Egypt. The M. E. S. C. was instrumental in curtailing the planting of cotton and the partial replacement of this crop by heavier plantings of wheat.

All in all, the M. E. S. C. performs a very constructive service for the war effort and the civilian population in the Near East area.

Having in mind this highly organized machinery on an area basis, it is easy to visualize the difficulties which would be encountered if the United States were to pursue an independent course of action through a loosely organized machinery on a country basis. It is apparent that some adjustments must be made. The first move, clearly indicated, is for closer collaboration at the point of origin of the supply requirements. This step has no far-reaching implications; it is nothing more than the application of common sense.

For instance, in Baghdad there is a Central Supplies Committee, made up of local British and Iraqians, and a British representative from the M. E. S. C. There should be United States representation on this Committee.11 It would seem a simple and safe proposition to arrange to have a group from our Legation participate in the deliberations of the Committee. This would at least give the United States authorities a clear picture of the original requirements, and undoubtedly any revision or changes made by the M. E. S. C. Also the American Legation would in this way be currently informed of any program worked out by the M. E. S. C. for Iraq, and would inform the Department of the plan.

In addition to the need for collaboration at distant points there is need for better team-work in Washington. Eventually, some practical type sub-committee of the Combined Raw Materials Board and perhaps of the Combined Shipping Adjustment Board should be put into operation. Until that arrangement is developed further, considerable benefit can be derived from informal and non-official meetings such as those recently held in DE.12 It is from, these latter meetings that a good deal of the information in this paper has been garnered.

The above provisions along with a continuance of the present practice for a member, or members, of the United States Legation in Cairo to join informally with the M. E. S. C. would result in a perfectly sound working arrangement. To check this against the objectives set forth in paragraph one of this memorandum, the suggested procedure would allow for the following: (1) Satisfactory integration with the existing British machinery for the Near East.

(2) Practical adaptation to existing combined controls and flexibility for further adjustment if and when appropriate sub-committees are put into effect.

(3) Complete information on requirements.

(4) Political strength, provided caution is exercised in commitments.

The alternative course of action for the solution of the Near East supply problem calls for partnership with the British. The action is simple—United States representation on the M. E. S. C.—but the consequences are complex.

Until the present time, it has been conceded that the British have primary responsibility for the eastern Mediterranean area,12a and the treatment of that area has been tacitly left to their general control both in military and civilian matters, and to a lesser degree in political matters. With the increasing aid to that territory through Lend-Lease shipments and the substitution of United States suppliers for the former European suppliers, United States interests in the Near East have become of increasing importance. As far as the future may be appraised, the present trend will undoubtedly continue. From the point of self-interest, therefore, the United States should consider the possibility of playing a more important role in Near Eastern affairs.

The British attitude toward American representation on the M. E. S. C. is one of extreme cordiality. It was the British idea to begin with, and it is the British who still strongly urge United States participation. The type of representation has naturally been left to the American authorities, other than an informal and general agreement that there should be one military and one civilian representative. Whether the British envisage the participation as a full partnership is not known, but the chances are that they think of the move as considerably less.

The British want United States representation on the M. E. S. C. to obtain smoother functioning of the machinery of supplies; to get a unified Anglo-American attitude toward questions of policy and administrative detail; and to promote greater American responsibility in the Near East as a sphere of influence and as a theater of war. The British believe particularly that “aid to Egypt” or “aid to Tunis” should be raised to the broader plane of aid to the Near East.

There is little question that the British concept provides a broad and effective theory. If the mechanics and the human equations can be brought together into an orderly working scheme there would seem to be good reasons for formal participation by the United States in the broader approach to the affairs of the Near East countries.

According to the British file attached to this memorandum,13 the mechanics of the M. E. S. C. are well thought out and well executed. The concrete results of the Centre substantiate this statement.

The matter of personnel is the one big problem of the undertaking. To have American participation mean anything in a positive sense, this Government must send out to the Centre a representative of the very highest type. He should be a man well known publicly and in whom the public has confidence, and a man who has some knowledge of Near Eastern affairs. The man must not only have strength by himself but must be clothed with sufficient rank and authority to meet on equal terms such men as the Honorable Richard G. Casey, Minister of State, Sir Oliver Lyttelton, Minister of Supplies, other ranking diplomats, and the heads and officers of all the countries of the area. The situation very clearly calls for the rank of ambassador. A man who would fit these qualifications is Ambassador Bullitt.14 In addition to this top flight type representative there should be an equally able deputy who could take over during any absence of his chief. Also there should be an able accountant and sufficient staff for keeping adequate records.

So far this memorandum has been principally concerned with the “requirements” side of civilian supplies. A few words on the shipping and distribution side may eliminate some earlier misconceptions.

The M. E. S. C. does not contemplate a supply depot or a potential supply depot, at or near its headquarters. Nor does it contemplate a general practice of shipping materials to the M. E. S. C. for distribution to final destination points. The M. E. S. C. would be consignee only on bulk cargoes, which are listed as cereals, fertilizers, lubricants and wheat. Even here the ships are directed at time of sailing to either Persian Gulf ports or Red Sea ports.

With the Mediterranean closed for all practical purposes, waterborne freight must reach the Near East by either the Persian Gulf or the Red Sea. The topography of the region divides it for the distribution of supplies into two distinct parts, one comprising Iran, Iraq and Arabia, and the other the balance of the Near Eastern states.

If the United States authorities agree with the theory advanced herein that Iran is complementary to the Russian theater of war rather than to the Middle East theater of war and therefore should be set apart for special United States control, then Iraq is the only country in this particular group for M. E. S. C. handling, since Arabia has not yet been brought within that grouping. In other words, Persian Gulf sailing orders would be tantamount to country destinations.

In the other group, there are so many British Mandates that Red Sea sailing orders, so far as American interests are concerned, are likewise tantamount to country destinations, excepting for possible confusion between Turkey and Egypt.

Thus upon analysis the question of consigning bulk cargoes to the M. E. S. C. does not seem of such serious consequence.

In considering the wisdom of full participation with the British, it might be of comparative value to note the shortcomings of the more limited direct arrangements between this Government and the governments of the several countries of the Near East territory. Against the advantages of this approach set forth earlier in this memorandum, certain disadvantages are apparent when it is compared with the broader areal approach. The disadvantages are: (i) Inability in practice to fill the reasonable requests of any given country because the United States had not participated in formulating the general program.

(ii) Inadequacy of integration with the British machinery in case of adverse war developments in the Near East theater.

The disadvantages are simply the inherent weaknesses that are incidental to a limited course of action in a potentially limitless field of endeavor.

In contradistinction, full participation in the affairs of the M. E. S. C. would allow for the following: (i) Complete integration with the existing British machinery in the Near East.

(ii) The optimum correlation between Near East controls and the combined controls in Washington and London.

(iii) Complete information on country and area requirements, and participation in preparing and fulfilling programs for the countries and the area.

(iv) Strong political influence over the affairs of the Near East as a sphere, in addition to the influence now exerted on the individual countries.

Behind these known advantages are the unknown factors of war. It would seem the course of wisdom to prepare the ground for any eventuality. It may be that the Near East will become a focal point in the present world conflict, and that United States forces will play an increasingly prominent part in the probable campaigns of the future. Gaining joint authority in the area for the current administration of civilian supplies would pave the way for similar authority in the general affairs of the area in the future.

Frederick Winant

9 For correspondence regarding supplies for Iran, see pp. 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 138] ff.

10 Omission indicated in the original memorandum.

11 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401] ff.

12 Division of Exports and Defense Aid.

12a For a description of the negotiations between President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill which in March 1942 resulted in agreement for the division of the world into areas of strategic responsibility between the United States and Great Britain, see Maurice Matloff and Edwin M. Snell, Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941–1942, in the series United States Army in World War II: The War Department (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1953), pp. 165 ff. The allocation of the Near and Middle East and the Indian Ocean area as an area of British responsibility was in accord with “United States-British Staff Conversations: Report” (short title, ABC–1) of March 27, 1941, the joint strategic plan drawn up by American and British military staff planners at meetings held in Washington during January–March 1941. ABC–1 Report is reproduced in Pearl Harbor Attack: Hearings before the Joint Committee on the Investigation of the Pearl Harbor Attack, 79th Cong., 1st sess., on S. Cong. Res. 27 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1946), pt 15, p. 1485.

13 Not attached to file copy.

14 William C. Bullitt, former Ambassador to the Soviet Union and to France. During November 1941–February 1942 he was President Roosevelt’s personal representative on a mission to the Near East. The latter commission was undertaken initially and primarily to investigate and report on the matter of British “supply and similar problems” in the area in light of the growing importance of military operations in that theater of war, particularly Libya, although it was expanded subsequently to include “a general survey of the areas concerned”. Ambassador Bullitt was in the Near East from December 13, 1941, to January 23, 1942, and by direction of President Roosevelt his reporting and recommendations were made personally to the President. Originally the presidential plan called for Ambassador Bullitt to proceed from the Near and Middle East to India, Burma, the Straits Settlements, and the Dutch East Indies, returning to the United States by way of the Pacific, although he was given discretion to return immediately by the Atlantic if he considered this advisable after his study of the Near Eastern situation; he did in fact return via the Atlantic, presumably because of the war situation prevailing in the Pacific theater.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 800.24/294a: Telegram

[Document 6]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, April 30, 1942—8 p.m.

378. Department has now decided on formal representation on Middle East Supply Centre which will consist of one representative for military supplies and one representative for civilian supplies. Latter will be sent out from here, but until selected and appointed Department requests that you designate one member of your staff as the interim accredited representative. Department suggests Jacobs,15 but leaves final choice to you.

Legation in Tehran has been advised of decision and has been requested to participate formally in the local Central Supply Committee. Legations in other affected countries of Near East will be instructed similarly.

Please advise your choice of interim representative and when he will assume his new duties. Also communicate any pertinent information or raise any questions needing clarification in connection with formal participation. Suggest you and designated civilian representative confer with General Maxwell to coordinate American attitude. All matters of moment should be referred here for determination. More detailed instructions will follow.

Hull

15 Joseph Earle Jacobs, Counselor of Legation in Egypt and Consul General at Cairo.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 800.24/349¹⁄₁₂: Telegram

[Document 7]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 6, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 4:08 p.m.]

717. Before taking action on Department’s 378, April 30, 8 p.m. I would appreciate immediate clarification of the following two questions:

1. Does the Department desire permanent representation on the Middle East Supply Council, see Legation’s 1769, November 15, 10 a.m.16 and page 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5] of the Legation’s report “Notes on Egyptian Import Control” dated December 22, 1941,17 a body which meets once every 6 months, the next meeting being scheduled May 10 to May 13, [or] representation in Middle East Supply Center, the executive organization in Cairo which, under the British Minister of State, handles supply questions for Egypt and the entire Middle East? I ask this question because General Maxwell’s instructions from Washington dated April 30 authorize him to sit on the Council while the Department’s telegram under reference refers to the Center. Or does the Department intend that the American representatives participate in the activities of both bodies?

The reports and discussions at the Council’s semi-annual meetings should be of broad interest from economic, military and political points of view while the activities of the Center are of a more detailed character requiring that the American representatives become an integral part of its organization so as to be in a position to advise regarding the availability of materials in the United States and to recommend improvements designed to facilitate the flow of merchandise from the United States to the Middle East.

2. Has the Department arranged with the British authorities for the formal participation of the American representatives? Without specific instruction from London it is doubtful whether the Council or the Center will be prepared to take the American representatives into complete participation.

I propose Jacobs as interim accredited representative with Jones as his alternate. General Maxwell proposes to participate in same manner with Captain Jones of his staff as alternate. Participation can begin upon receipt by the Council or the Center or both of the authorization mentioned in query 2 above.

As the permanent American representative for civilian supplies who is to be sent out from Washington will be called upon to display mature judgment, discretion and organizing ability, and to possess considerable foreign experience preferably in the area, I urge that the person appointed possess such qualifications. He should before leaving the United States make a thorough study of the course of the Center’s recommendations through such agencies as the Ministry of War Transport in New York, the British Purchasing Commission and the United Kingdom Commercial Corporation. Precise information of this nature is entirely lacking here.

Kirk

16 Not printed.

17 Not found in Department files.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 800.24/298²⁄₁₁: Telegram

[Document 8]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, May 6, 1942—11 p.m.

401. Supplementing Department’s No. 378, April 30 and replying to your cable No. 443 of March 21. Public announcement has been made that Iraq and Iran are eligible for lend-lease assistance.18

Legation in Baghdad advised of decision regarding United States representation on MESC, and Chargé d’Affaires instructed to serve as civilian representative on existing local Central Supply Committee. Embassy in Ankara also advised and Ambassador or his alternate designated civilian representative on existing local coordinating committee.19

Civilian requirements of each country of Near East except Turkey and British colonial and mandated territories are processed in following manner.

Requirement is submitted to local committee in the individual country for appraisal of essentiality and urgency in comparison with other requirements of that country and in relation to shipping space roughly estimated by MESC as available to that country.

Findings of local committee are forwarded to MESC for integration with Near East areal requirements. This reference in no way impairs right of United States Chiefs of Mission to communicate with Department on any and all questions of detail or policy.

As for Turkey, only her requirements for cereals and sugar come under jurisdiction of MESC, although similar bulk cargoes will possibly be added later.

MESC examines requirements of each country for essentiality and urgency in relation to those of other countries of the Near East and endeavors first to fill them from Near East sources. If local supply is not feasible, approved requirements are integrated in over-all program for area.

To provide fuller information here, Department proposes that MESC cable Office of Lend-Lease Administration all lists which are cabled to London. Department hopes to establish a general receiving unit here for Near East requirements. Staff of proposed unit would include personnel from interested Government agencies and British Supply Council. In meantime Office of Lend-Lease Administration seems most appropriate existing agency.

British in London will determine within a limited period of time which requirements can be supplied from Empire sources and will cable Washington this decision and their recommendations on items which they themselves do not intend to supply.

United States authorities in Washington will consider all those items which the British do not undertake to supply from Empire sources. They will consult the British and the official agency of country seeking supplies, either jointly or separately.

Requisitions for lend-lease materials and clearance papers required for both private and governmental transactions will follow prescribed course through the various boards and committees operating here to pass on strategic and raw materials and shipping space. If the requisition or order is approved, the material will be shipped to Near East in following manner.

Bulk cargoes such as cereals and sugar will be consigned to MESC for distribution by that agency in accordance with exigencies of the situation at time of cargo’s arrival. Retransfer of these bulk cargoes will be a particular responsibility of United States representative on MESC.

All materials not shipped in bulk will be consigned to country of destination.

Procedure for handling requirements of British colonial and mandated territories will be dealt with in a later cable, as will question of follow-up on delivery of material at destination.

Chipman20 and Piburn21 have been consulted on this general subject. Department would be interested in any comments or suggestions from you on matters discussed herein. War Department suggests you show General Maxwell this cable.

Hull

18 For correspondence regarding Lend-Lease aid to Iraq and to Iran, see pp. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401] ff., and pp. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] ff., respectively.

19 For correspondence on Lend-Lease supplies for Turkey, see pp. 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791] ff.

20 Mr. Chipman had been assigned to duty in the Department.

21 Lt. Col. Edwin W. Piburn, who had served as temporary Lend-Lease representative to the United States Military Mission in North Africa.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 800.24/349²⁄₁₂: Telegram

[Document 9]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 7, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received May 7—8:17 a.m.]

727. My 717, May 6, 9 p.m. [a.m.] The Middle East Supply Center received a telegram from London indicating that [a representative] from the Maxwell Mission and a civilian sent from Washington are to be American representatives in the Center. The message adds that until the latter arrives an officer will be [designated] from this Legation to serve in his stead. This appears to dispose of the questions raised in my telegram referred to.

Invitations to attend the Council meetings next week either in person or by alternate are about to be issued to General Maxwell and Jacobs.

Kirk

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 800.24/349¹⁄₁₂a: Telegram

[Document 10]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, May 8, 1942—midnight.

410. Your 717, May 6, 9 a.m. Department reaffirms representation to be on Middle East Supply Centre. General Maxwell will receive further instructions from War Department.

American participation on Centre is by invitation of British authorities. Centre may expect specific instructions from London momentarily.

Little is known here about Council. From your cable 717 and earlier reports Department infers that Council is organ which defines broad operating policy of Centre and approves specific programs prepared by Centre. If this inference is reasonably accurate Department believes American representation on this governing board is desirable.

Advantage is being taken of our confusion between Council and Centre to suggest informally to British authorities here that United States representatives be invited to sit on Council as well as on Centre.

If you hear from Council regarding attendance at meeting scheduled May 10–13 you are authorized to handle at your discretion formal or informal representation from point of view of civilian requirements.

Department will cable shortly regarding representative coming from here. In meantime all available sources of information on Middle East Supply Centre are being investigated thoroughly.

Hull

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 800.24/3493/12: Telegram

[Document 11]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 16, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 9:26 a.m.]

779. Department’s 410, May 8, midnight, last paragraph. If the Department has not yet selected the representative for civilian supplies on the Middle East Supply Center, General Maxwell suggests that Fred Winant now in the Department is well qualified.

Kirk

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 883.24/57: Telegram

[Document 12]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 18, 1942—1 p.m.

575. Your 779, May 16, 9 a.m. Department appreciates General Maxwell’s suggestion. You and he will be glad to know that before receipt of your message Fred Winant had been selected as civilian representative. He will probably leave around July 1 accompanied by an administrative assistant with Lend-Lease accounting training. Both will be appointed in the Foreign Service Auxiliary.

It is planned to designate Winant “United States Civilian Representative on the MESC” and to attach him to the Missions at Cairo, Baghdad, Tehran and Jiddah so that he may have the benefit of the advice of the respective Chiefs of Mission. Department would appreciate your comment on this as well as your reply to the following: 1. What additional staff if any do you think it would be desirable for Winant to have?

2. Could the Legation provide him with a competent secretary or should one accompany him?

3. Could Jacobs or Jones assist Winant to some extent, particularly during latter’s absence from Cairo?

4. British Food Ministry has suggested that he be accompanied by an agricultural expert to advise on new crop plantings. Do you consider this advisable?

Hull

[For public statement regarding purpose and membership of Middle East Supply Center, see Department of State Bulletin, January 16, 1943, page 76.]

Exchange of notes between the United States and the United Kingdom regarding air services in the Near and Middle EastExchange of notes between the United States and the United Kingdom regarding air services in the Near and Middle East

[13] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, February 28, 1942—2 p.m. [Received February 28—10:44 a.m.]

811.79680/76: Telegram

[14] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] April 16, 1942.

811.79680/205

[15] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , May 27, 1942.

811.79680/122

[16] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , July 28, 1942.

811.79680/170

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State 811.79680/76: Telegram

[Document 13]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, February 28, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received February 28—10:44 a.m.]

959. Department’s 438, February 5, 8 p.m.; and Department’s 814, February 24, 6 p.m.1 With regard to the proposed establishment of an air route between the west coast of Africa and Australia, the Embassy has just received a note dated February 27 signed by Mr. Eden2 which in substance reads as follows:

I understand that the proposed route is to be used only during the present war emergency for purposes wholly concerned with the war and that it is not intended that it should be used commercially. I have the honor to inform you that, on this understanding, the British Government welcome the establishment of the proposed air route through British territory. The British Government however wish to make it clear that should the American Government now or after the war wish to make use of this service for commercial purposes the British Government will expect to be further consulted.

With respect to the further points mentioned by the Department of State, the British Government has no objection to the United States authorities communicating direct with the appropriate local authorities in the case of those territories for which the British are responsible. These authorities are, in respect of Mombasa, the Governor of Kenya at Nairobi; in respect of Diego García in the Chagos Archipelago, the Governor of Mauritius; in respect of Seychelles, the Governor at Mahé; and in respect of Mbeya, the Governor of Tanganyika at Dar es Salaam. It is suggested, in the case of Cocos Islands, that the American authorities should communicate with General Wavell.3 The American authorities, it is presumed, are in contact, in so far as Port Hedland is concerned, with the Commonwealth Government.

It may be possible in the case of Mombasa and Mbeya for any necessary improvements to the existing aerodromes to be undertaken by the Colonial authorities in question.

The American authorities will doubtless explore this possibility as soon as information is available as to the improvements if any that may be necessary. At present it is not clear whether the establishment of a landing ground in Coëtivy Island would be practicable or whether more promising possibilities are afforded by the Island of Mahé. This point no doubt will be considered by the American authorities in consultation with the Governor of Seychelles when the requisite surveys have been undertaken.

In communicating the above, I would venture to point out that the hope has been expressed by the Air Ministry that the American authorities in developing the section of the route as far as Mombasa should adhere to their declared intention of following the route Ascension Island, Leopoldville, Bukama or Elizabethville, Mbeya, Mombasa, and would not go farther north than this in order that the Takoradi–Khartoum air route would not be jeopardized by over-crowding.

It is my understanding that insofar as the Free French and Belgian territories are concerned the American authorities are in communication with the Free French authorities and the Belgian Government.

Matthews

1 Neither printed.

2 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

3 Gen. Sir Archibald P. Wavell, British Commander in Chief in India.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 811.79680/205

[Document 14]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] April 16, 1942.

Mr. Helm4 came in to see me at my request.

I referred to the memorandum presented by the British Embassy to Mr. Welles5 under date of April 15, 1942, together with a copy of a note from the British Foreign Minister to our Embassy in London.6 Both the memorandum and the note expressed concern lest military services being inaugurated through Pan American Airways between Washington and Cairo might become commercial air services. Hope was expressed that any endeavor to convert these routes into commercial air routes for Pan American should be handled through the diplomatic channel and in consultation with Great Britain.

I said that the British Government was correct in understanding that these routes had been arranged as routes for military and government services. There had not been any intention of making them at this time commercial air routes. We were aware of the fact that without the knowledge of this Government, agents of Pan American Airways had approached the Governments, both of Egypt and of Iraq, with a view to securing commercial concessions. This had not been done with the knowledge or consent of any branch of the United States Government. I said that we would, prior to making any change in the governmental nature of these routes, take it up with the British Government.

I said that I wished to make two distinct points in this connection.

First: In agreeing that we would consult the British Government, we did not wish to be understood as accepting the principle that American airlines could or should be excluded from these areas after the war, or that entry into these areas should be dependent on the consent of any foreign government. The assurance given was intended to mean merely that we would enter into friendly consultation on the subject.

Second: We did not wish to indicate that the service rendered by the planes running on the military routes should be limited necessarily to military service. We were agreeable to their not being used for strictly commercial service—that is, to make it clear that Pan American could not advertise a commercial service on a military plane. On the other hand, I felt that the authorities of the United States Government in these areas should be at liberty to use any unfilled space on the planes for any reasonable governmental transport service, which might include repatriation of American nationals, transport of needed materials, carriage of mail and the like. It would be absurd not to use all the transport space available merely because the use intended was not strictly “military”.

To this Mr. Helm readily agreed.

I said that the reason for being willing to consult with the British Government regarding air routes in these areas did not, of course, imply on our part any acquiescence in the idea that any power could preempt areas of the earth’s surface outside its own borders and claim the right to exclude us from the air transport field.

I did feel that at the close of the war, or at an appropriate occasion, instead of indulging in a scramble for air routes, the British Government and we ought to sit down and consider the matter in entire friendship. Otherwise, the situation would develop into a concession hunter’s scramble, which neither of us ought to permit.

Mr. Helm agreed to this, saying that in his own view, the result would probably be competitive air services in the same area, which he thought was entirely healthy. The Imperial Airways had been competing in this very area with the Dutch, and he thought the Dutch had done a better job. If it had not been for the Dutch competition, the Imperial Airways probably would not have improved its own services.

He then inquired what our attitude would be towards a treaty by one government with another, under which an independent government agreed to give to one nation exclusive rights for airplanes of one country to traverse its skies.

I said that if I understood him correctly, he referred to a situation in which, for example, Great Britain might have a treaty with, say Spain, under which Spain gave exclusive right to British airplanes to traverse Spain. I said I thought our Government would undoubtedly object to any such arrangement. We could hardly be expected to welcome an agreement between two countries preventing American traffic from crossing the area. Mr. Helm noted the point.

I had an uneasy suspicion that probably the British may have contemplated some such arrangement with Egypt. Mr. Helm did not elucidate the point. He indicated that he, personally, was entirely sympathetic to holding all questions of this kind open, endeavoring to make a fair adjustment when the appropriate time came.

A[dolf] A. B[erle], Jr.

4 A. K. Helm, Counselor of the British Embassy.

5 Sumner Welles, Under Secretary of State.

6 Unauthenticated copies in the files of the Department are not printed.

The Department of State to the British Embassy 811.79680/122

[Document 15]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Aide-mémoire

On April 15, 1942 the British Embassy handed to the Department of State an aide-mémoire 7 on the subject of Pan American Airways services in the Near and Middle East. Reference was made to an attached copy of a note dated February 24, 19427 addressed by Mr. Eden to the United States Ambassador in London on the same subject.

With regard to the air services presently carried on by Pan American Airways into Egypt, and from Cairo to Basra, note is taken of the fact that subject to the approval of the British military authorities, the Egyptian Government would be prepared to grant to Pan American Airways facilities for operating special air services to meet the requirements for official passengers, mail or freight; and that the British Government believes that space in such services in excess of United States military requirements should be confined to material connected with the war effort of the United Nations, and that British and Allied military material should have priority after United States military material.

It is the view of this Government that Pan American Airways, in respect of the services to Egypt, and from Cairo to Basra, is operating a facility for the benefit of the Government of the United States and the United Nations. As this is done at the expense of the United States, it would seem that the United States should be free to make use of any unfilled space on these planes for non-commercial, civilian use approved by the United States authorities in the region. If the phrase “material connected with the war effort of the United Nations” is interpreted in this sense, and is not restricted to what may be regarded as “military use”, this Government could accept the point of view of the aide-mémoire under reference.

This Government is not prepared to accept without qualification the suggestion that British and Allied military material should have priority after United States military material, irrespective of circumstances. It is believed that the needs of the situation will be adequately met if the competent authority of the United States on the ground is instructed to give full consideration to British and Allied military needs in determining priorities.

It will readily be appreciated that travel for diplomatic and other government personnel, though civilian, may in many instances outrank in necessity non-exigent space requirements for British and Allied military material. Repatriation of American citizens might, in various contingencies, take priority over such material, depending on the circumstances. Determination of priority must be decided by the sound judgment of the competent authority on the ground in the light of circumstances, rather than by blanket rule.

Should the particular question of a commercial air service over Egyptian territory require examination, the United States Government is entirely willing to discuss it in the first place with the British Government. It believes, however, that such discussion could be more adequately held in Washington rather than in Cairo.

The Government of the United States agrees with the British Government that the present moment is not opportune for discussion of post-war commercial air services between Cairo and Basra, and in Sudan and Egyptian territory. As and when exploration of this subject appears desirable, it will feel free to take the matter up with the British Government, and has every confidence that through frank exchange of views, a solution of any problems then arising may be arrived at.

In conclusion, the Department expresses the hope that no attempt will be made by either Government, or by companies acting for either Government, to set up arrangements which would exclude air transport lines of the other, except after consultation through diplomatic channels. It is believed that at a future time, consultation between the two Governments on the entire subject of commercial air routes in Africa and in the Middle East will be advantageous to both Governments and it is, accordingly, hoped that no arrangements exclusive in character will be made until such general consultation shall have been had.

Washington , May 27, 1942.

7 Unauthenticated copies in the files of the Department are not printed.

7 Unauthenticated copies in the files of the Department are not printed.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 811.79680/170

[Document 16]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide Mémoire

Ref: 940/70/42
No. 541

His Majesty’s Government have given careful consideration to the State Department’s Aide-Mémoire of May 27th on the subject of Pan American Airways Services in the Near and Middle East.

2. His Majesty’s Government understand that a revision of the agreements with the American and British authorities under which Pan American Airways operate in and across Africa is at present under consideration. In view of this fact, it appears unnecessary to pursue further the questions raised in this correspondence on the subject of allocation of space in these services. In this connexion His Majesty’s Government have noted with satisfaction that paragraph 3 of the Department’s Aide-mémoire refers only to non-commercial civilian use, and that it is proposed that the competent local authorities of the United States forces should be instructed to give full consideration to British and Allied military needs in determining priorities. His Majesty’s Government are confident that this matter and the other points raised in paragraphs 3, 4, and 5 of the Department’s Aide-mémoire can be satisfactorily settled by agreement between the local British and American authorities.

3. His Majesty’s Government entirely concur with the principle expressed in the last paragraph of the Department’s Aide-mémoire objecting to exclusive arrangements for air transport lines, and consider this principle is one which is applicable not only in the area covered by this correspondence but throughout the world.

Washington , July 28, 1942.

Concern of the United States at the impact of Axis victories and propaganda on the political stability of the Near East; dispatch of the Hoskins MissionConcern of the United States at the impact of Axis victories and propaganda on the political stability of the Near East; dispatch of the Hoskins Mission

[17] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)

[Washington,] July 10, 1942.

740.0011 European War 1939/23492

[18] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] July 14, 1942.

867N.01/1812³⁄₅

[19] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] July 16, 1942.

740.0011 European War 1939/23493

[20] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 27, 1942—midnight.

740.0011 European War 1939/23914a: Telegram

[21] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 27, 1942—midnight.

740.0011 European War 1939/23914b: Telegram

[22] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 15, 1942—8 p.m. [Received 10:43 p.m.]

890D.00/914: Telegram

[23] Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 18, 1942.

811.20290B/7½

[24] The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

Washington, October 20, 1942.

811.20290B/9½

[25] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, November 12, 1942—5 p.m.

811.20290B/3: Telegram

[26] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, November 20, 1942—4 p.m.

811.20290B/4a: Telegram

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) 740.0011 European War 1939/23492

[Document 17]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)1

[Washington,] July 10, 1942.

Joint Declaration of July 3, 1942, by Germany and Italy With Respect to Egypt

Germany and Italy issued a joint declaration in regard to Egypt on July 3, as follows: “When their armed forces are advancing on Egyptian territory, the Axis powers solemnly assert their firm intention to respect and safeguard the independence and sovereignty of Egypt. When entering Egypt, Axis forces did not regard it as enemy territory but had the intention of driving out the English from Egyptian territory and of continuing military operations against England which aim at liberating the Near East from British domination. The policy of the Axis powers is guided by the principle ‘Egypt for the Egyptians’. Freed from the chains which bind it to Great Britain and which have made it suffer the consequences of war, Egypt is destined to take her place among the independent and sovereign nations.”

In a telegram dated July 7,2 Mr. Kirk3 reports that the statement has not been issued in the local press due to a censorship stop, and that the British appear to be more concerned with its effect in other Arab areas than in Egypt itself. However, an Egyptian source of information considers that the Egyptian reaction is more important and widespread than the British realize. The Egyptians are also wrought up over Axis broadcasts to the effect they will be likely to suffer from Axis air raids on British military targets in Egypt, and warning them of British scorched earth tactics on withdrawal. The Axis is also saying that the British are using pressure to effect the transfer of the King and the Government elsewhere, and is expressing confidence in an Axis victory.

This propaganda, taken together, has impressed the Egyptian public, which has largely lost confidence in British military capacity. The attitude of the Egyptians is due to fear for their lives and property and to the fact that they consider the British responsible for Egypt’s present plight. As a result, there is an undercurrent of restlessness and if further British military reverses occur the Egyptian Government may find the situation difficult to control.

Wallace Murray

1 Addressed to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle), the Under Secretary of State (Welles), and the Secretary of State.

2 Telegram No. 1185, July 7, 2 p.m., from the Minister in Egypt, not printed.

3 Alexander C. Kirk, the Minister in Egypt.

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1812³⁄₅

[Document 18]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] July 14, 1942.

Mr. Secretary: As you will recall from our conversation just before your departure, you wished to consider and discuss further the attached proposed letter to the President transmitting for his approval a statement4 setting forth the attitude of the Government of the United States toward the peoples of the Near East, with particular reference to their future.

The advantage of the present draft is that it refers to neither the Arabs nor the Jews and thereby avoids the controversial subjects both of the National Home for the Jews in Palestine and the Jewish Army.

While Axis propaganda has been able to make alarming inroads among the Arabs of the Near East, we have, unfortunately, sat by in silence and done nothing to win the Arabs over to the cause of the United Nations and away from the Axis.

If, as is not improbable, it eventually becomes necessary to send American troops to the Near East to bolster up the crumbling position of Great Britain there, I think we would be open to grave criticism for having exposed unnecessarily our troops in that area to the hostile native populations as well as to the Axis armies, when it might have been possible for us to take suitable action at an earlier moment to turn the tide of anti-American feeling among the Arabs and to have gained some support from them for our cause.

We are at your disposal any time you wish to discuss this matter further.5

Wallace Murray

4 Neither printed; these particular drafts were not sent. For earlier drafts, see pp. 538–540 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 649].

5 This matter was discussed further in the Department and with President Roosevelt during July and early August.

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 740.0011 European War 1939/23493

[Document 19]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] July 16, 1942.

Mr. Berle: There are two considerations which, it seems to me, should be borne in mind in deciding whether it would be desirable for the Secretary to make a statement to offset the Germano-Italian Declaration of July 3, 1942.

Publication of that declaration has been prevented by the British in Egypt, consequently it would be impossible to use a statement there without letting the cat out of the bag.

A second and more important consideration is that the Germano-Italian Declaration is not confined to Egypt in its application but embraces the entire Near East in the following passage: “… Axis forces … had the intention … of continuing military operations against England which aim at liberating the Near East from British domination.”

An adequate statement in rebuttal would have to be of equal scope. As you know, we have drafted a declaration, approval of which is pending, setting forth the intentions of this Government with respect to the entire Near East, and emphasizing the complete emptiness and cynicism of Axis promises. Such a declaration, if issued, will serve to cancel all Axis promises to the Near Eastern peoples: past, present and future.

Wallace Murray

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 European War 1939/23914a: Telegram

[Document 20]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 27, 1942—midnight.

4106. Part I.8 The following plan has been discussed with the President and has his general approval: 1. The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff have for some time been giving special consideration to the situation in the Near East and have discussed with the State Department the serious consequences for the United Nations if this area were lost. They feel that every possible effort, both political and military, must be made to hold this vital area.

2. The United States still holds a unique position in the Near East and American prestige and influence is still high. This results from a realization by the people of the area that the United States has no territorial or vested political interests there. Furthermore, since actions speak louder than words, this widespread goodwill toward the United States has become what might be described as a deep-seated conviction on the part of the peoples in this area, due mainly to a century of American missionary, educational and philanthropic efforts that have never been tarnished by any material motives or interests. No other member of the United Nations is in such a position.

3. Although large American military forces are not now available for the protection of the Near East, there are weapons in the field of American political action and propaganda that we are in a position to contribute to help hold this area.

4. In the political field, in an effort to help this critical situation, the State Department has under contemplation two specific steps as follows: a. The issuance of a declaration of United States Government policy in regard to the Near East, a copy of which is included as Part II of this telegram.9

b. The appointment of a diplomatic agent to Lebanon and Syria.10

5. A further step is also contemplated by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Even though the Near East remains primarily a British theater of military responsibility, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that an American Mission, part military part economic, might, because of the standing of the United States, be able to help hold this area, and they have in mind sending to the Near East as soon as possible such an American Mission.

6. An initial activity of this Mission will be to make an economic survey of the area. …

7. The major and positive function of another section of such an American Mission will be to capitalize on the existing goodwill toward the United States and, as a result to gain more active support of the peoples of this area for a United Nations’ victory. The main efforts of this section of this Mission … will be in the field of political warfare and of propaganda. This will require, on the one hand, the closest collaboration with the American consular and diplomatic representatives in this area, and, on the other hand, with the local representatives of OWI11 who will actually do the propaganda work. Personal contact with influential leaders in the various areas of the Near East will, from the start, be a major function of the head of this Mission.

8. American propaganda throughout the Near East will be increased enormously and quickly in both volume and effectiveness over what has been done to date. It has already been discussed with OWI that there should be made available in the shortest possible time an increased amount of American news for Arabic newspapers, an efficient photo newspaper service, pamphlets, gadgets, etc. as are being offered in other parts of the world.

9. For effective coordination the activities of this Mission must of course be subject to the general control of the American theater commander. Full cooperation with all other American Government agencies operative in this area is being arranged before the Mission leaves for the Near East.

10. In its work in the Near East, this American Mission must operate, although in close cooperation with the British and the Fighting French, as an independent American organization and not, as may be suspected, as a “front” for the French and British. Its principal arguments will be: a. The military power and potentialities of the United Nations.

b. The inevitable fate of the peoples of the Near East in case of Axis victory—political and economic enslavement as in all occupied countries.

c. The self-interest of the Near East peoples and their better prospects for political and economic development as a result of a United Nations’ victory.

d. The assurance of the support of the United States for their aspirations to independence after the war if, in line with American foreign policy and the Atlantic Charter,12 these peoples actively assist in winning it.

11. Such an American Mission will naturally cover the same theater as the Middle East Command but its primary efforts will be aimed at the Arabic speaking world of the Near East—Egypt, Lebanon, Syria, Palestine, Trans-Jordan, Arabia, Iraq, and, because of physical location, Turkey and Iran.

Official headquarters will be in the same place as the British Middle East Command. Operating headquarters probably will be established in Beirut, Lebanon, with subsidiary headquarters in each of the political areas listed above.

12. The proposed head of this Mission is Lt. Colonel Harold B. Hoskins, Army of the United States, for the past year and a half in the State Department and now on an indefinite leave of absence. Colonel Hoskins, who was born in Beirut of American missionary parents, speaks Arabic, French, German and Spanish. During the last war he was a Captain in the 5th Regiment Marines, 2nd U.S. Division, wounded and decorated. Since then he has been in the cotton goods business in the United States but has continued to travel widely in Southern Europe and the Near East. He is also Vice-President of the Board of Trustees of the American University of Beirut.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14. It seems advisable that such an effort should be made, and the results can be substantial, especially as this Mission will be going out with the full support of both the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Department of State, and it is hoped with prior agreement as to its American character and activities by the British political and military authorities.

15. Please discuss this project with the Foreign Office and other competent British officials and endeavor to get their concurrence in (1) the two steps contemplated by the State Department, including the issuance of the proposed declaration of United States Government policy toward the Near East. This statement is in the opinion of this Department the minimum that can be effectively said. If the British suggest or prefer that such a statement be issued by our diplomatic representatives in the Near East rather than announced from Washington, you are authorized to accept such a compromise; for maximum effect, however, this statement should be issued in Washington by the President or the Secretary of State.

(2) the operation of the American Mission along the lines outlined above.

16. Please transmit a copy of this instruction to General Bolte13 and ask him to discuss this project with the Fighting French National Committee and to endeavor to get their concurrence also to the points in paragraph 15.

17. In view of the urgency of this matter, you are requested to obtain British and French approval and cable us their concurrence at the earliest possible moment.

Part II follows as Department’s 4107.

Hull

8 Telegram sent in two sections, Part I as No. 4106 and Part II as No. 4107.

9  Infra.

10 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753] ff.

11 Office of War Information.

12 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

13 Brig. Gen. Charles L. Bolte, United States representative to deal with the Free French on military matters.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 European War 1939/23914b: Telegram

[Document 21]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 27, 1942—midnight.

4107. Part II. The statement referred to in paragraph 4 (a) above is as follows: “Questions have been asked as to the attitude of the Government of the United States toward the peoples of the Near East, with particular reference to their future. It is therefore desirable to make known this Government’s attitude, which is as follows:

“The war objectives of this Government as stated in the Atlantic Charter include the ‘desire to see no territorial changes that do not accord with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned,’ and respect for ‘the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live’.

“An elaboration is given in the basic statement of policy made by Secretary of State Cordell Hull on July 23, 1942,14 as follows: ‘We have always believed—and we believe today—that all peoples, without distinction of race, color, or religion, who are prepared and willing to accept the responsibilities of liberty, are entitled to its enjoyment.

‘We have always sought—and we seek today—to encourage and aid all who aspire to freedom to establish their right to it by preparing themselves to assume its obligations.

‘It has been our purpose in the past—and will remain our purpose in the future—to use the full measure of our influence to support attainment of freedom by all peoples who, by their acts, show themselves worthy.’

“This Government is of course dedicated to the fulfilment of these objectives in the Near East as in other parts of the world.

“The record shows that the Axis Powers have repeatedly and cynically dishonored their promises and engagements. Therefore it is inconceivable that any Near Eastern peoples place either faith or credence in them. The Axis aggressors threaten the maintenance and extension of freedom in the Near East; consequently, increased participation in the war effort by all Near Eastern peoples would be in their own interest and naturally would be welcomed by the United States Government.”

Hull

14 For text of speech broadcast nationally by the Secretary of State on July 23, 1942, over all radio networks, see Department of State Bulletin, July 25, 1942, p. 639.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/914: Telegram

[Document 22]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 15, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received 10:43 p.m.]

5168. My telegram 4970, September 4, midnight.15 This morning Eden16 handed me an aide-mémoire in answer to my aide-mémoire based on the Department’s 4106, August 27, midnight. He made the following verbal statement of policy to me in relation to the areas affected. He told me that because of the necessities of war British policy was based, first, on military might, second, on contributions of money and materials such as half a million pounds of air raid protection in Iraq, third, the driving out or arrest of Quislings or enemy spies and, fourth, on propaganda which warned against the “Herrenvolk” using as an example the action of the Italians against the Arabs in Tripoli which is known in that area. He hoped very much that nothing we would do would controvert that policy but that in what we do we would give general support to it. He is not as pessimistic as we are in regard to this territory and feels that under all the circumstances, with the reverses in Russia and earlier British reverses in Libya, the situation has stood up well. He recognizes that Syria is a weak spot but General de Gaulle17 has just agreed to return to London. I have not taken this up with the Fighting French pending a reply from the British and in view of the nature of this reply I feel it inopportune to do so.

The Prime Minister himself is opposed to the language of the declaration and he asks that if we decide to issue a modified declaration the British be given an opportunity to see it before issuance.

The aide-mémoire follows: “His Majesty’s Government have not failed to give most careful attention to the aide-mémoire received from the American Embassy under date August 31, in which the opinion of His Majesty’s Government is invited on certain political action contemplated by the United States Government in the Middle East, and on the proposed despatch of a special American mission to those regions.

2. His Majesty’s Government fully appreciate the wish of the United States Government to utilize for the purposes of the war all the great reserves of good will which the United States has undoubtedly built up in the Middle East by decades of philanthropic and cultural enterprise. They agree that it is highly desirable to make the most effective use possible of these reserves, and of the great influence which the United States enjoy, for other reasons, in those territories as elsewhere, and they cordially welcome the intention of the United States Government to appoint a diplomatic agent in Syria and the Lebanon. As regards the proposed public declaration, His Majesty’s Government recognize the value of any step that would stimulate the Middle Eastern peoples to increase the degree of their participation in the resistance to the Axis aggressors, and if the United States Government are of the opinion that this object can satisfactorily be advanced by the issue of a declaration, His Majesty’s Government would not wish to raise objection. At the same time, they must in all frankness say that they see very considerable dangers in addressing a statement in the form proposed to the regions in question, and should the United States Government be prepared as His Majesty’s Government sincerely hope to reconsider the wording of the draft statement His Majesty’s Government would greatly appreciate an opportunity to consider any revised formula.

3. In the first place, the stress laid in the draft declaration on the promotion of ‘liberty’ and ‘freedom’ appears inappropriate when applied to a region in which all the countries specified, with the exceptions of Palestine and Transjordania and the possible further exception of the Levant States, already enjoy independence qualified only by the exigencies of the war situation and the requirements of the Allied forces operating within their boundaries.

4. Such a declaration followed by the announcement on the American side of the intention to despatch a special mission would, in the view of His Majesty’s Government, incur the precise risk of strengthening that Axis influence and that Axis propaganda which it is the express intention of the proposal to combat. The meaning of the draft declaration would infallibly be taken in the countries to which it is intended to apply as containing both an implication that ‘liberty’ is being withheld and an assurance that it is the intention of the United States Government to hasten its achievement. No implications could be more welcome to Axis propaganda, could be more readily turned against the occupying forces or could be more calculated to increase the tension of the existing situation and to threaten the security of the Allied command.

5. On the other hand, and as regards the areas covered by the proposed mission which do enjoy full independence, His Majesty’s Government cannot but feel that the suggested mission and the draft declaration are liable to be misinterpreted as regards Palestine both by Jews and Arabs in a sense which could hardly fail to have dangerous repercussions. As regards Syria and the Lebanon as the United States Government are aware, the situation is complicated in so far as the fulfillment of the Anglo-French recognition of independence is impeded by the obstruction of the Fighting French to recognition of, and administration, while the tense military situation in Egypt renders it difficult for His Majesty’s Government on their side to apply the pressure which they would otherwise wish to bring. American help in securing this fulfillment, afforded at the right time and in the right manner, will be heartily welcomed by His Majesty’s Government. But the proposals now advanced, in so far as they refer to these areas seem to His Majesty’s Government calculated to provoke a state of popular agitation and excitement which, at the present time, it would be very difficult to meet.

6. A special word must be said about Turkey. Although His Majesty’s Government feel that the proposed declaration is hardly appropriate to that country, they are anxious to make clear that the arrangements which the United States Government may wish to make for the utilization, and the increase, in the interest of the United Nations war effort, their undoubted influence in Turkey are, in the view of His Majesty’s Government, essentially a question between the United States and the Turkish Government. His Majesty’s Government for their part, if only in view of their Treaty of Alliance with Turkey and the delicate political situation in regard to that country, welcome the evident readiness of the United States Government to keep them acquainted with the action which they may propose to take.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8. In respect of the other activities mentioned in the Embassy’s memorandum, His Majesty’s Government would welcome the appointment of specialized American personnel to work with the appropriate British authorities on all these matters. In general they welcome the intention of the United States Government that American propaganda should be greatly and rapidly increased in the interest of the United Nations war effort throughout the Middle East where the soil, for the reasons pointed out in the American Embassy memorandum, should be peculiarly fertile.”18

Winant

15 Not printed.

16 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

17 Gen. Charles de Gaulle, Leader of the Free French Forces.

18 It is stated in The Memoirs of Cordell Hull (New York, The Macmillan Company, 1948) vol. ii, p. 1500, that this proposal for a declaration of policy on the Near East was abandoned in consequence of the British reaction.

Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State 811.20290B/7½

[Document 23]

Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 18, 1942.

Dear Mr. Secretary: An aide-mémoire sent by the State Department to the British Foreign Office under date of August 31st,19 with reference to a United States Mission to the Near East, has come to the attention of the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff. In it there are several inaccuracies.

In paragraph 1 the statement appears that “The United States Joint Chiefs of Staff for some time have been giving special consideration to the situation in the Near East and have discussed with the Department of State the serious consequences for the United Nations of possible Axis success in this area.” While it is true that the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff have such a project under consideration, it has not been the subject of special consideration as indicated nor has any one been authorized to present the views of the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff on this subject to the Department of State.

In paragraph 5 the statement appears:—“…20 and the Joint Chiefs of Staff have, therefore, in mind the sending of such an American mission to the Near East as soon as possible.” This statement only approximates the truth inasmuch as the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff have referred this question to the Combined Chiefs of Staff and will abide by the decision of that body and will give no approval to such a mission unless it receives the concurrence of General Maxwell commanding American troops in the Middle East.

Paragraph 11 describes the functions of the proposed American Mission, which are larger in scope than those being considered by the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff in their current study of this subject.

Paragraph 14 states:— “The Department of State feels that the effort involved in the sending of the mission is well worth while and that its results can be substantial, especially as it will enjoy the full support of both the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Department of State, …”20 As stated above, it has not yet been determined whether the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff will give this project their approval.

It is the opinion of the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff that the aide-mémoire in question does not accurately present their views and has the effect of committing them to a certain line of action prior to their decision that they will take such action. The matter in question is now the subject of study by the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff and the Combined Chiefs of Staff. It has been referred to the British Chiefs of Staff in London for approval and to the Commanding General of the American Troops in the Middle East for his recommendations.

It is requested, therefore, that the British Foreign Office be asked to disregard your aide-mémoire of August 31st until such time as final action has been taken on the matter through the channels in which it is being processed by the Joint U.S. Chiefs of Staff.22

For the Joint U. S. Chiefs of Staff:
William D. Leahy

19 See telegram No. 4106, August 27, to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom, p. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], upon which the aide-mémoire was based.

20 Omission indicated in the original.

20 Omission indicated in the original.

22 A memorandum (not printed) by Mr. Wallace Murray, Political Adviser, on November 5, 1942, indicates that no reply was sent to this letter in view of later correspondence with Admiral Leahy. The British Foreign Office had already replied; see telegram No. 5168, September 15, 8 p.m., supra. Agreement was reached with the British Chiefs of Staff for a visit by Colonel Hoskins to Cairo; see footnote 25, p. 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 26].

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy 811.20290B/9½

[Document 24]

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to Admiral William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy

Washington, October 20, 1942.

My Dear Admiral Leahy: I had the opportunity on Friday last of talking with the President concerning the last paragraphs of your letter to me on October 723 regarding the proposed mission to the Near East of a group headed by Lieutenant Colonel Hoskins …

It is true that the British authorities appear to be disinclined to agree that this mission should proceed to the Near East, but the President feels, and requested me to tell you accordingly, that the British authorities should be told that this Government desires the mission to proceed to the Near East in view of its belief that such a mission could accomplish much useful work in the interest of the United Nations. The President said that the British authorities might as well be frankly told that at the present time an American mission of this character would be able to do much that is useful in view of the fact that the Government of the United States possesses very considerable influence and prestige in that area, and that because of the desire of all of us that Axis propaganda and Axis activities throughout the countries of the Near East should be effectively combatted, it was desirable that this mission be sent at an early moment.

I mentioned this question a few days ago briefly to Lieutenant General McNarney in view of my thought that an effective way of convincing the British authorities that their objections should be withdrawn would be to send Colonel Hoskins to London in order that he could inform General Eisenhower fully of the details regarding the work which the proposed mission was to undertake so that General Eisenhower could himself take the matter up with the appropriate authorities in London. General McNarney felt, however, that under existing arrangements this question should be discussed with the Combined Chiefs of Staff in Washington rather than in London. This, of course, is a question which you are able to determine and which I am not.

I shall appreciate it if you will let me know what can be done along the lines above set forth in accordance with the desire which the President expressed to me.24

Believe me

Yours very sincerely,

Sumner Welles

23 Not printed.

24 In a letter of October 31, 1942, from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Under Secretary of State it was stated that the British Chiefs of Staff had agreed that a representative should be sent to Cairo to discuss the proposed mission. The letter also stated that the British had objected to including as a function of the proposed mission the distribution of food in the Middle East on the ground that it would cut across the activities of the Middle East Supply Center on which the United States was represented. (811.20290B/9½)

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 811.20290B/3: Telegram

[Document 25]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, November 12, 1942—5 p.m.

1406. From the Under Secretary. Colonel Harold B. Hoskins has been instructed to proceed to Cairo to conduct a survey for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Department and the President, with whom I have discussed the subject, are interested in facilitating his mission and I shall appreciate your giving him assistance and advice in accomplishing his purpose. [Welles.]

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 811.20290B/4a: Telegram

[Document 26]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, November 20, 1942—4 p.m.

1463. Personal for the Minister from the Under Secretary. I am deeply interested in the negotiations about to be undertaken in Cairo with the British authorities by Lieutenant Colonel Hoskins. The projected mission which he has been designated to undertake in certain Arab countries of the Near East has been approved by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and by the Combined Chiefs of Staff and the President has personally expressed his desire that the mission be carried out.25 I hope you will facilitate his negotiations in every way you properly can and I wish you would explain to Casey26 the interest which we here have in the matter. For one reason or another the mission has been delayed for an inordinate period of time and I think it would be highly helpful and very much in the interest of this country if arrangements can be concluded as promptly as possible in order that the mission may get on its way. Please telegraph me of any important developments in regard to the conversations which Hoskins will have. [Welles.]

Hull

25 The Department of Defense has supplied information to the effect that while JCS and COS approval had been given to the Hoskins visit to Cairo for the purpose of negotiating with British authorities there, no such approval had been given to the projected mission to certain Arab countries of the Near East.

26 Richard G. Casey, British Minister of State Resident in the Middle East.

Consideration by the Department of State of proposal to appoint American representative as counterpart of British Minister Resident in West AfricaConsideration by the Department of State of proposal to appoint American representative as counterpart of British Minister Resident in West Africa

[27] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 14, 1942—6 p.m. [Received October 15—9:33 a.m.]

882.20/619: Telegram

[28] Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] October 27, 1942.

851T.01/12⅙

[29] Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 2, 1942.

851T.01/12⅕

[30] Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 2, 1942.

851T.01/12⅕

[31] Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 28, 1942.

851T.01/12⁴⁄₆

[32] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] January 9, 1943.

851T.01/12⁴⁄₆

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/619: Telegram

[Document 27]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 14, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received October 15—9:33 a.m.]

346. From McBride.1 In discussions on October 8 with Lord Swinton,2 Mr. Makins3 and General Giffard4 I was requested to take up several matters on my return to Washington. Swinton is coordinating various British efforts in West and Central Africa and is successfully straightening out many difficulties and delays in the war effort.

He feels that time has now arrived to consider closer coordination with various American activities in this area. Through General Fitzgerald5 he can cover military questions, but he would welcome an American commissioner or special representative with headquarters at Accra with whom he could consult frequently on economic and political questions, shipping matters, strategic services, purchase of essential raw materials, and other similar activities connected with the joint war effort. Swinton’s activities are not only in British colonies, but extend all the way from Senegal to Angola.

Hibbard, who has conferred with Swinton and is close friend of Makins, and who has already broached this general idea, would be an excellent choice for such a position. I think he is better informed than any other available officer on African problems and time is too precious to permit sending someone not already familiar with and experienced in this area.

Whoever is chosen, should first proceed to Accra to talk further with Swinton, then to London for observation as to British methods and ideas, then to Washington for final instructions.

Other interested departments in Washington would have to cooperate in building up a suitable staff at Accra to cover the various activities and any American agents or officers other than military sent to this area should report to the Accra office and operate under its general guidance.

I will be glad to confer on this matter upon return, but meanwhile perhaps Department would care to explore the possibilities. I think, if Department feels some such plan is desirable, it should be initiated within next 2 months. [McBride.]

Hibbard

1 Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of the President in Liberia.

2 British Minister Resident in West Africa.

3 Roger Makins, British Foreign Office official serving for the British Treasury with the British Minister Resident in West Africa.

4 Gen. Sir George James Giffard, British General Officer, Commander in Chief in West Africa.

5 Brig. Gen. S. W. Fitzgerald, Commanding General, United States Armed Forces in Central Africa.

Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 851T.01/12⅙

[Document 28]

Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] October 27, 1942.

Lord Swinton, British Minister of State for West Africa, has requested the appointment of a commissioner or special representative with headquarters at Accra, with whom he could consult frequently on economic and political questions, shipping matters, strategic services, purchase of essential raw materials and other similar activities connected with the joint war effort. Lord Swinton concerns himself not only with the coordination of colonial government affairs in the British West African colonies, as regards the needs of the war effort and the fighting services, but with the formulation and operation of British policy pertaining to the whole of West Africa from Gambia in the north to Angola in the south. He is also intimately concerned in the formulation of policy and the operation of agreements made there under affecting the French and Belgian colonies in Central Africa. He is furthermore indirectly concerned with coordinating the development of colonial policy in British West African colonies with the same policy as regards British East African colonies, working through the media of the West African Governors’ Conference and the East African Governors’ Conference.

The suggested appointment is a matter of vital importance to and an unprecedented opportunity as regards American interests in the greater part of the Continent of Africa. The immediate objective is the coordinating for the war effort of American activity involving the numerous new agencies of this Government which are now placing their representatives in the African scene; namely, BEW, WPB, OSS, OWI,6 and the Intelligence Services of the Army and Navy. There is also the operation of such organizations as Pan American Airways and American Export Lines Airways and Transcontinental Western Airlines. There is furthermore the present operations of the Standard Vacuum Oil Company in extending its facilities for servicing our war machine in African territory with petroleum products and the long-range policy of this company as regards leases concerning land, installations and equipment. The need for coordination of all these related activities and the correlation of them with British activities is both great and urgent.

There is, however, a reason of even greater importance for giving the most careful consideration to this appointment. The future of our economic relations with the greater part of the Continent of Africa is at stake today. The British statesmen at present working in that field, together with the colonial governments of British territory and associated British organizations which concern themselves with the war effort in the territory of other powers in Africa are thinking and planning now for projected and possible post-war developments in the economic and political ordering of the Continent. Decisions are being taken day by day and the groundwork for the structure of the future policies of the home governments is being mapped out. We should protect American economic interests in that Continent by having adequate representation on the spot to keep this Department advised of the trend of events, of the political and economic maneuvering of other powers, and of those steps which should be taken for the protection and furtherance of American interests.

It is suggested that we should send a special representative of the President to work with Lord Swinton and other British leaders in the war effort, but also to keep constantly in mind the long-range program of our interests in all of that territory. I feel that this Government should appoint an outstanding, eminent American, who in personal capacity and background would be fully equal in stature to the type of British statesmen who are controlling British interests in Africa. He should be someone who is well versed in world economic affairs and particularly one who has had experience in negotiation and contact with British statesmen and officials. To send anyone less well qualified would only result in attaining for American interests the second-rate position which such second-rate representation would inevitably deserve.

Such an official, it is further suggested, should have a general commission to concern himself with the coordination of the war effort in the territory of the United Nations in Africa.

As pointed out by Mr. Willkie7 in his address last evening, the days of imperialism and of the colonial system are definitely drawing to a close and we can look forward to the rise of nationalism equally in Africa as in other areas in the Near, Middle and Far East. Present conditions of control and government and the economic ordering of colonial possessions are undoubtedly due for a change, and in the era which is ahead we should be prepared to deal with such conditions of flux and change through the most adequate representation in the field that our Government can achieve.

6 Board of Economic Warfare, War Production Board, Office of Strategic Services, and Office of War Information, respectively.

7 Wendell Willkie, Republican candidate for President in 1940.

Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 851T.01/12⅕

[Document 29]

Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 2, 1942.

A conference was held in the Division of Near Eastern Affairs at 11 o’clock on October 28 to consider the request of Lord Swinton at Accra, transmitted by telegram no. 346, of October 14, 6 p.m., from Colonel McBride at Monrovia, for the appointment of an “American Commissioner or Special Representative with headquarters at Accra with whom he (Lord Swinton) could consult frequently on economic and political questions, shipping matters, strategic services, purchase of war material and other similar activities connected with the joint war effort”.

Those Divisions which would be primarily concerned with the appointment of such a representative were invited to send someone to take part in the conference. The following were present: Dr. Feis, Economic Affairs; Mr. Begg, Cultural Relations; Mr. Geist and Mr. (?), Commercial Affairs; Mr. (?), Foreign Activity Correlation and Mr. Nielsen and Mr. Stephens, Defense Materials. The Division of International Communications and the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements were unfortunately not represented. Mr. Murray8 was present and Mr. Villard9 presided. Colonel McBride, who had returned from Monrovia, was present to give an account of his talks with Lord Swinton on the subject. The conference was begun by a few explanatory remarks by Mr. Villard and the reading of a memorandum on the subject by Mr. Jester, a copy of which is attached.10

A round table discussion ensued, of which no minutes were taken but from which the following conclusions developed: 1. That it was highly desirable to have a ranking American representative in Africa to work with Lord Swinton. The territory covered by such an official should coincide with the area in which Lord Swinton concerns himself, as well as the area covered by General Fitzgerald.

2. That it would probably be more desirable to press for the appointment of an official as Personal Representative of the President with the rank of Ambassador.

3. That if it were necessary to accord a territorial limitation to the scope of such a representative, he might be commissioned to concern himself with the coordination of the war effort in the territory of the United Nations in Africa, but with special powers to deal with problems arising in Portuguese African territory.

4. That concurrence and support of the War Department, as the Department most vitally concerned with this appointment, should first be sought before the matter is taken up with other governmental agencies interested in operations in Africa.

5. That the details of the organization and staff which might be required by such a representative would have to be worked out by him when in the field. In general, however, it was contemplated that he would not operate as a super organizer or a control center of the activities of various government representatives, but would function more in the nature of an adjuster, a trouble shooter and a smoother-out of friction. The consular offices involved in particular would continue to operate as heretofore, reporting directly to Washington and referring only to the Personal Representative of the President such matters in which they were informed were of interest to him or such matters concerning which they desired his advice or assistance.

At no time was the fundamental appropriateness of the subject matter questioned by the members of this conference. The general attitude was one of development of ways and means for the appointment and details regarding the nature of the appointment, function, organization, and scope of control.

8 Wallace Murray, Adviser on Political Relations.

9 Henry S. Villard, Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

10  Supra.

Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 851T.01/12⅕

[Document 30]

Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 2, 1942.

At the request of this Division, Colonel Thomas Betts, G–2, War Department, and Major Crittenden (Operations) called for a conference at 4 p.m. Friday, October 30 on the above subject.11 The conference was attended by Mr. Villard and Mr. Jester and was presided over by Mr. Murray. The subject was briefly explained by Mr. Murray and a portion of the memorandum (October 27, 1942) was read by Mr. Jester. A discussion ensued, out of which the following conclusions developed: 1. Representatives of the War Department believe that their Department would be in favor of the proposal, provided that it was clearly understood by all concerned that no limitation was to be placed on the activities of the Commanding General in the area concerned, who should have a free hand. This point was frequently reiterated in the discussion by the army officers and as frequently it was stated by the Division officials present that the State Department had no desire whatsoever to impinge on the authority of the General commanding in the area, but on the contrary, desired to set up an organization that would assist him in the prosecution of the war effort.

2. It developed that the army officers present were very much concerned about the need for the establishment of some measure of control in the area concerned of the activities of the various representatives of the numerous civilian agencies of the Government operating in that area; namely, O.W.I., O.S.S., B.E.W., et cetera. It appeared that they would be prepared to support establishment of a very definite measure of control over these other agencies.

The State Department representatives at various times in the discussion emphasized the point that we felt it was necessary to have the full concurrence and support of the War Department in this matter before broaching the subject and explaining the possibilities of the appointment to other Government agencies.

The conference adjourned without any specific decision being reached about the next step to be taken. The army officers present reported that they would report to their respective superiors and it appeared that their recommendations would be favorable. Colonel Betts several times made the point, however, that the possibility of the successful operation of such an appointment in connection with the military effort in Africa would depend very largely on the personalities involved; namely, the personal relations of General Fitzgerald or some other Commanding General in the area and the Personal Representative of the President who might be appointed.

11 i.e., “Proposal for the Appointment of a Special Representative of the President to Work with Lord Swinton at Accra.”

Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 851T.01/12⁴⁄₆

[Document 31]

Memorandum by Mr. Perry N. Jester of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 28, 1942.

Reference is made to previous memoranda on the subject of recommending the appointment of a personal representative of the President with the rank of ambassador or minister to work with Lord Swinton at Accra, and to represent the interests of this Government and nation near the governments of the United Nations’ territories in Africa.

Following the return of the file on the subject mentioned just above from the Secretary’s Office with the directive that we reconsider the matter with a view to recommending an appointment of medium rank (interpreted to mean that the appointment of a personal representative of the President to the territories named was not desired). Mr. Villard stated that in his opinion it would not now be necessary to refer this matter to the War Department for their concurrence or approval; that with regard to the appointment of a Commissioner or other State Department representative, this Department could make and carry out a unilateral decision.

[Here follow suggestions as to the choice of a Commissioner and an assistant.]

Perry N. Jester

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 851T.01/12⁴⁄₆

[Document 32]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] January 9, 1943.

Mr. Hayter12 telephoned to say that the Embassy had had another inquiry from the Foreign Office as to the status of the proposed appointment of an American representative as a vis-à-vis to Lord Swinton at Accra. I told Mr. Hayter that the matter was still under consideration but that no final decision had been made. Mr. Hayter said that the Foreign Office was continually pressing the Embassy for a definite reply to the proposal which had been made on several previous occasions that such a representative be appointed. He said he was under the impression that the Foreign Office considered the matter of some importance and some urgency, since there were apparently many matters requiring coordination on the West Coast of Africa, not only as between the British and ourselves but also as among the various American civilian agencies operating in that area. I told Mr. Hayter I should be glad to pass this along to the appropriate quarters and that we would let him know as soon as anything definite developed.13

12 W. G. Hayter, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

13 Subsequent correspondence on this subject will be printed in Foreign Relations, 1943, vol. ii , under France, the first section.

Afghanistan:Afghanistan:

Contents

Establishment of an American Legation in AfghanistanEstablishment of an American Legation in Afghanistan

[33] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 13, 1941—9 p.m.

124.90H/56a: Telegram

[34] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 26, 1941—11 a.m. [Received December 26—11:17 a.m.]

124.90H/57: Telegram

[35] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Shaw)

[Washington,] January 8, 1942.

124.90H/57

[36] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, February 7, 1942—2 p.m.

123 Thayer, Charles/106: Telegram

[37] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 1, 1942—noon. [Received March 2—11:16 a.m.]

124.90H/63: Telegram

[38] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. W. Leonard Parker of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] March 6, 1942.

124.90H/71

[39] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 10, 1942—8 p.m.

124.90H/63: Telegram

[40] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 12, 1942—noon. [Received March 12—noon.]

124.90H/65: Telegram

[41] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 13, 1942—5 p.m. [Received March 13—1:47 p.m.]

124.90H/67: Telegram

[42] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, March 16, 1942.

124.90H/67½

[43] The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt

Washington, March 25, 1942.

124.90H/68½

[44] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 3, 1942.

124.90H/74½

[45] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 22, 1942—10 a.m. [Received noon.]

123 EN 3/710: Telegram

[46] The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, June 6, 1942—6 p.m. [Received June 30—9:49 a.m.]

124.90H/78: Telegram

[47] The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, June 12, 1942—8 p.m. [Received June 12—5:16 p.m.]

123 EN 3/725: Telegram

[48] The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, June 17, 1942—3 p.m. [Received June 18—8:33 a.m.]

124.90H/77: Telegram

[49] The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, July 25, 1942—4 p.m. [Received July 27—1:12 p.m.]

123 EN 3/743: Telegram

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 124.90H/56a: Telegram

[Document 33]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 13, 1941—9 p.m.

157. Please ascertain whether Afghan Government agreeable to establishment Legation at Kabul. If no objection a Foreign Service Officer will probably be appointed as Minister Resident and Consul General.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 124.90H/57: Telegram

[Document 34]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 26, 1941—11 a.m.
[Received December 26—11:17 a.m.]

265. Referring to Department’s 157, December 13. The Afghan Government informs me through its Ambassador Tehran that it agrees to the opening an AmLegation at Kabul. It adds, however, that since diplomatic representatives accredited to Afghanistan and those sent abroad by the Afghan Government have the rank of Ambassador or Minister Plenipotentiary it is “preferable” that the American Government designate a Minister Plenipotentiary to Afghanistan.

Dreyfus

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Shaw) 124.90H/57

[Document 35]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Shaw)

[Washington,] January 8, 1942.

Mr. Shaw: Reference is made to Mr. Dreyfus’ telegram no. 265, December 26, 11 a.m., in which it is stated that the Afghan Government is agreeable to the establishment of a legation at Kabul but would prefer a minister plenipotentiary to a minister resident.

I discussed this matter this morning with the Turkish Ambassador,1 who represents Afghan interests in the United States. The Ambassador stated that he considers that it would be regrettable if the representative of a great power like the United States were to have a lower rank than that of the other foreign representatives accredited to Kabul. It was pointed out to him that the appointment of a minister plenipotentiary would require legislative action and would take time. The Ambassador then suggested that consideration might be given to the appointment of a chargé d’affaires.

The Ambassador’s suggestion appears to me to be an excellent one. If a chargé d’affaires were appointed, it would be possible to appoint a minister plenipotentiary at a later date if it should appear to be advisable to do so. It is considered that the appointment of a chargé d’affaires would probably not offend the sensibilities of the Afghans, who, as may be noted from the attached telegram,2 appear to be hesitant about accepting a minister resident.

I am, of course, at your disposal to discuss the matter at any time if I may be of assistance.

In view of recent developments in the Near East, it is considered highly desirable that the office at Kabul be opened as soon as possible. It would be appreciated, therefore, if a decision might be reached at the earliest possible moment with respect to the subject matter of this memorandum.

Wallace Murray

1 Mehmet Münir Ertegün.

2  Supra.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 123 Thayer, Charles/106: Telegram

[Document 36]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, February 7, 1942—2 p.m.

28. Your 265, December 26, 11 a.m. Charles W. Thayer, now at Kuibyshev, has been designated Third Secretary and Vice Consul at Kabul to serve in a dual capacity. The purpose of his assignment is to open the office at Kabul, and he has been instructed to report to you for consultation en route.

Please take appropriate steps to inform the Afghan Government of Thayer’s assignment, stating that a much higher-ranking officer will be sent to Kabul to take charge as soon as his transportation can be arranged.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 124.90H/63: Telegram

[Document 37]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 1, 1942—noon.
[Received March 2—11:16 a.m.]

52. In a note dated February 28 the Afghan Ambassador3 informs me that his Government does not agree to the sending of a Third Secretary and Vice Consul to Kabul before the appointment of an Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary and that it is also preferable that the Legation be opened by the same Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary.

Dreyfus

3 Nowrouz Khan.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. W. Leonard Parker of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 124.90H/71

[Document 38]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. W. Leonard Parker of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] March 6, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Mehmet Münir Ertegun, Turkish Ambassador

Mr. Murray

Mr. Parker

The Turkish Ambassador called this morning, at Mr. Murray’s request, to discuss matters relating to the opening of a Legation at Kabul.

The Ambassador was informed that, in view of the existing situation in the Near and Far East, and because of the presence in Kabul of an Assistant Military Attaché, the Department desires to open a legation at Kabul as soon as possible. It was explained that a Foreign Service officer could be appointed minister resident and that funds would be available for his salary within the framework of existing legislation, but that the appointment of an envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary would involve considerable delay in securing appropriations and in effecting the appointment. The Ambassador indicated that he understood this situation.

Mr. Murray then referred to a suggestion made in a previous conversation by the Ambassador that a chargé d’affaires might be appointed. Mr. Murray then proceeded to outline the steps which had been taken to secure permission from the Afghan Government to open a legation. He explained that an officer had been assigned from Kuibyshev to Kabul in order to open the legation as soon as possible and that it was intended to assign a high-ranking Foreign Service officer to that post to assume charge as soon as one could be returned from Europe. He then informed the Ambassador of the substance of Tehran’s telegram no. 52 of March 1, noon, stating that the Afghan Government does not agree to the opening of the legation by a third secretary before the appointment of a minister and prefers that the legation should be opened by such a minister.

Mr. Murray then requested the Turkish Ambassador to take this matter up with the Afghan Government, explaining that the assignment of a third secretary is but a temporary measure; that a highranking Foreign Service officer will be assigned as chargé d’affaires as soon as possible; and that consideration can be given to the appointment of a minister at a later date. The Ambassador stated that he would take this matter up with the Afghan Government immediately.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 124.90H/63: Telegram

[Document 39]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 10, 1942—8 p.m.

61. The matter referred to in your no. 52, March 1, noon, has been discussed with the Turkish Ambassador, who is taking it up with the Afghan Government.

It was explained to the Turkish Ambassador that the appointment of an envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary would involve considerable delay because of necessary legislative procedures; whereas a Foreign Service officer can be appointed chargé d’affaires immediately. In view of recent developments in the Near and Far East and of the presence of an assistant military attaché in Kabul, it is essential that a legation be opened at Kabul as soon as possible. Thayer’s assignment was made because of the immediately unavailability of a higher-ranking officer; however, it is the Department’s intention to assign a high-ranking Foreign Service officer to assume charge at Kabul as soon as one can be returned from Europe. The appointment of a minister may then be considered at a later date.

Please convey the substance of the foregoing explanation to the Afghan Ambassador and again request him to endeavor to receive permission for Thayer to open the Legation at Kabul as a temporary measure.

Welles

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 124.90H/65: Telegram

[Document 40]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 12, 1942—noon.
[Received March 12—noon.]

64. Department’s No. 61, March 10. Afghan Ambassador has just communicated to me the following personal message from Minister for Foreign Affairs at Kabul.4

“When you were in Kabul I discussed with you the wishes of my Government concerning the opening of Legations and exchange of Ministers in order to strengthen relations between our countries. The views of my Government have remained unchanged. It is the usual practice in Afghanistan until a Legation is opened by a Minister not to give the privileges of opening a Legation and use of codes to a Military Attaché or other person.”

I have on several occasions explained to the Afghan Ambassador the legislative and other reasons which prevent the immediate assignment of an Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary but to no avail. Since the Afghans in spite of my explanations continue to view appointment of a Minister Resident as belittling the importance of Afghanistan, I am of the opinion that it would be harmful to pursue the matter further unless we are willing to accede to their request. I will, therefore, take no action pending further instructions.

Dreyfus

4 Ali Mohammed Khan.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 124.90H/67: Telegram

[Document 41]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 13, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received March 13—1:47 p.m.]

67. Supplementing my No. 64, March 12, I believe that if Department agrees to name a Minister Plenipotentiary to Afghanistan it may be possible to obtain consent of Afghan Government to Thayer’s proceeding to Kabul for purpose of opening Legation.

Dreyfus

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State 124.90H/67½

[Document 42]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, March 16, 1942.

Why not name the regular Minister to Afghanistan now and get it over with? Perhaps you can find someone from a demobilized Embassy or Legation.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt 124.90H/68½

[Document 43]

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt 5

Washington, March 25, 1942.

My Dear Mr. President: A few days ago you expressed to me the desire that we appoint immediately a Minister to Afghanistan.

I should like to recommend to you for your consideration the desirability of your appointment of Cornelius Van H. Engert as Minister to that country. You will remember that Mr. Engert was Minister Resident in Abyssinia up to the time of the Italian conquest. He has served subsequently as Chargé d’Affaires in Tehran and more recently as Consul General in Beirut. In all these assignments I feel that he has served most creditably.

I may add that Mr. Engert is intimately familiar with Afghanistan since he spent several months there some years ago. I know of no one in the Foreign Service as well qualified to serve in Kabul at this time.

Mr. Engert is, of course, a Foreign Service Officer of Class I.

Believe me [etc.]

Sumner Welles

5 Marginal note: “OK FDR”.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 124.90H/74½

[Document 44]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 3, 1942.

The Ambassador6 said that we would recall that several days ago, following a conversation with Mr. Murray, he had taken up with the Foreign Office at Ankara the question of American representation at Kabul. The Turkish Foreign Minister had discussed the problem with the Afghan Ambassador and had urged upon the Afghan Government that they agree to receive an American Chargé d’Affaires. The Ambassador stated that he was now in receipt of a telegram from Ankara stating that the Afghan Ambassador had now received a reply from his Government and had conveyed it to the Turkish Foreign Minister. The substance of the reply was that the Afghan Government would welcome American diplomatic representation in Kabul and had indeed been urging for some years that such representation be established. As proof of the Afghan Government’s desire to receive a diplomatic representative it had set aside one of the most suitable houses in the Afghan capital for the use of an American representative. The Afghan Government could not, however, receive any American representative below the grade of Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary.

I told the Ambassador that we were extremely grateful to him and to his Government for the effort they had made to settle this problem. I added that so far as I could see we should probably have to go ahead with the idea of an Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary at Kabul, although this raised certain administrative problems of which he was aware. The Ambassador said that if he or his Government could be of any further service to us in the matter both were at our disposal.

6 The Turkish Ambassador.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 123 EN 3/710: Telegram

[Document 45]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 22, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received noon.]

116. Afghan Minister informs me his Government has now given formal consent to appointment of Engert as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States at Kabul. I have asked him to ascertain in view of this development whether his Government will now grant permission for Thayer to proceed to Kabul to open the Legation.

Dreyfus

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State 124.90H/78: Telegram

[Document 46]

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer)7 to the Secretary of State

Kabul, June 6, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received June 30—9:49 a.m.8 ]

7. The Legation at Kabul has been opened today. Repeated to Calcutta, Karachi, Tehran, Ankara and Kuibyshev.

Thayer

7 Thayer had arrived at Kabul on May 31.

8 Reason for this delayed receipt not apparent from available documents.

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State 123 EN 3/725: Telegram

[Document 47]

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, June 12, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received June 12—5:16 p.m.]

8. The following telegram has been sent to Consulate General at Beirut for Minister Engert.

June 12, 8 p.m. The Foreign Minister requested today that you be informed of his most earnest hope that you will arrive in Kabul as soon as possible. He stated that your early arrival is especially desired in order to put an end to the abnormal situation which arose, first, through the arrival of a Military Attaché prior to the establishment of a Legation, and secondly, through the assignment of a Secretary prior to the appointment of a Minister. He spoke at some length of Afghan pride intimating that Afghan feelings had been injured by the above mentioned circumstances.

Although permanent Legation quarters will not be ready for 3 months, furnished temporary quarters are available now in a suburban villa.

I would therefore much appreciate being advised of your plans so that I might inform the Foreign Minister accordingly.

Repeated to the Department.

Thayer

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State 124.90H/77: Telegram

[Document 48]

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, June 17, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received June 18—8:33 a.m.]

15. The King9 in a brief address at the opening of Parliament on June 15 said that he was pleased to announce the establishment of an American Legation at Kabul. He expressed the hope that our already friendly relations would continue and strengthen especially in the financial and economic spheres. Except for a reassertion of Afghanistan’s neutrality and general assurances of friendliness especially toward Afghanistan’s neighbours the address contained nothing else concerning foreign affairs. No country except the United States was mentioned by name.

Thayer

9 Mohammed Zahir Shah.

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State 123 EN 3/743: Telegram

[Document 49]

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, July 25, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received July 27—1:12 p.m.]

34. I was received this afternoon by His Majesty the King of Afghanistan and presented my letters of credence as Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States. The King was very cordial and after the formal addresses had been concluded we conversed in French which he speaks quite fluently.

He said that his Government had for many years harbored feelings of great sympathy, confidence and admiration for the United States and he was happy that the President had decided to open a permanent Legation at Kabul. The King then referred to a passage in my address in which I had used the expression “in a world tortured by strife” and said it was precisely because the world was so very sick that the genuine friendship between Afghanistan and the United States was doubly precious and he would do all he could to preserve that friendship.

I assured His Majesty of course that he could count on my hearty cooperation and added that America was bending every effort to help cure this sick world, first by fighting to destroy the forces of evil and secondly by a scrupulous observance of the principles of law and morality in our relations with other nations.

Engert

Efforts by the United States to effect closer relations with AfghanistanEfforts by the United States to effect closer relations with Afghanistan

[50] The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, July 30, 1942—noon. [Received August 1—11:55 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/23276: Telegram

[51] The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 5, 1942—10 a.m. [Received August 6—9:22 a.m.]

800.8890/973¹⁄₆: Telegram

[52] The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 5, 1942—11 a.m. [Received August 6—9:48 a.m.]

800.8890/9732/6: Telegram

[53] The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 7, 1942—10 p.m. [Received August 9—2:52 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/23406: Telegram

[54] The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 16, 1942—10 p.m. [Received August 20—4:50 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/23593: Telegram

[55] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Afghanistan (Engert)

Washington, September 3, 1942—10 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/23406: Telegram

[56] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Afghanistan (Engert)

Washington, October 27, 1942—6 p.m.

800.8890/973¹⁄₆: Telegram

[57] The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, October 31, 1942—10 p.m. [Received November 2—2:36 p.m.]

800.8890/9735/6: Telegram

[58] The Assistant Chief of the Division of Defense Materials (Merchant) to the Second Secretary of the British Embassy (Dent)

Washington, November 16, 1942.

811.20 Defense (M)/10771½

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/23276: Telegram

[Document 50]

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, July 30, 1942—noon.
[Received August 1—11:55 a.m.]

40. I called upon the Prime Minister, Mohammed Hashim Khan, yesterday for the first time. He is, the Department will recall, an uncle of the King and has for the past 9 years been real ruler of Afghanistan. After a few minutes conversation, it was quite evident to me that he is one of the outstanding personalities not only of his country but of the political world today. We talked for an hour and a quarter and as he understands English well and speaks it fairly fluently conversation with him was easy. It is also a pleasure because his mind is amazingly well balanced, he is extremely intelligent and he is capable of an objective and impartial point of view which is quite unoriental. In fact he reminds me more of Venizelos10 or Smuts11 than anybody I have ever met.

The sequence of his remarks was that the democracies had made some fearful mistakes and had lost many opportunities during the past 20 years, including our failure to support the League of Nations. He then referred to the recent German successes in Russia and said they might have far-reaching results for Afghanistan whether the Afghans liked it or not. When the United States entered the war he had hoped it would shorten it but now he was predicting it would be a very long war and nobody could predict how it would affect Afghanistan before the full strength of America could make itself felt especially if Japan should attack Russia too. He said he was not pessimistic by nature and that deep in his heart he felt a better world would emerge from this catastrophe, but as a practical man with heavy responsibilities he had to face realities and he would welcome signs that the democracies would not go on making mistakes indefinitely.

I repeated to him what I had said to the King and to the Foreign Minister—see my 34, July 25, 4 p.m.12 and my 35, July 27, 10 a.m.13 —and also gave him some recent figures of our related production. I expressed my firm belief that the combination of the United States and the British Empire was invincible and that he should not feel unduly alarmed by events on the Russian front as the Germans still had a long way to go before they could menace Iran or Afghanistan.

Engert

10 Eleutherios Venizelos, former Greek Premier and political leader; lie died in 1936.

11 Jan Christian Smuts, Prime Minister of the Union of South Africa.

12  Ante, p. 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, and Doc. 49].

13 Not printed.

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State 800.8890/973¹⁄₆: Telegram

[Document 51]

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 5, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received August 6—9:22 a.m.]

47. Please see my next No. 48.14 … to reciprocating [reciprocate?] numerous recent expressions of good-will towards the United States in connection with the establishment of our Legation here, the Department may wish to recommend that whenever possible a little space on steamers returning to the United States from India be made available for reasonable quantities of Afghan exports.

Engert

14  Infra.

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State 800.8890/9732/6: Telegram

[Document 52]

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 5, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received August 6—9:48 a.m.]

48. The Legation has been requested by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs both orally and in writing to assist it in obtaining shipping space from Karachi to the United States for approximately 900 bales of karakul, 100 bales furs, 250 tons of wool and 40 tons pistachio nuts, all of which are now lying at Karachi. Ministry states that efforts made through Afghan Consul in New York have proved fruitless and points out that karakul is an extremely important item in Afghanistan’s foreign trade and that the United States is now the only market open to it. It hopes that in order to strengthen trade relations between the two countries the above and some similar shipments in the future may be accepted.

We have of course carefully explained the policy of the United States necessitated by the exigencies of the war and have referred to its circular of July 3.15

[ Engert ]

15 Not printed.

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/23406: Telegram

[Document 53]

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 7, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received August 9—2:52 p.m.]

49. I have talked to a number of people since my 40, July 30, noon, and find among the well wishers of the Allies a feeling of despondency because of the Russian defeats. I shall report later on Afghan attitude vis-à-vis Russia, Britain and developments in India but in view of immediate urgency of military situation I venture to make a practical suggestion to raise morale of Afghan Government: Arrival of a few American bomber squadrons even if only for purely temporary duty in North and Northeastern Persia would make profound impression in Afghanistan. It need only be a token force but widest possible publicity should be given to it and I should be advised in advance for discreet use in conversation. It would immediately create belief here that United States will help stop German advance into Turkestan which may have important bearing on Afghanistan Government decisions in near future. If announcement could be combined with a cautious promise to Afghans of certain limited lease lend aid so much the better.

Department will recall my persistent advocacy of despatch of token forces to Syria to bolster up Turkish and Syrian morale. Similarly we cannot afford to see Afghan Government so paralyzed with fear that Allied position in Middle Eastern bloc may be seriously jeopardized.

Engert

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/23593: Telegram

[Document 54]

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 16, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received August 20—4:50 a.m.]

54. Suggestion contained in my no. 49, August 7, 10 p.m., was based on the general feeling here that the Afghanistan Government is wondering whether the arrival of the German Army at the gates of the Caucasus and the Caspian Sea does not require certain revisions, in its foreign policy. In this and subsequent telegrams I shall analyze briefly the factors which will most likely determine Afghanistan’s policy in the immediate future.

(1) The Russian reverses and events in India have overshadowed all other matters and although official circles appear to be relatively calm there are many wild bazaar rumors in circulation which are either abetted or exploited by the Axis Legations to create the impression that Russia’s collapse is imminent.

(2) Considering that Russia and Great Britain have as in Iran been looked upon as the two traditional enemies of Afghanistan, it is hardly surprising that the present situation should have brought out much of the latent pro-German sentiment in the vague hope that the Axis Powers, being hostile to both the old enemies, might in some way prove Afghanistan’s salvation.

(3) However, fear of Russia has dominated Afghan policy far more than fear of Britain and the British are today much less unpopular than the Soviets. But as there is a further lack of confidence in British and Allied generalship and strategy and consequently in the ability to win the war decisively or even to hold India, the pro-British elements dare not assert themselves.

(4) At the present moment the principal reaction to German successes has, therefore, been undisguised relief that the shadow of the Soviet menace if not entirely removed has at least grown much less. The reactionary Mullahs, for example, have never ceased to inveigh against what they call Soviet godlessness and their political position in the country has undoubtedly been greatly strengthened; the military now feel that Russia will not for a long time be in a position to invade or even menace Afghanistan’s northern provinces; and the Afghan Foreign Office is pleased because it can permit itself a bolder tone in dealing with the Soviet Embassy and perhaps flirt with the tempting thought of Afghan Irredentist aspirations in Russian Turkestan.

(5) On the other hand toilers [sic] will give them important consideration which is causing the Afghan Government and even more especially the ruling family to view the military situation with deep apprehension and that is the possibility of the ex-King Amanullah who it will be recalled was deposed in 1929 and has since lived in Italy—arriving on the Russo-Afghan border supported by Axis arms and money to raise the standard of revolt. This would be facilitated by the fact that the Uzbegs and most of the other tribes in Russian Turkestan might now turn against the Soviets if further German successes should bring the Axis within striking distance of Transcaspia.

(6) As it is generally believed that quite a number of Afghans are pro-Amanullah if only to use him to rally the discontented elements against the present Government, the King and the revoltable [sic] group of his relatives now in power have an obvious stake in the outcome of the war. In other words as far as the present regime is concerned an Axis victory would constitute a far graver danger than the Soviets ever were, but so long as there is serious doubt in their minds whether the United Nations can bring the war to a successful conclusion the Afghan Government will want to run with the hare and not with the hounds.

(7) I believe we should therefore take advantage of the respite we still have before the Axis is able to bring direct physical pressure to bear on the Afghan Government. For if the German thrust into the Caucasus should necessitate our abandoning one or more of the trans-Persia routes the possibility of transit through Afghanistan of supplies to Russia and China might assume practical importance. To attempt it in the manner adopted in Persia would in Afghanistan lead to such complete disintegration and lawlessness that even larger forces than the Allies can spare would be insufficient to keep the route open. It could only be done with the good will and cooperation of the Afghan Government which in turn would require convincing it that the risks were not too great, that is, that adequate military protection would be forthcoming and that the territorial integrity and independence of the country would be guaranteed by the United Nations.

(8) Any overtures it may eventually be decided to make in this direction on behalf of the United Nations had best come from us as the Afghans would find it so much easier to acquiesce if we took the initiative rather than the British and/or the Russians, in the meantime I am continuing to harp on the fighting spirit of the United States and the British Empire and our complete confidence in ultimate victory. I am pointing out that so long as the Russian Armies have not been destroyed and Russian resistance has not collapsed Hitler will have to face another Russian winter which is only 2 months off.

(9) In my wanderings from the Bosphorus to the Indus I have never found a community where the external stimulus of a financial character [did not?] fall on fruitful soil, and can state where we should as soon as possible i. e., before we want anything ourselves, intimate the possibility of a small loan (perhaps to finance karakul exports et cetera or under Lease-Lend) provided the British agree. Please see also my number 47, August 6 [5], 10 a.m. in this connection. We should then be in a favorable position to suggest—when the time comes for the Afghan Government to define its attitude toward the war—that no decision be taken to the detriment of the war effort of the United Nations.

I have not discussed the above with my British colleague pending an expression of the Department’s views.

Engert

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) 740.0011 European War 1939/23406: Telegram

[Document 55]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Afghanistan (Engert)

Washington, September 3, 1942—10 p.m.

36. While demands elsewhere and other considerations render improbable adoption of the proposal contained in your 49 of August 7, 10 p.m., the matter is under consideration and if a decision is reached in accordance with your recommendation you will be notified immediately.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) 800.8890/973¹⁄₆: Telegram

[Document 56]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Afghanistan (Engert)

Washington, October 27, 1942—6 p.m.

52. … as mentioned in your 47 of August 5 and related telegrams, the Department has been endeavoring to provide means for bringing to the United States the items mentioned in your 48 of the same date, together with additional quantity of wool regarding which the Afghan Consul at New York has requested the Department’s assistance.

The British Embassy at Washington suggests that the assistance which the Department is endeavoring to render is not warranted, maintaining that the majority of 1941 Afghan lambskins are now unsold in the United States, that those skins the movement of which the Department is endeavoring to effect constitute only an insignificant quantity, and that with regard to wool and pistachio nuts, India and Russia are the normal markets. …

The Department remains of the opinion that from the point of view of this country the assistance recommended by you in your telegrams under reference should be accorded if possible. However, … your comments on the subject are urgently requested.

Hull

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State 800.8890/9735/6: Telegram

[Document 57]

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, October 31, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received November 2—2:36 p.m.]

98. British Minister17 and I have right along been in entire agreement re subject of your 52, October 27. He feels as you and I that if we can accommodate Afghan Government in small matters we should do so. We need, of course, make no promises re 1942 lamb skin crop … Incidentally British Minister states India does not want Afghan wool.

Engert

17 Sir Francis Wylie.

The Assistant Chief of the Division of Defense Materials (Merchant) to the Second Secretary of the British Embassy (Dent) 811.20 Defense (M)/10771½

[Document 58]

The Assistant Chief of the Division of Defense Materials (Merchant) to the Second Secretary of the British Embassy (Dent)

Washington, November 16, 1942.

Dear John: I refer to your letter of October 2218 (reference W. T. 676/28/42) regarding certain Afghan products. In view of the apparent objections of your Government to any action in the matter under discussion, the Department telegraphed to our Legation in Kabul19 the substance of the position reported in your letter under reference.

The Department has now received an answer20 which indicates that complete agreement appears to exist between your Minister and ours as to the desirability of assisting the Afghan Government in the matter … of lambskins, wool and pistachio nuts under discussion. Our Minister points out that it is unnecessary to make any promises regarding the 1942 crop of lambskins, but he reaffirms his strong support for action, and, incidentally, reports that his British colleague has stated that Afghan wool is not wanted by India.

The request for assistance in the matter … of the materials referred to above has been made to our Minister in Kabul in a form which he obviously regards as both official and urgent. The Honorary Consul of Afghanistan in New York has strongly seconded the request, and in addition the Department has received a note from the Turkish Ambassador here21 making the identical request on behalf of Afghanistan.

In the light of these requests the Department is of the opinion that any assistance in the matter which this Government can afford the Government of Afghanistan should be granted. It is planned, therefore, to request the Board of Economic Warfare … to instruct the appropriate procurement agency to purchase the products reported to be now lying at Karachi. The negotiation for their acquisition would be handled by our Minister at Kabul directly with the appropriate Afghan authorities. The Department understands that while a public purchase of this sort would qualify the materials for import under M–63, it would not necessarily result in the allocation of cargo space for their movement to this country. The immediate purpose, however, of providing a purchaser for the Afghan Government would be cared for, and with any later easing in the shipping situation, the goods could be lifted.

The tonnage and value of the materials in question are small, and in the judgment of the Department disposal of this matter along the lines intended is … desirable. In view of the fact that the agencies of your Government have evidenced no interest in acquiring the materials, the course of action described above appears entirely logical.

Sincerely yours,

Livingston T. Merchant

18 Not printed.

19 See telegram No. 52, October 27, 6 p.m., to the Minister in Afghanistan, p. 57 [Pg. 57 includes portions of Doc. 54, Doc. 55, and Doc. 56].

20  Supra.

21 Dated August 6, 1942, not printed.

Expression of regret by the United States regarding the accidental flight of an American Army plane over Afghan territoryExpression of regret by the United States regarding the accidental flight of an American Army plane over Afghan territory

[59] The Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, June 25, 1942—9 a.m. [Received June 25—4:28 a.m.]

811.248/601: Telegram

[60] The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, June 26, 1942—9 p.m. [Received June 26—4:58 p.m.]

811.248/607: Telegram

[61] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer)

Washington, June 26, 1942—10 p.m.

811.248/612a: Telegram

[62] The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, July 2, 1942—noon. [Received July 3—9:31 a.m.]

811.248/616: Telegram

[63] The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, July 4, 1942—4 p.m. [Received July 5—4:32 a.m.]

811.248/618: Telegram

[64] The Secretary of State to the Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell)

Washington, July 9, 1942—midnight.

811.248/618: Telegram

[65] The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 9, 1942—10 p.m. [Received August 11—7:49 a.m.]

811.248/679: Telegram

The Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell) to the Secretary of State 811.248/601: Telegram

[Document 59]

The Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, June 25, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received June 25—4:28 a.m.]

420. A plane belonging to the Tenth Air Force United States of America in a violent dust storm unwittingly flew over Afghan territory near Jalalabad yesterday between 9:00 and 11:00 a.m. The plane returned to Indian territory as soon as the mistake was discovered. I reported the incident to the Legation at Kabul last night by telegraph and with the acquiescence of the American military authorities here suggested that Thayer22 in the name of the Government convey at once an appropriate expression of regret for the unavoidable occurrence to the Afghan Government.

Merrell

22 Charles W. Thayer, Chargé in Afghanistan.

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State 811.248/607: Telegram

[Document 60]

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, June 26, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received June 26—4:58 p.m.]

19. The Legation has just been informed by New Delhi of the violation of Afghan territory yesterday by an American aircraft. Because of the seriousness with which the Afghan Government might view the incident and because of long delay in receipt of telegrams from Department the Legation without awaiting instructions is expressing regrets on behalf of the American Government to the Minister of Foreign Affairs.23

Thayer

23 All Mohammed Khan.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) 811.248/612a: Telegram

[Document 61]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer)

Washington, June 26, 1942—10 p.m.

6. The Department fully approves of New Delhi’s suggestion that you express to the Afghan Government the regret of this Government that an American army plane inadvertently flew over Afghan territory.

Please keep the Department fully informed of developments.

Hull

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State 811.248/616: Telegram

[Document 62]

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, July 2, 1942—noon.
[Received July 3—9:31 a.m.]

21. Department’s 6, June 26, 10 p.m. Last night I asked Foreign Minister, whether in view of fact that no reply had been received to Legation’s note of June 25 expressing regret over airplane incident, the case might be considered closed. He replied in negative adding that his Government held British Government responsible in such cases and that he would not be able to give me Afghan Government’s answer until he had had explanation from British Government which he hoped to have upon return to Kabul in about 10 days of British Minister who is now in New Delhi. The latter to whom I sent copy of Legation’s note informed me before his departure that Foreign Minister after receiving my note had asked him for British Government’s views on incident. British Minister answered that he would take matter up in New Delhi.

Thayer

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State 811.248/618: Telegram

[Document 63]

The Chargé in Afghanistan (Thayer) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, July 4, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received July 5—4:32 a.m.]

22. Reference to Legation’s telegram number 19, June 26, 9 p.m. The Director General of the Political Department today raised the question of the airplane incident of June 24 saying that he had been told by the Foreign Minister to request the Legation “to study” the matter with view to fixing responsibility should similar cases arise in the future. He particularly wanted to know whether American Army planes in India operate independently or are under the Indian Army General Staff. In the latter event he intimated the Afghan Government would consider the British Government responsible. He likewise intimated that the Afghan Government desired to fix responsibility for the future before considering the present case closed. At the same time he expressed the satisfaction of the Afghan Government with the prompt and frank expression of regret for the incident transmitted by this Legation.

Instructions are requested.

Repeated to New Delhi.

Thayer

The Secretary of State to the Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell) 811.248/618: Telegram

[Document 64]

The Secretary of State to the Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell)

Washington, July 9, 1942—midnight.

332. Reference is made to Kabul’s no. 22, July 4, 4 p.m., repeated to your office. After consultation with the American military authorities in India, if you perceive no objection thereto, please inform Thayer under what auspices the plane operated and request him so to advise the Afghan Government.

Please repeat to Kabul as Dept.’s No. 10.

Hull

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State 811.248/679: Telegram

[Document 65]

The Minister in Afghanistan (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Kabul, August 9, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received August 11—7:49 a.m.]

50. Regarding airplane incident. In a signed note the Minister of Foreign Affairs now states “Although the trespass committed by an American airplane over Afghan territory has caused much concern to the Afghan Government the friendly action of the American Legation and its assurance that the trespass was not intentional have satisfied my Government and it accepts the expression of regret of the United States Government.

Trusting that all necessary precautions will be taken by American authorities concerned against the recurrence of such incidents in the future I consider the matter as closed.”

Repeated to Delhi.

Engert

Egypt:Egypt:

Contents

Unwillingness of the United States to interfere with British activities concerning Egyptian political crisisUnwillingness of the United States to interfere with British activities concerning Egyptian political crisis

[66] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, January 21, 1942—7 p.m. [Received January 22—6:48 p.m.]

740.0011 E.W. 1939/18803: Telegram

[67] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, January 23, 1942—6 p.m. [Received January 24—5:05 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/18878: Telegram

[68] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 1, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 6:50 p.m.]

883.00/1231: Telegram

[69] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 2, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 3:31 p.m.]

883.00/1232: Telegram

[70] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 3, 1942—6 p.m. [Received February 3—10:56 a.m.]

883.00/1233: Telegram

[71] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 4, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 4:07 p.m.]

883.00/1234: Telegram

[72] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 4, 1942—7 p.m. [Received 9:15 p.m.]

883.00/1235: Telegram

[73] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 4, 1942—11 p.m. [Received 11:16 p.m.]

883.00/1236: Telegram

[74] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 5, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 9:23 p.m.]

883.00/1237: Telegram

[75] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 5, 1942.

883.00/1248

[76] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] February 5, 1942.

883.00/1248

[77] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 9, 1942.

883.00/1248

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 E.W. 1939/18803: Telegram

[Document 66]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, January 21, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received January 22—6:48 p.m.]

119. I am informed in strictest confidence that after having given his consent to the suspension of relations with Vichy and following the taking of such action by the Egyptian Government, King Farouk was given to understand by the Assistant Chief of the Royal Cabinet, an Aly Maher1 satellite, that the matter had not been properly explained when it was presented for Royal approval. The King is said to have been greatly angered by this alleged breach of faith and to have reprimanded the Foreign Minister2 so strongly the latter submitted his resignation day before yesterday.

Hearing of what had happened the British Ambassador3 is said to have sought an urgent interview with the Prime Minister4 yesterday afternoon, pointed out that it could only be assumed that the Foreign Minister was being forced out for having complied loyally with a legitimate request of Egypt’s British ally and the Prime Minister could draw his own conclusions as to such results as might logically follow “intolerable” intervention of this kind by the Palace. The Ambassador is reported to have added that this was not the first time he had been forced to speak seriously of the King’s behavior.

The Prime Minister replied that the decision to suspend relations with Vichy stood and that the Foreign Minister was remaining in office. He admitted the King’s intervention in the matter however and said that he had prevailed with difficulty on the King to desist. The Prime Minister added that he was having no easy time in handling the King and asked the Ambassador to attempt to appreciate the difficulty of his task. To this the Ambassador is said to have replied that he was entirely [willing?] to do his share but that there were limits beyond which patience ceased to be a virtue and that should the occasion arise there was no doubt in his mind as to the advice which he would give his Government.

In connection with the foregoing today’s Alahram reports that the Minister of Foreign Affairs met with the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Chamber of Deputies last night to discuss certain matters deemed inappropriate for debate in the Chamber and that among the questions discussed was that of the suspension of relations with Vichy.

Kirk

1 Former Prime Minister of Egypt, who was forced out of office in 1940 and was regarded as hostile to the British.

2 Salib Samy Pasha.

3 Sir Miles Lampson.

4 Hussein Sirry Pasha.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/18878: Telegram

[Document 67]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, January 23, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received January 24—5:05 p.m.]

131. My 119, January 21, 7 p.m. As further facts regarding the circumstances surrounding the altercation between the King and the Foreign Minister on the Vichy severance question have come to light the British appear to be taking an increasingly serious view of the influence being exerted by certain elements in the King’s entourage. The present status of the matter is understood to be that the British Embassy has recommended to London the taking of firm measures to effect the removal from the Palace of certain undesirable persons particularly the Assistant Chief of the Royal Cabinet who is reputed to be close to Aly Maher Pasha and 16 or 17 Italians who are still connected with the Palace in various capacities but that London has not yet indicated its reaction.

Kirk

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 883.00/1231: Telegram

[Document 68]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 1, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 6:50 p.m.]

183. My 147, January 26, 9 p.m.5 I am very confidentially informed that the Egyptian Prime Minister advised the British Embassy this afternoon that his position had become so difficult that he had decided to resign either tomorrow or the day after. He is said to have cited as an impelling reason for his decision certain student demonstrations at the ceremony commemorating the death of Mohamed Mahmud6 yesterday in the course of which the Government and the British were reviled and Aly Maher, the King and even General Rommel7 cheered. Similar demonstrations are reported to have occurred today at the university in Cairo and their recrudescence tomorrow is said to be feared. The British Ambassador was out of town for the day and it remains to be seen what influence he will attempt to exert in the matter on his return tonight.

Kirk

5 Not printed.

6 Egyptian Prime Minister, 1938–39.

7 Gen. Brwin Rommel, in command of Italo-German forces in Libya.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 883.00/1232: Telegram

[Document 69]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 2, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 3:31 p.m.]

187. My 183, February 1, 6 p.m. It is reported but not yet officially announced that the Prime Minister tendered his resignation shortly after noon today following which the King received the British Ambassador on the latter’s urgent demand. Latest indications were that the Ambassador would probably support the return of the Wafd in preference to the formation of another weak coalition excluding the Wafd and in order to forestall the nomination of a Palace–Aly Maher candidate.

Kirk

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 883.00/1233: Telegram

[Document 70]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 3, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received February 3—10:56 a.m.]

188. My 187, February 2, 2 p.m. I am now advised in strictest confidence that in his interview with the King this morning the British Ambassador stated that, although the Embassy desired to avoid interference in Egyptian internal politics, he felt impelled in the capacity of an ally to point out that such new government as might be formed should have the two essential qualifications of (1) being disposed to carry out fully the terms of the Anglo-Egyptian treaty and (2) being sufficiently strong to maintain absolute control over the internal situation. Proceeding on that assumption the Ambassador said he was convinced that such a government could only be formed upon consultation with Nahas Pasha, the leader of the Wafd.

The King is said to have replied that he agreed entirely with the Ambassador regarding the necessary qualifications of the new government and that he had thought of consulting Nahas. When the Ambassador insisted, however, that the King should consult Nahas by noon tomorrow the King is said to have been evasive and in a subsequent conversation with [of?] the Ambassador with the Chief of the Royal Cabinet it was revealed that it was the Palace plan ostensibly to favor the participation of the Wafd in the government but to maintain as a first step in that direction it would seem desirable to institute a stopgap government in order to give time for coming to an agreement with the Wafd regarding the maintenance of an appropriate opposition representation in Parliament and similar questions.

The further development of this situation would seem to depend to a large extent on the attitude assumed by Nahas Pasha on his return to Cairo from upper Egypt tomorrow.

Kirk

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 883.00/1234: Telegram

[Document 71]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 4, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 4:07 p.m.]

196. My 188, February 2 [3], 6 p.m. The King conferred with the leaders of the various parties yesterday afternoon. Nahas Pasha, the Wafd leader, was received first and I am confidentially informed that the King suggested to him the formation of a coalition Cabinet but that Nahas took the position that the situation was so serious that he could only assume responsibility for government if given a free hand to form a Wafd Cabinet. I am further advised that the British Ambassador saw the Chief of the Royal Cabinet last night and without taking a stand on the coalition Government issue made it clear that he must insist on Nahas being given an opportunity to form a government in accordance with Nahas wishes.

It is reported that the King is continuing his conversations today.

Kirk

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 883.00/1235: Telegram

[Document 72]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 4, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received 9:15 p.m.]

197. My 196, February 4, 11 a.m. I have just returned from the Palace where the King summoned me to inform me as the representative of a friendly power that at 3 o’clock today he had received an “ultimatum” to the effect that unless by 6 o’clock this evening Nahas were not charged with the formation of a Cabinet he, the King, must accept the consequences of such a refusal and the nature of what those consequences would be, the King added, was not a matter of any doubt.

The King stated that immediately upon the receipt of the communication from the British Ambassador he had consulted with all his advisors both official and private as well as with the leaders of the parties and that not only had they stated in writing their disapproval of this step by the Embassy but Nahas himself had declared in writing that he would refuse to form a Ministry under the existing conditions. These statements were being communicated to the British Ambassador by the Chief of the King’s Cabinet and while I was with His Majesty that official returned to the Palace to state that the British Ambassador had requested an audience with the King at 9 o’clock tonight which was granted.

In the urgency of the moment and the obvious stress prevailing at the Palace there was no opportunity for me to enter into any discussion with the King. I took the occasion, however, to impress upon His Majesty as effectively as possible the fact that at the present moment there was only one great issue in the world and that was the defeat of Hitler, that the United States and Great Britain and, I believed, his own country were bound to exert every effort to that end to the exclusion of any other consideration and that although I could not enter into any matters relating to the internal politics of his country, I profoundly hoped that he would be guided solely by the practical consideration of what contributed the maximum effort to win the war.

I am informed that the British troops in Cairo are already mobilized against eventualities.

Kirk

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 883.00/1236: Telegram

[Document 73]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 4, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received 11:16 p.m.]

198. My 197, February 4, 7 p.m. Following the surrounding of the Palace by British troops the British Ambassador accompanied by the general officer commanding British troops in Egypt and a strong escort called at the Palace at 9 o’clock tonight and after delivering a prepared statement presented a letter of abdication for the King’s signature. The King thereupon made a plea for leniency and immediately called in Nahas Pasha to form a new government. At present writing Nahas is in conference with the British Ambassador and it is not yet known what type of government he intends forming.

Kirk

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 883.00/1237: Telegram

[Document 74]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 5, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 9:23 p.m.]

205. My 198, February 4, 11 p.m. This afternoon’s press reports that shortly after noon today Nahas Pasha presided over a meeting of the Wafd Executive Committee called to discuss the final composition of the new Cabinet and that Nahas will probably submit the list of his proposed collaboration to the King this afternoon or tomorrow morning. It is generally believed that he will propose the formation of an entirely Wafdist Cabinet and insist on the dissolution of the Chamber of Deputies and the holding of elections therefor.

In the meantime it is rumored that Ahmed Maher Pasha in his capacity of President of the Chamber of Deputies has addressed a letter to the British Ambassador strongly protesting against British interference in Egyptian internal politics by insisting that one individual in the person of Nahas be charged with the formation of a new Cabinet and that the President of the Senate has made a similar protest adding that he would be prepared to associate himself with such measures as it might be deemed appropriate to take under the circumstances.

Tonight’s press also carries a statement made by Nahas to the press late last night in which he is reported to have said that, although he had declared earlier in the day his unwillingness to assure [assume?] responsibility for government under the existing serious situation which had recently reached “its severest point” he had decided it his duty to carry out the King’s order charging him with the formation of a new Cabinet in order to meet the present crisis and to assure a democratic regime.

Kirk

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 883.00/1248

[Document 75]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 5, 1942.

Mr. Welles: We are impelled to suggest the despatch of the attached draft telegram to Cairo in view of the disturbing possibilities inherent in the Egyptian situation in connection with the conduct of the war.

It would seem highly undesirable for the British to remove King Farouk from the throne owing to the likelihood that he would become a martyr in the eyes of his people and a rallying-point for disaffection, sabotage and attacks directed at the British. In comparable circumstances in the past the Egyptians have shown a very considerable capacity for trouble-making and have even resorted to assassinations. Any such development would also provide Axis propagandists with a remarkable opportunity for playing upon the sympathies of the Arab and Moslem world.

It should be remarked that Sir Miles Lampson, the British Ambassador at Cairo, has consistently handled Farouk without tact and that he appears in the King’s eyes as a fault-finding schoolmaster.

During the last war, the British were able to remove a Khedive of Egypt without difficulty, but they do not appear to realize the immense damage to their prestige in the East which has resulted from their lack of strength in the present struggle which is particularly manifest at this time.

Nahas Pasha, who is now being called to the premiership at the dictate of the British, has long been the leading exponent of Egyptian nationalism and independence, and as such he has commanded the allegiance of the great mass of Egyptians. In consequence, the recent actions of British, which have served effective notice that Egyptian independence is not only a fiction but one which has worn completely through, place Nahas in a difficult position whereby he may lose his political following.

In these circumstances, we have thought it well to put in a word to Sir Oliver Lyttelton, the British Minister of State, who has general political supervision in the Middle East, but we have not overlooked the possibility that the present Egyptian crisis may be geared directly into Axis plans.

Wallace Murray

[Annex]

Draft Telegram to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, February 5, 1942.

Your 196, 197 and 198 of February 4. Your remarks to the King as reported in your 197 are approved. This Government considers that it has a legitimate present interest in political developments in the Egyptian area in connection with the war effort, and in view of the presence of General Maxwell’s mission in Egypt8 and of the large quantities of ordnance which have been sent to that area from the United States. Therefore, unless you perceive objection, you should inform the British Minister of State of this Government’s hope that a situation will not be created requiring a substantial and continuing diversion from their main task of British armed forces in the Egyptian area.

You should also state the realization of this Government that the causes of the present crisis may be found to lie deeper than those which are now apparent in that the crisis may conceivably be connected with general Axis plans in the eastern Mediterranean area. However, according to the information now available here, an accommodation would appear desirable whereby the King will remain in power and Nahas Pasha will assume the Premiership under conditions enabling the latter to retain the support of the great body of Egyptians which he has enjoyed in the past.

For your information, we have been impressed by Ambassador Bullitt’s9 view that the King lacks competent advisers and has consistently been handled without tact by the British Ambassador.

8 Gen. Russell L. Maxwell, Chief of United States Military Mission in North Africa with headquarters at Cairo.

9 William C. Bullitt, Personal Representative of the President on a mission to the Near East, November 1941–February 1942; see footnote 14, p. 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5].

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) 883.00/1248

[Document 76]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] February 5, 1942.

Mr. Murray: I am sorry to say that I cannot go along with this suggested telegram.10 It may be that Sir Miles Lampson has shown, as I have frequently been told, a complete lack of tact in his handling of the Egyptian situation. I do not feel, however, that our interest in the situation is sufficiently direct to warrant such direct intervention in the scene as that which you suggest. Egypt is so clearly within the British sphere of influence that the British Government very naturally would resent a démarche of this kind on our part.

I could not agree for one moment to similar interference on the part of the British in domestic affairs of one of the American republics, and I would suppose that the British would take that point of view if we attempted this sort of interference in the domestic affairs of Egypt.

Do you not also feel that, if the situation becomes more messy than it is and we would interfere in the way you suggest, the British would immediately claim that our interjection of ourselves into the picture was responsible for the situation?

S[umner] W[elles]

10  Supra.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 883.00/1248

[Document 77]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 9, 1942.

Mr. Welles: We of course defer to your views respecting the suggested telegram to Cairo. However, we are inclined to the belief that the situation of the Latin American Republics is not analogous to that of Egypt at present, in that the former are not in an active theater of war. If one of the Latin American Republics were a scene of hostilities to which the British had been diverting large quantities of ordnance and shipping acutely needed by themselves, they would hardly hesitate to offer friendly advice should we become involved in serious difficulties with the government of that republic.

It will be recalled that even prior to our entry into the war the British formally invited our intervention in the affairs of Iran.11 When we, uninvited, intervened in the affairs of Iraq,12 the British expressed warm appreciation of our action. Our proposed action in the present instance, of course, contemplated something far short of “intervention” and, as will be noted, envisaged merely the expression of a “hope” by this Government that a means might be found to keep Egypt on even keel in the present vital period of military operations there, in which we have a heavy stake.

In view of the actual importance of the Near East as a combat area and avenue of military supplies in respect of which this Government has already devoted substantial efforts and assumed large commitments, would you not agree in a general way that we cannot remain wholly inactive when any country in that area shows definite possibilities of going to pieces, either politically or economically?13

Wallace Murray

11 See Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 383 ff.

12  See ibid., pp. 486 ff.

13 Marginal note by Welles: “re your last paragraph—Under certain circumstances yes—but not in Egypt at present—SW”.

Concern of the United States regarding effect of Axis military advance into Egypt; plans for evacuation of American diplomatic and consular personnel from EgyptConcern of the United States regarding effect of Axis military advance into Egypt; plans for evacuation of American diplomatic and consular personnel from Egypt

[78] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 16, 1942—11 a.m. [Received February 18—2:30 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/19498: Telegram

[79] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, February 27, 1942—8 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/19498: Telegram

[80] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, April 6, 1942—4 p.m. [Received April 8—10:23 a.m.]

811.24580/25: Telegram

[81] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, April 15, 1942—5 p.m.

811.24580/25: Telegram

[82] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, April 17, 1942—6 p.m. [Received April 19—1:55 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/21085: Telegram

[83] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, April 23, 1942—7 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/21085: Telegram

[84] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] May 8, 1942.

800.24/358½

[85] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 19, 1942—7 p.m. [Received June 20—8:55 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/22351: Telegram

[86] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 22, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 11:19 a.m.]

124.83/86: Telegram

[87] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long)

[Washington,] June 22, 1942.

883.20/152

[88] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 23, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 7:02 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1039/22404: Telegram

[89] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 23, 1942—6 p.m.

124.83/86a: Telegram

[90] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long)

[Washington,] June 23, 1942.

883.20/153

[91] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 27, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 5:50 p.m.]

124.83/87: Telegram

[92] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 29, 1942—6 p.m.

124.83/87: Telegram

[93] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 30, 1942—11 p.m.

124.83/87: Telegram

[94] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 2, 1942—11 a.m. [Received July 2—5:55 a.m.]

124.83/89: Telegram

[95] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 25, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 7:44 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/23091: Telegram

[96] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 2, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 4:37 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/23279: Telegram

[97] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, September 7, 1942—5 p.m. [Received September 8—8:53 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24082: Telegram

[98] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, October 24, 1942—10 a.m. [Received October 24—7:19 a.m.]

740.0011European War 1939/25048: Telegram

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/19498: Telegram

[Document 78]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 16, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received February 18—2:30 p.m.]

273. Personal for the Secretary and Under Secretary. I don’t wish to inject a further disturbing note at this time of preoccupation farther east but after telegraphing for months about the importance of preserving this theater of war as a springboard for offensives against the Axis I feel that the time has come when I must know if from necessity or merely from lack of a practical realistic concept if this part of the world is being laughed off as a factor in the defeat of Hitlerism.

A few months ago there seemed to be the possibility that the importance of this area was about to be recognized and that we ourselves were to take the initiative in galvanizing the British into some kind of a dynamic force that could cope with the situation and then in supplying them with the necessary equipment for the task. That would have meant the preservation of the entire Mediterranean, the reduction of Italy to impotency, the elimination of Spain and Portugal as a part of Hitler’s scheme of expansion, the immobilization of Vichy with its fleet and its strategic position in North Africa and the encouragement of Turkey to believe that life with Hitler was not the only salvation.

The war with Japan ended that hope. All effort and all concentration was diverted there and if I led from emotion and not from reason I should acquiesce. But as a hardboiled realist I know that there are only two ways of beating Japan viz. bomb the existence out of Toyko, Yokohama, Osaka, Kobe, et cetera or else beat Hitler first. All the generals that have passed through here tell me that the first can’t be done without the use of Vladivostok but they all admit that there are only three points from which Hitler can be hit and those are the British Isles, Russia and here. I’m sure Churchill14 has seen to the stocking of England with forces against invasion, I assume that everything is being done to ration the Russians with supplies but in this area I can see nothing but deterioration. British bungling has been demonstrated time and again and the lack of material is no longer an excuse, for this last offensive has shown that lack of unified command, defective strategy and dilatory methods have constituted the chief factors of defeat. All these elements have brought us to the present situation and as a consequence this place is now wide open from the land, from the sea and from the air. The British forces here already proven inadequate have been decreased to strengthen the Far East effort which has frittered away its heroic effort in a so-called “delaying campaign” which except for the stupendous show of MacArthur15 has necessitated apologies from all of us.

The fact is that the Middle East means the Mediterranean, it means the richest oil fields, it means the communications to India and China and on to Japan and it means the springboard for offensives against Germany and Italy which after all happen to be the spots which are germinating the hell to which we have been reduced. I ask again are we going to laugh off this area for if so my job is merely one of discreet preparation for a possible evacuation of Americans.

Cables are futile things. Either they are cold and clammy when they reach their destination or else they smack so of exaggeration that they negative their purpose. But please realize I have never received any intimation of what we really think of this situation out here and have only been confronted with the goings and comings of visitors from home who have said “yes it’s important to hold the Middle East but—”. It is possible that Hitler does not wish to strike here or may not be able to do so. Good, but the fact remains that he may be able to and if so he will succeed unless something is done immediately either to ward off or to oppose him when he does. Are the British or are we paying any attention to such a contingency. I ask you, because neither the British Ambassador nor the Minister of State nor the Commander-in-Chief here can tell me. Believe me, my question does not spring from hysteria but from plain common sense. After all, if this war is not prolonged until it is lost, it is we who have got to win, and win not only with material but with the domination of our judgment in the strategy of selecting the time and place for the infliction of direct and ruthless blows against the Axis Powers, for which the world has been too long awaiting. This theater if preserved is indicated for that purpose. Are we going to preserve it and are we going to use it or are we going [to] waste ourselves in farflung delaying actions which are inconclusive and which do not strike the Axis power at its source.

Kirk

14 Winston S. Churchill, British Prime Minister.

15 Gen. Douglas MacArthur, Commanding General, United States Armed Force in the Far East.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 740.0011 European War 1939/19498: Telegram

[Document 79]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, February 27, 1942—8 p.m.

168. A paraphrase of your 273, February 16, 11 a.m., was transmitted to the War Department, which desires you to be informed in effect that the Chiefs of Staff and the Combined Planning Committee are cognizant of the situation in the Middle East. Every consideration is being given to the requirements of that area consistent with the needs of other vital areas and with the means available.15a

Welles

15a Concerning the place of Egypt and the Middle East in War Department planning in 1942, see Maurice Matloff and Edwin M. Snell, Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1941–1942, in the series United States Army in World War II: The War Department (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1953), particularly pp. 165–168, 198–202, 226–227, 244–255, 277, and 297–298.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 811.24580/25: Telegram

[Document 80]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, April 6, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received April 8—10:23 a.m.]

540. For the Acting Secretary. I understand that a revision of the organization of the United States Military North African Mission is under consideration in the War Department. You are aware of my insistence in the past on the importance of a unified command and on the danger inherent in divided authority. General Maxwell16 through his superior qualifications and his familiarity with the problems and personalities in this area has established a position of the highest order and furthermore is able to render conspicuous service through harmonious cooperation with the British. I urge that, whatever may be the reorganization contemplated, all our military activities in this area, except of course the duties of Military Attaché, be maintained under one command and that General Maxwell assume that command.

I might add that in a revision which would contemplate United States military operations in this area I should wish to make special recommendations [regarding] Military Attaché to this Legation17 whose marked ability, experience and special knowledge would render him invaluable both in planning and in operation.

Kirk

16 Gen. Russell L. Maxwell, Chief of United States Military Mission in North Africa, with headquarters at Cairo.

17 Col. Bonner F. Fellers.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 811.24580/25: Telegram

[Document 81]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, April 15, 1942—5 p.m.

324. Your 540, April 6, 4 p.m. War Department states that all United States military activities in North Africa are under the command of General Maxwell with the exception of the policy and operational control of the Ferry Command which that Department desires to maintain in Washington and the duties of the Military Attaché. There is no prospect at present of any change in this arrangement.

With reference to Colonel Fellers, the War Department asserts that no actual military operations are contemplated at present.

Welles

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/21085: Telegram

[Document 82]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, April 17, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received April 19—1:55 p.m.]

608. Personal for the Acting Secretary. I suggest you see and show to the President telegram 978 to War Department from Military Attaché to this Legation regarding Malta as well as material which Fellers has been sending in about Rumanian oil fields.

Furthermore I hope that both you and the President are seeing the reports on the war situation in this area which our Military and Naval Attachés here are sending to Washington. They should be carefully weighed as against reports from British sources for I am unable to satisfy myself that the British are adequately impressed both by the threats to this area as well as by its offensive possibilities or are sufficiently astute and energetic in obtaining and making effective use of the material suitable for defensive and especially offensive operations in this theatre. In April of last year I said that I thought that we should take the initiative in determining what is needed out here and in seeing that it gets here. Now we should be in a position to take also the leadership in determining [what] strategy should be determined by the immediate necessity of preserving and developing the offensive potentialities of the relatively few bases from which the German, Italian, Japanese mainlands can be struck. Such blows struck now even with smaller forces would be more effective than massed attacks later after these bases may have been lost and would go far to end the war. Hitler’s open discard of the fiction of Vichy independence increases the threat to this area and to whole African continent. The only reinforcements that can be brought quickly are air reinforcements and the immediate use of high altitude long range daylight bombers may still serve to check the Axis preparations in the Mediterranean. After all we cannot do everything everywhere but we can do something somewhere and I maintain that even in the scheme of all the operations on the limitless front special emphasis on the Mediterranean area is fully justified. In short we need here American planes under American supervision to fight in the American way, and we need them at once.

Kirk

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 740.0011 European War 1939/21085: Telegram

[Document 83]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, April 23, 1942—7 p.m.

347. From the Under Secretary. Your 608, April 17, 6 p.m. You are assured that the matters to which you refer are receiving immediate attention. [Welles.]

Hull

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Secretary of State 800.24/358½

[Document 84]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Secretary of State 18

[Washington,] May 8, 1942.

Need for Over-all American Political Representative in the Near East Assisted by a High-Ranking Army Officer

Mr. Secretary: With reference to the situation in the Near East and American interests in that area, to which you referred this morning, the following are some of the more important reasons why it seems to this Division that an outstanding American official should be sent to that area. It is our idea that this official should make his headquarters in Cairo and should correspond in position roughly to that of Mr. Casey, the British Minister of State in the Near East.

Our interests in the Near East are threefold—political, military and economic:

I. Political Interests.

As a result of British military defeats, the prestige of Great Britain in the Near and Middle East has fallen to a low ebb. Our own prestige in that area, however, remains high, since the local inhabitants realize that we have no territorial ambitions or imperial designs. Evidence of our own political prestige is shown in several recent developments in which the British have called on us for aid in obtaining better cooperation from the Iranians, Syrians, Egyptians and Turks. Many political questions are arising daily which affect our interests and there is a great and growing need of coordinating our policy. This can best be done, it would seem, through the appointment of a broad-gauge man with a thorough understanding of the international situation and having the personal confidence of the President.

II. Military Interests.

Although the relative importance of the fighting fronts in Russia, the British Isles, the Pacific and the Near East may be debated, the great, if not vital, importance of the Near Eastern front is not questioned. The junction of Axis and Japanese forces there would isolate Russia and open to the Axis the resources in petroleum and other raw materials which it requires for an indefinite continuation of hostilities. If the Germans are not able to reach Iran through Russia, their alternative is to try to do so through the Near East and they may well conclude that the southern route is the easier of the two. We have sent to the British in the Near East planes, guns and tanks in large numbers. Moreover, we have two military missions operating in that area. The first is under General Maxwell at Cairo and includes Egypt, the Sudan and the former Italian territory on the Red Sea and in Ethiopia, as well as Syria and Palestine. This mission has the responsibility of establishing large supply bases and assembly plants. The Iranian mission, until recently under the command of General Wheeler, has as its sphere of activity Iraq and Iran and the Persian Gulf area. One of the tasks of that mission is to assist in creating facilities for the transportation of Lend-Lease supplies across Iran to Soviet Russia. In addition, there are the numerous military questions which arise as a result of our using air bases in Africa and the Middle East for ferrying military aircraft to the Middle East and to the Far East. Among questions which arise in this connection are such matters as acquiring possible air bases in Saudi Arabia which would not be open to attack either from the Mediterranean or from the Indian Ocean and the Arabian Sea.

III. Economic Interests.

Our economic interests throughout the area are twofold—first, acquiring urgently needed supplies such as chrome from Turkey and seeing to the maintenance and development of petroleum resources as at Bahrein in the Persian Gulf; secondly may be mentioned our responsibilities in seeing that the imperative needs of the local populations in the Middle Eastern countries are met from our own and British sources. In this latter connection, it has recently been decided to establish American representation on the Middle East Supply Center at Cairo.19 This Center passes on requests for goods for civilian requirements throughout the Middle Eastern sector. In addition, we are in the process of setting up local committees in the various countries on which the local authorities, the British, and ourselves will be represented. These committees will pass upon requests for imports, in the first instance, and forward them to the Middle East Supply Center at Cairo for further consideration and recommendations. For the time being, some member of the American Legation at Cairo will be our representative on the Supply Center but, in the near future, it is planned to send out a man or small group of men from this country to handle our activities in that Center.

Conclusion.

From the foregoing it will be seen that our political, military, and economic interests in the Middle East are of first-rate importance. It seems clear that we must continue to assume greater responsibilities in that area. For this reason, it seems highly important to have a high-ranking man of broad experience to coordinate these various activities. Primarily, he would operate in the political field but I believe he should be assisted on the economic side by our representative on the Middle East Supply Center and on the military side by a senior Army officer who, to be effective, should be given general control over all of our military activities, present and future, in that area.

Paul H. Alling

18  Attached to this document is a memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) dated June 29, 1942, addressed to Assistant Secretary Acheson, reading as follows: “Both the Secretary of State and I for some time past have been urging insistently that this step be taken. In the last meeting of the Liaison Committee at which I brought this matter up some two weeks ago, the Deputy Chief of the General Staff told me that the matter had been given full consideration and that the War Department was not going to do anything of the kind inasmuch as this theater of activity was allocated to the British.

“It would seem to me unfortunately that events of the past ten days have shown the wisdom of the suggestion which the Secretary and I and Kirk have been making.”

19 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/22351: Telegram

[Document 85]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 19, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received June 20—8:55 a.m.]

1031. Personal for Secretary and Under Secretary. I endorse emphatically the recommendations contained in telegram nos. 1148 and 114920 from Colonel Fellers to MilID21 and I cannot too strongly urge that they be brought to the immediate attention of the President for his consideration, especially in view of the reported presence of Churchill in Washington.

These recommendations are based on the necessity of meeting present emergency,22 for if the German operations are to be extended and Allied air reinforcements are not sent here immediately to aid in checking these operations, the possibility is more imminent that we must face losing the Middle East and there is no need to restate the far-reaching consequences of such an eventuality. There is, however, a long range view as well that envisages the means whereby this theater, which both geographically and topographically is preeminently indicated for an out and out air offensive against the Axis Powers in the Mediterranean, may be galvanized into an effective war organization and to that end we must meet the necessity of effecting a thorough change in the strategy and methods which have hitherto governed the Command and operations in this area and which events in the past have proven thrice to be failures.

Kirk

20 Neither printed.

21 Military Intelligence Division.

22 Offensive by General Rommel which resulted in the capture of Tobruk and brought Italo-German forces into Egypt as far as El Alamein; for correspondence regarding the concern of the United States at the impact of this Axis advance and Axis propaganda on the political stability of the Near East, see pp. 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 17] ff.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 124.83/86: Telegram

[Document 86]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 22, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 11:19 a.m.]

1048. Evacuation plans which were prepared months ago are complete insofar as is possible with the exception of the name of the country which would take over American interests in case of evacuation. May I assume that Switzerland is indicated?

It is obvious that the matter should be kept secret as my first preoccupation at the present moment is to avoid any action here which might smack of panic. I submit that the question might be settled between Washington and Bern on the understanding that instructions be not sent to the Swiss Chargé here unless and until circumstances require.

Kirk

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long) 883.20/152

[Document 87]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long)

[Washington,] June 22, 1942.

The Egyptian Minister23 came in at his own request. He was very much discouraged and disheartened about the developments on the Libyan frontier. He said that on the past two occasions when advances had been made by the Germans or the Italians he had not been apprehensive, but in the present circumstances he was very much disturbed. His Government had no Army and had been unable to obtain equipment for one though they had tried since 1936 at the time of the Convention they signed with England.24 At first Czechoslovakia was to make arms and then was overrun before the deliveries had begun, and subsequently Sweden had found its factories incapable of furnishing them in time to justify the contract. The result is that they are without arms. He alluded to the anti-British feeling which had developed in Egypt as early as 1935 and which had recurred since. He said that recently there had been an amplification of that feeling. He said his Government was now faced with a very difficult position. He did not know what attitude his Government would take, but governments must in the last analysis take steps to insure their own best interests.

The Minister asked whether the American air forces could not be concentrated upon the enemy and whether the tacticians could not supplement with American forces the present difficulty in which the English found themselves. I replied to the Minister that we hoped the situation was not as bad as it sounded, and that he might be assured that everything that could be done would be done to oppose the enemy.

B[reckinridge] L[ong]

23 Mahmoud Hassan Bey.

24 Treaty of Friendship and Alliance, signed at London, August 26, 1936, League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. clxxiii, p. 401.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1039/22404: Telegram

[Document 88]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 23, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 7:02 p.m.]

1057. My 1054, June 22, 8 p.m.25 Fall of Tobruk has caused extreme apprehension in Egyptian circles which up to that time had tended to regard developments in Libya with apathy and criticism of British by Egyptians for ineptitude in conduct of operations and alleged deterioration of morale is heard on all sides. The fact that in absence of adequate British explanation of [apparent omission] local population had recourse to Axis radio for information thereon contributed to local consternation.

I am confidentially informed that Prime Minister25a alluded to this situation in a conversation with British Ambassador yesterday and said Parliament was exerting pressure on him for clarification. Prime Minister expressed confidence in his ability to counteract feeling of panic in respect of both Parliament and public provided Ambassador could give assurance of British intention to defend Egypt to last. Ambassador thereupon urgently requested London for authority to give such assurance and this morning received a reply empowering him to reassure Prime Minister regarding British determination to hold country.

The Prime Minister also assured the Ambassador of his readiness to take all necessary measures to prevent sabotage, fifth column or other activity which might prejudice security of Egypt as a base for Allied operations but emphasized that in order to cooperate effectively he would have to be kept currently informed of British military plans.

I am informed that the Ambassador plans to see the Prime Minister this morning in order to communicate London’s assurance and that he will be accompanied by British military representatives who will give such explanation as is deemed advisable regarding military situation. It is understood that in latter connection particular emphasis will be placed on necessity in time of crisis of keeping means of communication unencumbered.

It is expected that the Prime Minister may make a statement on subject in Parliament tonight.

Kirk

25 Not printed.

25a Mustapha Nahas Pasha.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 124.83/86a: Telegram

[Document 89]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 23, 1942—6 p.m.

602. 1. The following instructions will enable you and principal consular officers at Alexandria and Port Said to take appropriate action in sudden emergency or when explicit instructions cannot be obtained from Department.

2. Should your departure become necessary and conditions prevent transmission of regular travel orders, travel expense including air travel and per diem and shipment of effects are authorized for all officers and American employees of Department (and of other Departments and agencies if they do not have funds available for the purpose) and for their wives and minor children at discretion principal officer, subject to travel regulations, payable from authorization no. 11–1942. Draw separate drafts and render separate accounts.

3. Terminate services all alien personnel except as directed in paragraph 14 at expiration of 30 days’ leave less leave already taken in calendar year. Commence leaves day after effective date of closing or if services are needed thereafter within 2 weeks after closing. Salaries cannot be paid in advance but Department will endeavor to arrange payments when due.

4. Officers will decide whether to retain premises and leave Government property therein or to terminate leases and store property in commercial warehouses. Officers will make most economical arrangements not incompatible with security of property concerned including effort to obtain reduction of rental of retained premises. Officers will decide whether Government property in retained premises should be entrusted to landlords or custodians should be retained. In the latter event principal officers are authorized to retain one or two of their most trustworthy employees as custodians at salaries same as they were receiving previously in other capacities.

5. The property mentioned above includes furniture, equipment, and nonconfidential archives. Such archives should be sealed.

6. Destruction of all confidential files, seals, codes, ciphers, true readings, legend machine dies, et cetera is of utmost importance. Burn fee stamps and obtain affidavits of two competent witnesses.

7. Thoroughly mutilate and burn all passports of any character, valid or invalid, extra visa pages, certificates of naturalization and certificates of registration and identity, blank or filled in. Retain first pages of destroyed passports for delivery to Department and make complete list with identifying data when possible of all other citizenship documents destroyed. In no circumstances should you bring with you any of above citizenship documents except first pages of passports.

8. Officers and American employees may store personal effects in Government-owned buildings or in retained leased premises. In absence of such facilities Government will pay local storage charges.

9. If possible, submit forms 285 and 298 and telegraph Department effective date of closing of office.

10. At time of closing inform Department of all cases of non-compliance with authorizations to draw drafts and make payments to individuals against deposits with Department.

11. This instruction is a precautionary measure. You should quietly formulate plans to deal with a possible emergency taking no steps that might reveal to local authorities or alien employees on your staff that departure might be contemplated. It is of political and military importance that all offices should be maintained as long as possible and officers should invoke the above instructions and leave their posts only when danger becomes so serious and immediate as to threaten the liberty and lives of the staff.

12. Repeat the foregoing in paraphrase to Alexandria and Port Said.

13. The Swiss Government has agreed provisionally to assume the representation of interests of the United States outside the Western Hemisphere wherever this Government’s representatives must be withdrawn. In latter event you should ask Swiss representative provisionally to assume representation of United States interests in Egypt (as well as Panamanian interests at Alexandria and Port Said) and you should report by telegraph to Department which would then ask Swiss Government to authorize its representative in Egypt definitively to assume such representation. Meanwhile you may in your discretion initiate informal and confidential conversations with your Swiss colleague concerning the foregoing.

14. If you should decide to move the Legation to another place in Egypt rather than to close it and leave the country, you are authorized to modify the above instructions along the following lines: You may take with you not only all officers and American employees and their wives and minor children but also those alien employees whose services you consider absolutely essential. Travel expenses authorized as in paragraph 2 above. You should take with you such files, supplies, and codes as you are certain can be safeguarded during the journey and thereafter, bearing in mind that you should have some means of communicating confidentially with the Department.

Hull

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long) 883.20/153

[Document 90]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Long)

[Washington,] June 23, 1942.

The Minister26 came in this afternoon at my request. I told him that we had no specific information to convey to him but we wanted him to feel that we were deeply interested in the situation his Government found itself, and that we were entirely sympathetic and wanted to keep in communication with him. I further told him that the military authorities were considering what might be done under the circumstances. There was no definite information I could give him. If anything should develop, the Department would be glad to let him know, and we hoped that he would communicate with us and would feel that he could approach us at any time.

I particularly desired that he should not communicate to his Government any inferences from anything I may have said because we did not want to give the basis for the thought that any decision had been made, but only that they found a sympathetic understanding here and a disposition to do whatever we found to be practical to alleviate the situation.

B[reckinridge] L[ong]

26 The Egyptian Minister.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 124.83/87: Telegram

[Document 91]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 27, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 5:50 p.m.]

1091. Department’s 602, June 23, 6 p.m. I am confidentially informed that following is present status of British evacuation plans in event of Axis occupation of Egypt.

1. As regards British Colony it is regarded that adequate facilities have been provided in past for their departure and there is no question of a general plan for their evacuation in time of crisis. Every effort would be made however to evacuate British and Allied persons liable to be shot if captured, persons possessing information valuable to the enemy and possibly women and children although it seems doubtful if much could be done for this last category.

2. British consular officers would remain behind and would presumably be captured.

3. British Ambassador and a nucleus of officers would accompany Egyptian Government should it move out of the country but it has not been decided whether Ambassador and staff would remain should Government not move. Instructions in this latter connection have been requested from London by Embassy but have not yet been received.

In event that, because of the nonbelligerent status of Egypt or considerations of prestige, British Ambassador should be directed to remain here irrespective of eventualities, I should of course so report with a view to the possible modification of instructions contained Department’s telegram under reference but since time may not permit my so doing I should appreciate receiving immediate instructions authorizing me to use my discretion as regards my own movements and those of our diplomatic and consular personnel in Egypt with special reference to associating ourselves with the British along the lines of procedure which they may follow. I might add that in my opinion no useful purpose would be served by our leaving only consular personnel here.

Kirk

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 124.83/87: Telegram

[Document 92]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 29, 1942—6 p.m.

634. In response to last paragraph of your 1091, June 27, you are informed that Department’s 602, June 23 was intended to give you in your discretion full authority regarding your movements and those of American diplomatic and consular personnel in Egypt.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 124.83/87: Telegram

[Document 93]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 30, 1942—11 p.m.

649. With further reference to the final paragraph of your 1091, June 27, 11 a.m., we agree that there is no point in leaving only consular personnel in Egypt.

While as previously stated it is desired to place full authority and discretion in your hands regarding future movements, the following comment is made:

As Egypt is neither a co-belligerent nor an ally of this Government, we believe that your decisions can properly be governed by the practical consideration of where you and your staff can be most useful. If American citizens largely evacuate Egypt and the Axis occupies the country, we cannot see that your remaining would serve any useful purpose as neither the Egyptian Government, if it remains, nor the Legation would have any liberty of action. We should be deprived of the valuable services of yourself and your staff for no sufficient reason. Presumably the British Embassy has to consider the Anglo-Egyptian alliance factor which however has no direct application to your situation and no indirect application of real importance that we can perceive.

Is any consideration being given to Khartoum for the Egyptian Government, the British Embassy, and yourselves? And have you considered the feasibility of your proceeding by plane to Jeddah?

Hull

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 124.83/89: Telegram

[Document 94]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 2, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received July 2—5:55 a.m.]

1133. Department’s 649, June 30, 11 p.m. As already reported by me the question has been raised as to an eventual departure of the Egyptian Government and the British Ambassador has suggested removal to Khartoum. Up to last night no decision had been taken by Egyptian Government although as previously stated there are indications that it would remain.

I had assumed that upon leaving Egypt my ultimate destination would be Jidda pending further dispositions.

Kirk

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/23091: Telegram

[Document 95]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 25, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 7:44 p.m.]

1317. Personal for the Secretary and Under Secretary. The continuation of the hitherto indecisive fighting on the El Alamein front has furnished occasion for professing of optimism as to the outcome of the struggle and an inclination is apparent to exalt Allied achievement and discount the growing strength of the enemy. This attitude is unjustified and fundamentally unhealthy. Reports are current of the mounting reinforcements to Rommel’s army and in spite of the efforts which have apparently been made, there is no outstanding improvement in the general position of the British. A few days ago operations were initiated by Auchinleck27 which it is difficult to believe were not intended to attain a decisive objective but those operations halted at an inconclusive state. It is now said that they may be resumed at any moment. I fail to see, however, any new and definite factor which in itself offers encouragement for the future.

Kirk

27 Gen. Sir Claude J. E. Auchinleck, Commanding General, British Forces in the Middle East.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/23279: Telegram

[Document 96]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 2, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 4:37 p.m.]

1366. Personal for the Secretary and Under Secretary. My 1351, July 31, noon.28 I realize that the assumption is that the particular responsibility for military operations in this theatre lies with the British and that the role here of the United States at present is confined to rendering such aid as is within our power. The general responsibility for winning the war, however, is ours as well as Britain’s and the loss of the Middle East, with the grave consequences thereof to the cause of the United Nations in the denial of the Mediterranean to eventual Allied offensive operations as well as in the jeopardy to the routes to Russia, India and China, would at least postpone the victory for which we are fighting. In the sincerity of the deepest conviction, I submit, therefore, that we have not met that responsibility unless, in the face of the present danger to Egypt, the President and his advisors have acquainted themselves with the lines of the present strategy of the Allied commanders in this theatre as well as with what those commanders believe is required to implement that strategy and then, have challenged both that strategy and those requirements in the light of their own superior knowledge and broader view. Only in this way can determination be assured of the actual elements involved and the fact be established that everything that is humanly possible is being done to save the situation here while there may yet be time.

Kirk

28 Not printed.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24082: Telegram

[Document 97]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, September 7, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received September 8—8:53 a.m.]

1596. My 1594, September 7.29 The fact that Rommel has been forced to delay operations and that his latest venture failed is due to Allied air superiority, to which General Brereton’s30 Command has so valiantly contributed. If more air is sent at once, this advantage may be developed into a victory and if still more arrives in time, even the menace of an eventual diversion of greater Axis strength to this theater can be met. With Rommel silenced and advanced territory gained, the opportunity is present of creating an air front in this theater that can dominate Axis power in southern and southeastern Europe.

Kirk

29 Not printed.

30 Maj. Gen. Lewis H. Brereton, Commanding General, U. S. Tenth Air Force. General Brereton had been ordered on June 23, 1942, to transfer the heavy bombers of the Tenth Air Force to the Middle East.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011European War 1939/25048: Telegram

[Document 98]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, October 24, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received October 24—7:19 a.m.]

1870. My 1819, October 14, 5 p.m.29 The British started an offensive in Western Desert last night. No announcement has as yet been made.

Kirk

29 Not printed.

Problems arising from presence in Egypt of American military personnel: Post-war demobilization and criminal jurisdictionProblems arising from presence in Egypt of American military personnel: Post-war demobilization and criminal jurisdiction31

31 There was also considerable correspondence, not printed, regarding visas or military identification cards for American personnel entering or passing through Egypt.

[99] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 16, 1942. [Received June 30.]

883.20/150

[100] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 18, 1942—noon. [Received 5 p.m.]

811.221/275: Telegram

[101] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, September 25, 1942—4 p.m. [Received September 26—9:51 a.m.]

811.203/172: Telegram

[102] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, October 6, 1942—10 p.m.

811.203/172: Telegram

[103] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, October 8, 1942.

883.20/156

[104] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, November 17, 1942. [Received November 30.]

883.20/158

[105] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, December 5, 1942—3 p.m.

811.203/172: Telegram

[106] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, December 12, 1942—6 p.m. [Received December 13—6:06 p.m.]

811.203/201: Telegram

[107] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, December 23, 1942—4 p.m.

811.203/201: Telegram

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 883.20/150

[Document 99]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

No. 4206 London, June 16, 1942.
[Received June 30.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform the Department that the Embassy has been approached by the Foreign Office in connection with the possible despatch of American armed forces to Egypt. In a letter dated June 9, 1942, (copies of which are enclosed)33 from an official of the Foreign Office, the difficulties encountered by the British in connection with the troops of the Allies of Great Britain in Egypt are indicated.

It appears that whereas the British enjoy certain privileges by virtue of the “Immunities Convention” annexed to the Anglo-Egyption Treaty of Alliance34 the Egyptian authorities objected to the troops of the Allies entering and leaving Egypt under the same conditions as those enjoyed by the British. A system was devised whereby a special yellow card was issued to members of the Allied forces. This did not, however, solve the problem from the point of view of the Egyptian authorities; and now the British Ambassador to Egypt35 has worked out a solution whereby he gave assurance, on behalf of the British Military High Command in Egypt, of the repatriation of members of the Allied forces.

The British have given the Embassy a draft aide-mémoire for communication by them to the Allied Governments or authorities concerned and to the Free French, copies of which are enclosed,33 with regard to this matter. In this aide-mémoire it is stated that the Egyptian Government have requested that the assurance given by Sir Miles Lampson should be supplemented by similar assurances by the Allied Governments concerned. The British Government state that, as the discussions on the subject had been carried on by Sir Miles Lampson, it would be convenient and would avoid any risk of the matter being re-opened if the respective Allied Governments would authorize Sir Miles Lampson to convey their assurances to the Egyptian Government.

The Foreign Office, in its afore-mentioned letter, asked if the Embassy could inform it of the action the United States Government would wish to take regarding members of the American Armed Forces who are serving or may serve in Egypt during the War.

It is requested that the Embassy be instructed as to the reply it should make to the Foreign Office on this matter.

Respectfully yours,

For the Ambassador:
H. Freeman Matthews
Counselor of Embassy

33 Not printed.

34 Signed at London, August 26, 1936, League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. clxxiii, p. 401; for the Convention concerning the immunities and privileges to be enjoyed by the British Forces in Egypt, signed the same day, see ibid., p. 433.

35 Sir Miles Lampson.

33 Not printed.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 811.221/275: Telegram

[Document 100]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 18, 1942—noon.
[Received 5 p.m.]

1020. Major General Maxwell36 informs me that he has been designated Commanding General United States Army Forces in the Middle East. It would appear that this measure raises the fundamental question of the status of American operations in this entire area and from the point of view of this Legation, the matter of the relations of this command to the Egyptian Government on whose territory it is to operate. I urge therefore that immediate steps be taken in consultation with the War Department to specify the status of that command as envisaged at present and, in the absence of any treaty between the United States and Egypt analogous to the Anglo-Egyptian of 1936, to determine the basis of understanding with the Egyptian Government which may be regarded as essential for the activities of that command in order that it may operate freely and effectively on Egyptian territory.

Kirk

36 Maj. Gen. Russell L. Maxwell, previously Chief of the United States Military Mission in North Africa, with headquarters at Cairo.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 811.203/172: Telegram

[Document 101]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, September 25, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received September 26—9:51 a.m.]

1704. My 1020, June 18, noon. General Maxwell has raised question of making informal inquiry of Egyptian authorities concerning negotiation of a “gentleman’s agreement” which would permit “the United States military authorities to punish violations of law by members of the armed forces of the United States in Egypt and by citizens of the United States accompanying the army”.

For obvious reasons it is highly desirable that uniformed members of United States military forces in Egypt be amenable to jurisdiction of American military courts but as Department is aware a request for this privilege must be made with extreme caution in view of the aversion of the Egyptian authorities, after having obtained release from the capitulations at Montreux,37 to grant new concessions, waiving jurisdiction of Egyptian courts over aliens in Egypt. Before taking up the matter therefore I wish to have the advice and instructions of the Department.

If Department desires that Legation approach the Egyptian authorities the procedure which I submit for consideration is that I be authorized to initiate negotiations with the competent Egyptian authorities with a view to obtaining extension to United States military personnel in Egypt for duration of war of same or similar immunities from Egyptian jurisdiction as is accorded to British troops under Anglo-Egyptian treaty of August 26, 1936, and several proclamations relating to that treaty. I would explain desirability from standpoint of prosecution of the war efforts of the United States that American military authorities be permitted to exercise jurisdiction over American military personnel in Egypt. I would give assurances that American authorities will do everything possible to see that justice is done in all cases that might arise.

As regards procedure to be followed in implementing the grant it would seem that the provisions thereof might be embodied in military order issued by Prime Minister under authority conferred upon him by decree of September 1, 1939, declaring state of siege in Egypt thereby avoiding necessity of negotiating an agreement or the enactment of special legislation.

The matter is one of urgency as problem increases in importance from day to day as new military personnel arrives.

I should appreciate receiving by air pouch several copies of agreement recently negotiated with respect to jurisdiction over United States troops in British Isles.39

Kirk

37 Convention … regarding the abolition of capitulations in Egypt, signed at Montreux, May 8, 1937; for text, see Department of State Treaty Series No. 939, or 53 Stat. (pt. 3) 1645; for correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1937, vol. ii, pp. 615 ff.

39 Agreement effected by exchange of notes at London July 27, 1942, effective August 6, 1942; for text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 355, or 57 Stat. (pt. 2) 1193.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 811.203/172: Telegram

[Document 102]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, October 6, 1942—10 p.m.

1200. Your 1704, September 25. Department has consulted War Department which desires exclusive jurisdiction in criminal matters over all persons in Egypt subject to military law of United States. Military authorities will assume responsibility to try, and on conviction to punish, all offenses which such persons are alleged on sufficient evidence to have committed in Egypt.

Department approves of procedure suggested by you and considers it desirable if recognition of jurisdiction referred to can be obtained without formal agreement and as soon as possible. You may point out that jurisdiction desired by this Government is not as extensive as that granted to Great Britain under Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of August 26, 1936; that recognition of such jurisdiction would not in any sense constitute a regime such as the capitulations but is only designed to cover a special situation during a period of emergency for reasons of military discipline and a proper functioning of the military organization; and that such rights are generally recognized as appertaining to the military authorities in the circumstances indicated.

As requested, copies of the United States of America (Visiting Forces) Act, 194240 are being sent by air. That Act and the exchange of notes appended thereto indicate in more detail jurisdiction desired by military authorities of this Government. Similar jurisdiction has been recognized by the Australian Government without a formal agreement, and the matter is the subject of discussions with the Government of Canada.

Welles

40 5 & 6 Geo. VI, Ch. 31.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 883.20/156

[Document 103]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

No. 263 Washington, October 8, 1942.

Sir: There is enclosed herewith a copy of despatch no. 4206 of June 16, 1942, from the Embassy at London,41 in which it is stated that the British Ambassador at Cairo has given assurances to the Egyptian Government relative to the eventual repatriation of members of the “Allied” forces, but that the Egyptian Government desires this assurance to be supplemented by similar assurances from the other Governments concerned.

It is noted that in the communication dated June 9, 1942, from the British Foreign Office to the Embassy at London,42 a copy of which was enclosed with the despatch under reference, it was stated that the British Government would be happy to communicate an appropriate assurance from the United States Government to the Government of Egypt through the British Ambassador at Cairo, but that the Foreign Office appreciates this Government may prefer to handle the matter through the American Minister at Cairo.

The matter has been taken up with the appropriate Departments and there are enclosed herewith a copy of a communication dated September 3, 1942, from the Navy Department, and a copy of a communication dated September 14, 1942, from the Secretary of War.43 You are authorized to communicate the assurances contained therein to the Egyptian Government and to inform the British Ambassador at Cairo of your action.

A copy of the present instruction is being sent to the Embassy at London with the request that the Foreign Office be informed.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
A. A. Berle, Jr.

41  Ante, p. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99].

42 Not printed.

43 Neither printed.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 883.20/158

[Document 104]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

No. 702 Cairo, November 17, 1942.
[Received November 30.]

Sir: With reference to the Department’s instruction no. 263 of October 8, 1942 (file no. 883.20/156), concerning the matter of giving assurances to the Egyptian Government that the American military forces in Egypt will ultimately be demobilized outside of Egypt or otherwise taken care of by the American authorities, I have the honor to enclose, for the information of the Department, a copy of the Legation’s note No. 654, October 29, 1942 to the Foreign Office on this subject, together with a copy of the reply of the Foreign Office dated November 16, 1942.44

Respectfully yours,

Alexander Kirk

[Enclosure]

The American Minister (Kirk) to the Egyptian Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs (Nahas)

No. 654 Cairo, October 29, 1942.

Excellency: I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that my Government has instructed me to convey to the Egyptian Government assurances that, at the conclusion of the war, the members of the United States armed forces and attached personnel in Egypt will be demobilized outside of Egypt without the Egyptian Government being involved in any expenditure arising out of their removal from Egypt; that the United States Government will endeavor to apprehend any deserters from such forces; and that any particulars desired by the Egyptian Government concerning persons who were residents of Egypt prior to enlistment in the United States forces will be furnished before such persons are discharged.

Please accept [etc.]

Alexander Kirk

44 Latter not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 811.203/172: Telegram

[Document 105]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, December 5, 1942—3 p.m.

1565. Department’s no. 1200, October 6, 10 p.m. Please report what progress has been made in negotiating an informal agreement with the Egyptian authorities according to American military authorities exclusive jurisdiction in criminal matters over military personnel.

Hull

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 811.203/201: Telegram

[Document 106]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, December 12, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received December 13—6:06 p.m.]

2177. My 2147, December 7, 11 a.m.45 Subsequent receipt Department’s 1200, October 6, 10 p.m., and after several conferences with legal department United States Army Headquarters, I addressed note to Prime Minister on October 27 along lines indicated my 1704, September 25, 5 [4] p.m. On November 27 Prime Minister handed me informally for study draft note he proposed to send in reply embodying modified procedure more restricted than that suggested in my note. This draft has since been under study by army headquarters and on December 6 I received letter from them asking me to attempt to persuade Egyptian authorities to change their proposed procedure in two respects as follows: (1) Egyptian proposal concedes to American military (Army and Navy) authorities jurisdiction over crimes and misdemeanors but reserves right when aggrieved party is civilian (a) to determine whether crime or offense was committed in or out of line of duty and (b) when out of line of duty to decide whether accused will be tried by mixed courts or handed over to American military authorities for trial. Our military authorities maintain that uniformed military personnel are always on duty and desire complete jurisdiction over such personnel regardless of whether aggrieved party is military or civilian. In order to obtain such jurisdiction they are prepared to agree to Egyptian proposal as regards American civilian personnel of the Army and Navy. Our efforts to obtain complete exemption of military personnel from Egyptian jurisdiction will be prejudiced by two recent incidents which have aroused Egyptian resentment, (a) Killing of Egyptian at Alexandria by Greek sailor absent without leave, the Greek authorities claiming that sailor was still on duty and Egyptian authorities that he was not and (b) by two deaths of Egyptians in Cairo as a result of misconduct of Australian soldiers.

[(2)] Egyptian proposal provides for joint American-Egyptian claims commission sitting with neutral member in case of disagreement to assess damages for civilian victims of misconduct. Our military state that Secretary of War has already appointed Claims Commission for Middle East which is empowered to make settlements of $1000 or less and desire that this Commission function for claims with proviso that if Egyptian Government feels its awards are unjust it may make diplomatic representations for reconsideration and redress. Egyptian desire for joint commission is motivated by experience with British Military Claims Commission which Egyptians allege has not only been illiberal but dilatory in paying awards.

I am taking up these points with Prime Minister in the hope of obtaining his concurrence. He himself desires to do all he can for us in this matter but in view of unfortunate experiences with other military authorities in matters of jurisdiction and in view of strong stand which he took for the abolition of capitulatory regime in Egypt, he finds himself in difficult position as regards our request. It seems certain that he cannot agree to granting same rights and privileges which British enjoys. This, however, is not entirely objectional as our military authorities do not require or desire all the rights and privileges accorded to British.

While it is highly desirable that this matter be cleared up as soon as possible, no practical difficulties are being encountered in absence of agreement as our military authorities are assuming jurisdiction over our military personnel without protest from Egyptian authorities. Although there have been numerous minor but aggravating offenses by our troops, such as drunkenness, molestations and brandishing of fire arms, luckily no serious cases have arisen. I have tried to impress upon General Andrews46 importance of exemplary conduct on part of our officers and men especially toward Egyptians and necessity of prompt and adequate punishment of offenders. In view of importance of maintaining our very friendly relations with the Egyptians and the esteem in which Americans have hitherto been held in Egypt, it might be very helpful if the Department would likewise express similar views to the War Department.

Kirk

45 Not printed.

46 Gen. Frank M. Andrews, Commanding General, United States Army Forces in the Middle East, succeeding General Maxwell in November 1942.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 811.203/201: Telegram

[Document 107]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, December 23, 1942—4 p.m.

1653. The viewpoint expressed in the last sentence of section 2 of your no. 2177 of December 12, 6 p.m., has been discussed informally with the War Department, which states that it appreciates the necessity for exemplary conduct on the part of its personnel and that American troops in Egypt are under standing instructions with respect thereto.

Hull

Representations by the Egyptian Government regarding effect on Egyptian cotton trade of reciprocal trade agreement between the United States and PeruRepresentations by the Egyptian Government regarding effect on Egyptian cotton trade of reciprocal trade agreement between the United States and Peru

[108] The Egyptian Minister (Hassan) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 25, 1942.

611.836/13

[109] The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Minister (Hassan)

Washington, December 3, 1942.

611.836/13

The Egyptian Minister (Hassan) to the Secretary of State 611.836/13

[Document 108]

The Egyptian Minister (Hassan) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 25, 1942.

Sir: I have the honour to inform you that the Royal Egyptian Government has carefully studied the text of the reciprocal trade agreement between the United States and Peru signed May 7th, 194247 and has come to the conclusion that the terms of the agreement relating to the importation of long-staple cotton (cotton having a staple of one and one-eight inches or more in length) will be detrimental to the Egyptian cotton trade with the United States. The enclosed memorandum explains the findings of the competent Egyptian Government Agencies.

Viewing the situation with grave concern, my Government has instructed me, in bringing this matter to the attention of the United States Government, to point out that, while fully recognizing the exigencies of the moment, it hopes that a more equitable solution could be found by the United States competent authorities which might alleviate the harmful effects inflicted on a friendly country whose national wealth depends primarily on cotton.

Thanking you in anticipation for the attention you may give this matter, I seize this opportunity [etc.]

Hassan

[Enclosure]

Memorandum by the Egyptian Legation

Egypt has always been and still is a purely agricultural country. Agriculture constitutes over 90% of its economic activities. Cotton, although using only a little over 30% of its arable land, is by far the most important crop from an income point of view as it yields the nation about 50% of all agricultural income. Egypt consumes less than 5% of its cotton for domestic industry and the country depends completely on the export of its cotton.

While Peruvian cotton constitutes a substantial item in Peru’s wealth, Egyptian cotton is the life of Egypt’s economic existence. The following comparisons corroborate this statement:

Peru’s cotton accounts for 58 percent of the value of Peru’s total agricultural exports, while Egypt’s cotton accounts for 75½ percent of the value of Egypt’s total agricultural exports. The value of the Egyptian cotton exports in 1939 (the last normal year) was over 24 million Egyptian pounds while the total value of Egypt’s agricultural exports was 32 millions.

Still more striking is the comparison of cotton to the total value of exports of the two countries. Egypt’s cotton constitutes 71½ percent of the total value of its exports. In 1939, the value of Egypt’s cotton exports was over 24 million Egyptian pounds while all exports amounted to 34 million Egyptian pounds. In the same year, the value of Peru’s cotton exports was only 19½ percent of the total value of its exports. The value of Peru’s cotton exports was 75 million Sols while the value of her total exports was 380 million Sols.

Before the reciprocal trade agreement between the United States and Peru, signed on May 7th, 1942, the quota for Egyptian long staple cotton was 43½ million pounds while it was only about 2 millions for Peru. The global quota introduced into the new agreement will greatly increase Peru’s share of the quota at the expense of Egypt. In the first place, Peru’s 35,000 bales (17,500,000) of Pima, of which only 10% is consumed domestically, could all be exported to the United States. Peru’s exports of Pima which is the direct competitor of Egyptian cotton is about 15,000,000 pounds or 33 percent of the global quota. In the second place, demand for Tanguis cotton is increasing in the United States, while the pre-war markets for this Peruvian cotton are no longer available. The increase in the sale of Tanguis to the United States will, therefore, cut still deeper into the global quota. It is even feasible that the exports of both Pima and Tanguis to the United States could fill the whole of the global quota, leaving very little for Egypt which enjoyed about 95 percent of the total of individual quotas which were in force before the signing of the reciprocal trade agreement between the United States and Peru. It is, therefore, apparent that this agreement is most harmful to the vital interests of Egypt.

It seems, therefore, that the correctional measure for an equitable solution would be either a substantial increase in the global quota or its entire abolishment.

47 For text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 256, or 56 Stat. (pt. 2) 1509; for correspondence regarding the negotiation of this agreement, see vol. vi, pp. 674 ff.

The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Minister (Hassan) 611.836/13

[Document 109]

The Secretary of State to the Egyptian Minister (Hassan)

Washington, December 3, 1942.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of September 25, 1942, in which you state that your Government has come to the conclusion that the terms of the agreement relating to the importation of long-staple cotton (cotton having a staple of one and one-eighth inches or more in length) will be detrimental to the Egyptian cotton trade with the United States and express the hope that a more equitable solution could be found by the competent authorities of this Government. In the memorandum accompanying the note it is stated that it would seem that the correctional measure for an equitable solution would be either a substantial increase in the global quota or its entire abolishment.

I have the honor to inform you that the contents of your note and accompanying memorandum are being submitted to the appropriate authorities of this Government for their consideration, and that full reply will be made as soon as their views are known.

With respect to your Government’s fear that the bulk of the quota will be filled by Peruvian cotton, it should be noted that large amounts of Egyptian cotton are required in the production of certain types of war equipment. Moreover, the shipping situation has tended to favor the importation of Egyptian cotton rather than Peruvian cotton, and both general imports and imports for consumption into the United States of Egyptian cotton have continued at a high rate since the effective date of the trade agreement with Peru.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
Dean Acheson

Representations by the Egyptian Minister regarding an article in Time alleged to be derogatory to the King of EgyptRepresentations by the Egyptian Minister regarding an article in Time alleged to be derogatory to the King of Egypt

[110] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 16, 1942.

811.917 Time/56

[111] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 18, 1942.

811.917 Time/57

[112] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, March 5, 1942—noon. [Received March 6—4:37 a.m.]

811.917 Time/60: Telegram

[113] The Tinder Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt

Washington, March 7, 1942.

811.917 Time/60½

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 811.917 Time/56

[Document 110]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 16, 1942.

Mr. Welles: The Egyptian Minister telephoned me yesterday to inform me of the “protest” which he said he had made to you as a result of an article in Time magazine, entitled “Farouk the Foolish”.

The Minister held forth at some length over what he regarded as an insult to his Sovereign, and stated that during his discussion of the matter with you he had referred to the public apology made by the President when the same magazine had insulted the President of Chile. He added that you had thereupon expressed your deep regrets over the incident involving King Farouk.

The Minister then revealed the real purpose of his call; namely, to obtain some public expression of the regrets which he said you expressed to him during the course of your conversation.

I would appreciate an indication from you as to whether you wish the matter pursued further or whether you desire to let it drop.48 In such cases, the representative of an oriental government is under pressure to obtain publicity calculated to offset the publicity complained of, consequently I presume that Hassan Bey will keep after me in this matter until I am in a position to give him some reply.

Wallace Murray

48 Attached is a memorandum by Mr. Welles dated February 17: “I am sorry not to be able to oblige the Egyptian Minister, but in the interest of Egypt itself I think it wise to let this matter drop and give no more publicity.”

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 811.917 Time/57

[Document 111]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 18, 1942.

Mr. Welles: I discussed this matter with the Egyptian Minister today, and I think I managed to persuade him that it would be better not to give the incident any further publicity.

The Minister informed me, incidentally, that a representative of Time magazine had come to Washington at his request to discuss the whole question, and that he has been assured that the magazine will make “amends” of some kind in a subsequent issue.

Wallace Murray

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 811.917 Time/60: Telegram

[Document 112]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 49

Cairo, March 5, 1942—noon.
[Received March 6—4:37 a.m.]

365. Although insofar as I am aware the article on Egypt published in foreign news of Time of February 16 has not yet been commented on officially here, it is likely that the state of indignation which similar reflections provoked in the past may be cumulative in the present instance. Accordingly I should appreciate receiving any observations the Department may care to make on the deplorable manifestation of bad taste which can serve no other purpose than to agitate further a state of affairs already more turbid than is compatible with the realization of the maximum war effort in this area.

Kirk

49 President Roosevelt saw this telegram and on March 7 wrote to Welles: “What are you doing about this? F.D.R.” (811.917 Time/60½)

The Tinder Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt 811.917 Time/60½

[Document 113]

The Tinder Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt

Washington, March 7, 1942.

My Dear Mr. President: In reply to the inquiry contained in your memorandum of March 750 as to what I have done with regard to the offensive article concerning the King of Egypt published in the February 16 issue of Time, I may say that immediately after the publication of this issue of Time the Egyptian Minister called to see me.

I expressed to the Minister my very deep regret that an article of this character which reflected upon the King of Egypt should have been published in an American magazine. I told him that I would make my views known to the editor of Time. The Minister said that he had already received word from the chief editor of Time that he was coming down to Washington to call upon the Minister to express the regret of the Board of Editors that this article had been published.

Subsequently I myself spoke with two of the editors of Time and made it clear to them that the policy they were pursuing by publishing articles of this character, which had in the past created and still were creating such deep resentment on the part of people of friendly countries, was doing a very serious disservice to the highest interests of the United States at a peculiarly critical moment.

Since that time they have consulted me on three or four occasions with regard to questionable material that they had ready for publication, and on two of these occasions when I expressed my strong objection to publication of this material the material has not been published.

In conclusion I may say that the Minister appeared to be satisfied with the apologies tendered him by the editor of the magazine.

Do you think of anything further which I might usefully do?

Believe me

Faithfully yours,

Sumner Welles

50 See footnote 49, p. 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112].

Ethiopia:Ethiopia:

Contents

Consideration by the Department of State of the resumption of diplomatic representation in EthiopiaConsideration by the Department of State of the resumption of diplomatic representation in Ethiopia

[114] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] March 6, 1942.

124.84/157

[115] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] March 9, 1942.

124.84/157

[116] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Shaw)

[Washington,] March 11, 1942.

124.84/157

[117] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] March 18, 1942.

124.84/157

[118] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Asmara (Smith)

Washington, April 18, 1942.

125.146 P 7/3b

[119] The Chargé in Egypt (Jacobs) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 12, 1942—1 p.m. [Received May 13—3:48 p.m.]

124.84/159: Telegram

[120] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, May 15, 1942—5 p.m.

123 SM 511/390: Telegram

[121] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 5, 1942—5 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/22070a: Telegram

[122] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 9, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 8 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/22132: Telegram

[123] The Consul at Asmara (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Asmara, August 8, 1942. [Received August 24.]

884.00/525

[124] The Consul at Asmara (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Asmara, August 12, 1942. [Received August 24.]

884.00/524

[125] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, October 2, 1942—8 p.m. [Received October 4—4:34 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24641: Telegram

[126] The Consul at Asmara (Smith) to the Secretary of State

Asmara, October 13, 1942. [Received October 27.]

124.84/165

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) 124.84/157

[Document 114]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)1

[Washington,] March 6, 1942.

Major Chapman-Andrews, a British officer who accompanied the Emperor Haile Selassie on his return to Ethiopia and who took part in the negotiation of the recent Anglo-Ethiopian agreement,2 has given our Legation at Cairo some interesting background regarding that agreement.

According to Major Chapman-Andrews, there was a very great difference of opinion between the British Foreign Office and War Office with respect to the arrangement which should be made with Ethiopia. The War Office favored a virtual protectorate, arguing that, given the chaotic condition of the country and the incapacity of the population, close British control would be advantageous to both parties. The Foreign Office, however, felt that emphasis should be laid on independence, rather than control, and argued that it would set a bad political precedent to deny independence to the first country to be freed from Axis rule. It was further pointed out that a protectorate would require large expenditures of British funds and the use of a large British administrative personnel together with a considerable number of troops, who could ill be spared. After a hard struggle, the Foreign Office viewpoint was substantially adopted.

Under the new agreement, Major Chapman-Andrews said, the old capitulatory régime is abolished, although British judges will sit on certain Ethiopian courts and foreigners may demand trial before those courts. He admitted that the negotiators had overlooked the question of American capitulatory rights and said that it seemed quite possible that those rights remained legally in force, since the United States has never ceased to recognize the Ethiopian Government. American diplomatic representation at Addis Ababa would be welcomed, he said. Such representation will be restricted for the duration of the war to allied belligerents of the United Nations.

A force of British troops will remain in Ethiopia for the time being, especially in the area adjoining French Somaliland. The British will also continue to administer the Ogaden province, but without prejudice to Ethiopian sovereignty over that area. Eritrea is entirely outside the scope of the agreement, although after the war it is possible that concessions will be made to give Ethiopia an outlet to the sea.

The principal problem confronting Haile Selassie’s government, Major Chapman-Andrews feels, is financial, since the amount of the British subsidy granted by the agreement is very small. Politically, he may also have considerable difficulty with certain disaffected leaders, but it seems probable that he will be able to handle this situation.

Wallace Murray

1 Addressed to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) and the Under Secretary of State (Welles).

2 Signed at Addis Ababa, January 31, 1942, British and Foreign State Papers, vol. cxliv, p. 989.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) 124.84/157

[Document 115]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] March 9, 1942.

Mr. Murray: I think Dr. Berle is right.3 My thought would be that if we have some appropriate officer who can be spared in the Near East we could reopen our mission in Addis Ababa with a Chargé d’Affaires.

Please consult Dr. Berle and Mr. Shaw4 and let me have your joint recommendations so that I may take the matter up with the President.

S[umner] W[elles]

3 Attached to Mr. Murray’s memorandum, supra, is a handwritten notation by the Assistant Secretary of State, Adolf A. Berle, Jr., dated March 9, as follows: “I think we should promptly consider setting up diplomatic representation at Addis Ababa”.

4 G. Howland Shaw, Assistant Secretary of State.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Shaw) 124.84/157

[Document 116]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Shaw)

[Washington,] March 11, 1942.

Mr. Shaw: Please note the attached memoranda from Mr. Welles5 and Mr. Berle6 suggesting that our Mission at Addis Ababa be reopened.

As you know, a consulate is about to be established at Asmara, and it has been our thought that the consular officer there could proceed to Addis Ababa from time to time to investigate the local situation and report thereon. In that way we could be kept adequately informed of developments during the present transition period.

It is not yet clear how the new government at Addis Ababa is going to work out, and my own view is that we would be somewhat premature in establishing full diplomatic relations until such time as we can see the situation more clearly. Furthermore, as you know, there is a great shortage of officers in the Near East, and many of our missions and consular officers are greatly under-staffed. With the opening of new missions and consulates at Jidda, Kabul, Tabriz, Basra, and Asmara, there has been an additional demand for officers, and I really do not see where the personnel required for Addis Ababa could be obtained at the present time. I would suggest, therefore, that we might in due course request an exequatur for use at Addis Ababa for our Consul at Asmara. So far as his functions at Asmara are concerned no exequatur has been requested, nor, apparently, is one required. I believe that the arrangement proposed would meet the situation until such time as we can see more clearly what is required at Addis Ababa or until adequate personnel may become available.

Wallace Murray

5  Supra.

6 See footnote 3, above.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 124.84/157

[Document 117]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)7 to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] March 18, 1942.

Mr. Welles: As you will observe from the attached memoranda,8 Mr. Berle and Mr. Shaw share our view that it would be best, for the time being at least, to handle matters relating to Ethiopia through our Consulate at Asmara, which is about to be established. Within the next two or three months it should be possible for the Consul at Asmara to visit Addis Ababa, and we can then judge from his reports whether the establishment of a diplomatic mission there is necessary or desirable. Furthermore, within that same period of time personnel for the staffing of an office at Addis Ababa should become available, which is not the case at the present moment. Therefore, if you agree we shall proceed on the basis outlined herein.9

Paul H. Alling

7 Paul H. Alling was appointed Chief of the Division March 13, 1942; Wallace Murray was appointed Adviser on Political Relations on the same date.

8 Not printed.

9 Marginal note: “O.K. SW”

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Asmara (Smith) 125.146 P 7/3b

[Document 118]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Asmara (Smith)

Washington, April 18, 1942.

Sir: Reference is made to the Department’s instruction of January 9, 1942 to you10 with regard to the establishment of the American Consulate at Asmara.

It has now been decided that the Asmara consular district will consist of Eritrea, Ethiopia and Italian Somaliland, all of which are at the present time occupied by British military forces.

There is enclosed a copy of an instruction which has been addressed to the American Embassy in London11 on this subject.

You are hereby instructed to visit Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, at some convenient time after your arrival at Asmara. During this trip you are requested to investigate and report on conditions in Ethiopia, and to supply the Department with pertinent information regarding the desirability of establishing a permanent diplomatic mission in that country.

The expenses of your transportation and per diem for this trip, under the provision of the Travel Regulations, should be charged to your regular contingent expense allotment. If additional funds are required you should request an increase in your allotment for travel.

You will be furnished with a separate commission covering Ethiopia which, upon your arrival at Addis Ababa, you will present to the appropriate official of the Ethiopian Government with a request that you be furnished an exequatur covering Ethiopia.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
G. Howland Shaw

10 Not printed.

11 Instruction No. 1302, April 18, not printed.

The Chargé in Egypt (Jacobs) to the Secretary of State 124.84/159: Telegram

[Document 119]

The Chargé in Egypt (Jacobs) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 12, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received May 13—3:48 p.m.]

760. Ato Tesfaye Tegagn, personal representative of Haile Selassie, now in Cairo British representatives from Ethiopia attending meetings of Middle East Supply Council, called today to ask Legation to transmit to the President a letter of good will from the Emperor.12 This communication, which contains no request but emphasizes Ethiopian independence will be forwarded in next pouch.

In presenting this letter Tesfaye stated Emperor had instructed him to inquire whether United States might be considering reestablishment of diplomatic relations with Ethiopia which Emperor would heartily welcome. I told Tesfaye Legation had no information on this subject. I did not tell him I would refer his inquiry to Department but if Department has any plans in regard to this matter which it might desire to have communicated to Emperor through Tesfaye, he will be in Cairo until about May 17 or 18.

Jacobs

12 Dated May 1, p. 112 [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 123 SM 511/390: Telegram

[Document 120]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, May 15, 1942—5 p.m.

435. Your 760, May 12, 1 p.m. Talbot Smith, assigned Consul at Asmara, has been instructed to visit Addis Ababa some time after arrival at his post in order to request exequatur covering Ethiopian territory. You may convey this to Tesfaye in your discretion.

For your confidential information, Smith has also been requested to report upon the desirability of reestablishing our diplomatic mission in Ethiopia.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 740.0011 European War 1939/22070a: Telegram

[Document 121]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, June 5, 1942—5 p.m.

520. This Government is considering the question of adherence by Ethiopia to the Declaration by United Nations.13 A few days ago the Department cabled the Embassy in London14 stating that if Ethiopia is in fact at war against the Axis nations and is or may be “rendering material assistance and contributions”, it would be advantageous to have associated formally with the United Nations the first state to fall as a result of Axis aggression. The Ambassador was requested to ascertain informally the views of the British Government.

We have a reply15 to the effect that if Ethiopia should express a desire to adhere to the Declaration, the British would raise no objection. However, the British appear to be adverse to encouraging such initiative by Ethiopia because they feel it would lead to demands for material assistance now which might be difficult to furnish and probably to some territorial or other claims after the war as a reward for adherence. Furthermore, they feel it might lead to a desire by Ethiopia to play a more active role in the war, thus resulting in confusion and difficulties.

We should like your views on this question. The text of the Declaration was sent to you with instruction No. 116 of March 30.16

Hull

13 Signed January 1, 1942, vol. i, p. 25.

14 Telegram No. 2321, May 23, 1 p.m., not printed.

15 Telegram No. 2967, May 27, midnight, not printed.

16 Not printed.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/22132: Telegram

[Document 122]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, June 9, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 8 p.m.]

959. Department’s no. 520, June 5, 5 p.m. Aside from the British Minister of State and British officials passing through Cairo to and from Ethiopia, there are few direct sources of information here which might aid in forming opinions as to the merits of general or special questions of policy affecting Ethiopia. It is on that account that I welcome the decision communicated in Department’s 435, May 15, 5 p.m., to cause Mr. E. Talbot Smith to make a report on the advisability of reestablishing diplomatic relations with that country.

As regards the question of the adherence of Ethiopia to the Atlantic Charter,17 it would appear that from the point of view of present, as well as post-war consideration, the definite alignment with the United Nations of as many countries as possible offers distinct advantages and the arguments to the contrary suggested by the British, in so far as Ethiopia is concerned, should not in my opinion control. Judging from the past, governments which hope to obtain material assistance from the United States and Great Britain do not await encouragement to request such assistance, and the only danger in making any gesture which might be interpreted as an invitation to solicit aid, would lie in a lack of a sufficiently realistic sense on the part of the Allies to withhold such aid unless it affords an immediate and valuable contribution to the war effort. The same realistic sense should succeed in dealing with the other British arguments in this particular instance. Unless, therefore, other considerations of which I am unaware are involved, I see no reason why the adherence to the Atlantic Charter of Ethiopia as well as of other countries should be discouraged or in fact why it should not be discreetly encouraged.

Kirk

17 In telegram No. 1033, June 19, 9 p.m., the Minister in Egypt advised the Department, “In my No. 959, June 9, 10 a.m., for ‘Atlantic Charter’ please read ‘Declaration by United Nations’ throughout.” (740.0011 European War 1939/22337)

The Consul at Asmara (Smith) to the Secretary of State 884.00/525

[Document 123]

The Consul at Asmara (Smith) to the Secretary of State

No. 9 Asmara, August 8, 1942.
[Received August 24.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that I have not yet had an opportunity to visit Addis Ababa, as directed in the Department’s instruction to me dated April 18, 1942, and received on July 3, 1942. I have not proceeded yet because: (1) The Commission referred to in the last paragraph of the Department’s instruction has not yet arrived.

(2) The work entailed in opening an office without furniture, without a clerk until July 20, and with only one typewriter (borrowed), while at the same time carrying on the routine work of the office has made my absence out of the question.

(3) The evacuees from Egypt have thrown a great amount of detailed work on the Consulate.

However, I have had many talks with British and American officers and civilians in regard to the situation now obtaining in Abyssinia, and am passing on to the Department what I have gleaned.

The British are withdrawing all, or practically all, of their military forces from Abyssinia, and are apparently … permitting the country to lapse into a state of chaos. The Abyssinians have large stores of arms and ammunition, as they have not only the supplies given the Patriot troops by the British, but also the enormous stores captured from Italian sources. To disarm the country would, of course, be a difficult undertaking, for an Abyssinian would part with all his possessions rather than give up his gun. I presume the British cannot afford to spare the troops necessary for this job.

… The British have complete control of all surrounding territories,—the Sudan on the west, Kenya on the south, Italian and British Somaliland on the east and Eritrea on the north,—so have nothing to fear from outside interference. Nor can additional arms and ammunition be introduced into the country. French Somaliland is not a source of danger, as it is completely isolated. After two or three years, they may decide the situation calls for interference. In the meantime, their troops are released for action elsewhere, they may pose as liberators of conquered peoples, and are not running any military risks. …

I am enclosing a copy of a report on conditions at Addis Ababa on [in] February of this year prepared by a young military officer.18 Conditions there described still obtain, according to visitors just returning from the city. It is unsafe to be out at night, shots are often heard in the city streets, and apparently the Negus’ hold is very dubious in the city itself and almost non-existent in the rest of the country.

The Italian missionaries have been ousted by the present regime. The Negus wishes the French missionaries who carried on their activities in Abyssinia before the Italian occupation, to return, but as the French missionaries are Vichy French, the British oppose such return. The Cardinal Secretary of State Maglione of the Vatican suggested to the Negus that he retain a skeleton staff of forty Italian clergy, but the Negus refused this request. The Eritrean Catholic Coptics are intriguing to have only native Abyssinian priests in Abyssinia. What the outcome will be, nobody knows.

Very respectfully yours,

E. Talbot Smith

18 Report by Capt. Paul M. Morrill; not printed.

The Consul at Asmara (Smith) to the Secretary of State 884.00/524

[Document 124]

The Consul at Asmara (Smith) to the Secretary of State

No. 11 Asmara, August 12, 1942.
[Received August 24.]

Subject: Comments on the Abyssinian Situation

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my despatch No. 9 dated August 8, 1942, on the above subject, and to report that Captain Morrill now says that according to conversations he has recently had, the dire predictions made in the second paragraph of his report of February 17, 1942, (the enclosure to my despatch) are not coming true. He states that the Emperor has dealt firmly with all attempts to undermine his authority and the central part of the country can now be considered under his control.

The Ethiopian army now consists of ten battalions, three of which are mounted. Their equipment is fair and their training has brought them to a fair standard of efficiency. The British Military Mission is headed by Major General Butler and consists of some eighty British officers and an equal number of N. C. O.’s. These troops have had some experience already in suppressing mutinous tribes and recently two battalions covered the distance from Addis Ababa to the country between Jijiga and Hargeisa in less than two days.

Some improvement has also been made in the upkeep of the roads, and travel, always under convoy, has often been undertaken between Asmara and Addis Ababa. Just at present, however, travel has been suspended, as being temporarily too dangerous.

I am taking the liberty of enclosing copies of the (1) Treaty Between His Majesty’s Government and the Emperor,19 (2) Administration of Justice Proclamation,20 and (3) the Military Convention Between His Majesty’s Government and the Emperor.21

Very respectfully yours,

E. Talbot Smith

19 Signed January 31, 1942, British and Foreign State Papers, vol. cxliv, p. 989.

20 This proclamation is an Annex to the treaty signed January 31, 1942, ibid.

21 Signed January 31, 1942, ibid., p. 997.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24641: Telegram

[Document 125]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, October 2, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received October 4—4:34 p.m.]

1746. Legation’s 1590, September 7.22 Letter received today from Smith at Asmara requests that Department be informed that he has returned traveling via the Addis-Asmara Road and resumed charge September 27.

He stated that he is working on report of his trip and requested that following message be sent to Department.

“It is my understanding that the Emperor of Ethiopia has asked President Roosevelt for permission to join the United Nations Pact.23 What is the status of this request? The admission of Ethiopia is regarded as conditioned upon a declaration of a state of war between Ethiopia and the Axis Powers. Favorable action would facilitate situation for all parties as otherwise Ethiopia is considered neutral.”

In connection with foregoing see my 1033, June 19, 9 p.m.24 and previous.

Kirk

22 Not printed.

23 See telegram from Emperor Haile Selassie to President Roosevelt, July 28, p. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130].

24 See footnote 17, p. 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122].

The Consul at Asmara (Smith) to the Secretary of State 124.84/165

[Document 126]

The Consul at Asmara (Smith) to the Secretary of State

No. 38 Asmara, October 13, 1942.
[Received October 27.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to the Department’s instruction dated April 18, 1942, instructing me to visit Addis Ababa and to supply the Department with pertinent information regarding the desirability of establishing a permanent diplomatic mission in Ethiopia.

My despatch No. 37, dated October 8, 1942,22 entitled “Conditions in Ethiopia, September, 1942,” should be considered as background to this despatch. As I then reported, the Emperor, in his personal interviews with me, expressed disappointment that the American Government had not immediately reopened its legation as soon as the campaign had been completed. He reasoned that, as the American Government had never recognized the Italian conquest, it would be the first to reestablish its legation, and expressed his hope that it would be reopened in the near future. It was at my request that he furnish me with specific reasons for reopening the legation to present to my Government that he prepared the aide-mémoire attached.

Candor compels me to admit that present American interests in Ethiopia are so insignificant that they do not warrant the establishment of a mission. There are now twelve American citizens engaged in missionary work at Addis Ababa. The only other American in the country is the wife of a British Legation official, Mrs. D. M. H. Riches, the Second Secretary. She was formerly Miss Helen Hayes, American Clerk at the Legation at Cairo. American business interests are nil at present. Nor can I say whether the reasons for originally opening the legation in 1926 or 1927 still obtain, as I do not know the reasons for its being opened then.

However, I believe a mission, or at least a consulate, should be established at Addis Ababa to report the state of affairs and developments in Ethiopia, for otherwise the Department probably will secure only such information as is permitted to leak out of the country through the complete British control of the mails. …

As will be seen from my despatch, although Ethiopians nominally are again in control of their Government, Ethiopia is actually controlled almost completely by the British. They are organizing companies and the British Government has, in the case of the United Kingdom Commercial Corporation, even gone so far as to subsidize it by guaranteeing to make good any losses it may sustain. Subsidiary companies are being formed to work the banana fibre industry, to collect and export what crude rubber there is, and to undertake several other projects. These companies being organized in Ethiopia pay almost no taxes as compared to British companies organized in the United Kingdom. Yet, in spite of this activity, the British casually remark to me that, of course, until the war is over, little can be done to promote American trade and interests. Or shipping is not available and so business overseas is not now possible. But if it is possible for the British, why is it not possible for us? Is it because the shipping control is 100% in British hands?

In my opinion an American mission should be established to observe the developments in Ethiopia, and possibly to arrange for American interests to share in the development of the country. If the British can, at this time, spare the energy to organize as they are now doing, so can we! If we do not, I feel sure that the end of the war will find our British friends so strongly entrenched in Ethiopia that American interests will find little left. There are various concessions to be granted to develop the country, and I know of no reason why they should all be operated by the British.

Further, I believe that there is a great deal between the lines in the Emperor’s aide-mémoire, particularly his remark “the United States of America is expected to be represented in all the countries friendly to her with a view to observing whether international affairs are being conducted in a manner of friendship and equality in compliance with the sacred ideal for which the United Nations are fighting.” Does the Emperor suggest that he would like an American Legation established at Addis Ababa to observe the operation of his Government under the treaty of January 31, 1942? I feel sure, having interviewed him twice and having had several long conferences with his closest adviser, the Minister of the Pen, that this is exactly what he means.

The British Legation was reopened at Addis Ababa about April, and occupies its old compound some three or four miles out of the city proper. Mr. R. G. Howe, C. M. G., is the Minister and details of his career, together with the names and careers of other members of the Legation will be found in The Ethiopian Star, No. 12, Enclosure No. 7 of my despatch No. 37 of October 8, 1942. Mr. Howe is young for a minister, being a year younger than I.

The only other country now represented is Greece, being represented by a Greek Consul. He himself did not know how many Greeks were in the country, but the number is 500–700.

While I believe a legation should be established at Addis Ababa, to put us on an equal footing with the British, should the Department decide to postpone such action, the officer at Asmara can make periodic trips to Addis Ababa as I have done. I do not, however, recommend this, although it may enhance the prestige of this office. Communications between Asmara and Addis are very poor. A plane leaves Asmara for Addis Ababa once every two weeks, returning the following day, and this is the only regular service to the country from any direction! Connections with Nairobi simply do not exist. One might take a military convoy, but they run on no schedule, and one might wait weeks before finding one. The same holds true of travel between Asmara and Addis Ababa by road. I was ready to go for several weeks before I left, and had repeatedly asked the British authorities when their convoy was leaving for Addis Ababa. I finally gave up going by convoy and went by plane. Single cars are not allowed to make the trip.

With such poor connections, and with complete British censorship of the mail, it can readily be seen that the Consulate at Asmara cannot hope properly to cover developments in Ethiopia. But if the Department decides not to open a legation at Addis Ababa at the present time, I suggest that I be authorized to visit Addis Ababa twice a year at least, to gather information and report on conditions as I have done this time.

Very respectfully yours,

E. Talbot Smith

[Enclosure]

The Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) to the Consul at Asmara (Smith)

Aide-Mémoire

The Treaty of friendship between the United States of America and Ethiopia26 is still in force. This is significant from the fact that the Government of the United States of America refused to recognise to the aggressor a country which was invaded by force.

In no way has the relationship between the Government of the United States of America and the Imperial Ethiopian Government diminished as regards political and economical matters from what existed in the past. Ethiopia, one of the first victims of aggression, was the first to regain her independence with the assistance of the leading allied Governments who decided to make every sacrifice to meet the demands of this fearful war with a view to fighting for the salvation of the world and the restoration of the independence of the small nations. Under all circumstances Ethiopia is greatly attached to the people of the United States of America.

Ethiopia, after signing the treaty of alliance with Great Britain, has applied to the United States of America to be taken as a participator of the Sacred Atlantic Charter27 signed between Great Britian and the United States of America, the initiator of the Charter which the entire world is relying upon. Ethiopia is prepared to contribute towards the war effort to the extent that may be possible at present, and to greater extent after the war by placing her economical resources at the disposal of the United Nations. She is desirous of utilizing her resources in conjunction with the Governments friendly to her, and she is confident that some of the needs of the world could be met by this means.

Apart from raw material available in Ethiopia for exportation to the United States of America there are the possibilities of exploiting the various mineral wealth of the country in the future which must be considered from now on.

The United States of America entered the present war with the sole object of attaining victory for the allied nations and restoring complete independence to the countries overrun by the aggressors. She is despatching her troops in masses in order to achieve victory and lasting peace to all human beings. Under these circumstances the United States of America is expected to be represented in all the countries friendly to her with a view to observing whether international affairs are being conducted in a manner of friendship and equality in compliance with the sacred ideal for which the United Nations are fighting. The United States of America in addition to the war material she is providing for the fighting nations has been a great moral support to every country. At the end of the present war, Ethiopia, together with the other nations, will be one of the countries to adhere to a new and everbinding Kellogg Pact.28

In as much as it is desired that Ethiopia should be represented in the United States of America, it will be highly appreciated and regarded by the Imperial Ethiopian Government from both international and economical aspects as one of the most friendly gestures if the United States of America could see their way of reopening their Legation at Addis Ababa, which was nominally and temporarily closed, and send their accredited representative.

The results already achieved by the Grand Alliance formed by the United States of America for the salvation of the world will place American history on the front page of the annals of world history.

Addis Ababa, 22 September, 1942.

22 Not printed.

26 Signed at Addis Ababa, June 27, 1914, Foreign Relations, 1920, vol. ii, p. 243.

27 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, ibid., 1941, vol. i, p. 367; accepted by the United Nations in Declaration of January 1, 1942, ibid., 1942, vol. i, p. 25,

28 Treaty for the renunciation of war, signed at Paris, August 27, 1928, Foreign Relations, 1928, vol. i, p. 153.

Exchange of messages between President Roosevelt and the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I); adherence of Ethiopia to the United Nations DeclarationExchange of messages between President Roosevelt and the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I); adherence of Ethiopia to the United Nations Declaration

[127] The Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) to President Roosevelt

Written in Addis-Abeba; this twenty third day of Mazia, in the Year of Grace One thousand nine hundred and thirty-four. (1st. May 1942)

711.84/30

[128] President Roosevelt to the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I)

Washington, July 23, 1942.

884.001 Selassie, Haile/374

[129] The Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) to President Roosevelt

Addis Ababa, July 28, 1942.

884.001 Selassie I/374: Telegram

[130] President Roosevelt to the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I)

Washington, October 9, 1942.

740.0011 European War 1939/24773a: Telegram

[131] Draft of Letter From President Roosevelt to the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I)

undated

884.001 Selassie I/376

[132] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, October 27, 1942.

884.001 Selassie I/377

The Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) to President Roosevelt 711.84/30

[Document 127]

The Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) to President Roosevelt 29

[Translation]30

Mr. President: The distinguished President Roosevelt, Your predecessor and relative, had said of my country that Ethiopia is a state as well as a nation, and that this nation should not be effaced from the world. These hopes have today been realized. My country has regained her self-government and independence. Ethiopia has recovered her independence firstly through God and secondly through her friends the British. Moreover, Mr. President, she has recovered it through You and your great people.

In this respect we cannot forget the assistance You have rendered and the sympathy and friendship which You expressed during the period of our struggle for life and independence. Your country has confirmed to us through its action during the time of our difficulties that it is the guardian of true justice and good deeds. Your country has never recognized the Empire which Italy acquired by force, or the fruit of aggression. This has been to us great comfort and we shall never forget it. It will remain in the heart of Ethiopians from generation to generation. For this reason therefore, allow me to express to You the heartfelt thanks and indebtedness of myself and my people.

At this moment when Ethiopia is having her wounds dressed, war is consuming the world like fire, and spreading its work of destruction has reached Your great country. Nevertheless You have done everything to save the world from the terrible scourge. What have you not done, what have you not accomplished to this end? The renowned Messages which You sent forth to prevent war, and your heroic efforts of mediation failed to bear the fruit which they deserve. Your efforts have not been appreciated amongst the cruel, indeed they waged war upon You as is their custom by ruse and rejection of justice. And I marvel at the cool and steadfast stand which your people have made in the face of this affront. It is clear that when today the American People are thoroughly moved they are so not only for their own independence, their own honour and their own life, but also for the independence, the honour and the life of other peoples. Ethiopia is solidly with your respected country and the gallant British people, and if necessary is prepared to accomplish the supreme sacrifice.

There is no doubt, Mr. President, as to how this war will end. God is ever on the side of true justice which we all follow. Ethiopia subjected to Fascist oppression is the first country to receive true justice. Her conscience had been calm. Similarly God will in the near future show us the victory of the true justice the destruction of war-mongers, and the restoration of the independence of peoples who have fallen beneath the yoke of slavery. In this we have deep and certain confidence.

Written in Addis-Abeba; this twenty third day of Mazia, in the Year of Grace One thousand nine hundred and thirty-four. (1st. May 1942)

Haile Selassie I.

29 Transmitted to the Department by the Minister in Egypt in his despatch No. 387, May 18, 1942; received May 28.

30 This translation was furnished by the Emperor’s representative, Tsefaye Tegagn, when he presented the original. Original text not in Department files.

President Roosevelt to the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) 884.001 Selassie, Haile/374

[Document 128]

President Roosevelt to the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I)31

Washington, July 23, 1942.

My Dear Emperor Haile Selassie: May I send you this personal word to tell you how happy I am in your return to Addis Ababa.

I shall always remember the visit of your distinguished son-in-law, The Ras Desta Demptu, to the White House in 1933. I found him a most interesting man and I was very glad to have the privilege of talking with him on many subjects. I heard afterwards that he was finally run down and killed by the Italians in a remote part of Ethiopia while he was still carrying on a brave resistance against the invaders. I am terribly sorry.

Very sincerely yours,

Franklin D. Roosevelt

31 The President drafted this letter and asked the Under Secretary of State (Welles) “What do you think of my sending the enclosed?” On July 24 Welles indicated his approval and stated: “As you know, there have been various indications that the British Government intended to seize the present opportunity for establishing what would be tantamount to a protectorate over Abyssinia and I consequently feel that your suggested letter would serve a highly useful purpose as an indication of the policy of this Government with regard to the first victim of Axis aggression.” (884.001 Selassie I/373½, 375½) The signed original was sent to Welles on July 24 for delivery.

The Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) to President Roosevelt 884.001 Selassie I/374: Telegram

[Document 129]

The Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) to President Roosevelt 32

Addis Ababa, July 28, 1942.

My Government and people are anxious to assume the obligations of the United Nations pact.33 We the first nation to regain its freedom and independence wish to place the military and economic resources of our country at the disposal of those nations who gladly sacrifice all for liberty and justice.

Haile Selassie

32 Copy sent to the Department by the President’s personal secretary, Miss Grace Tully.

33 Declaration by the United Nations, January 1, 1942, vol. i, p. 25.

President Roosevelt to the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) 740.0011 European War 1939/24773a: Telegram

[Document 130]

President Roosevelt to the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I)

Washington, October 9, 1942.

I have received Your Majesty’s telegram34 stating that your Government and people are anxious to assume the obligations of the Declaration by United Nations and that Ethiopia desires to place its military and economic resources at the disposal of the nations which gladly sacrifice all for liberty and justice.

It is gratifying to accept the adherence of Ethiopia to the Declaration by United Nations;35 to welcome as one of the United Nations the first state to regain its territory after temporary occupation by an Axis aggressor. You may be sure that there is deep appreciation for your offer to place at the disposal of the United Nations the military and economic resources of Ethiopia for use in the struggle against the common enemy.

Franklin D. Roosevelt

34 Dated July 28, supra.

35 The concurrence of the British, Chinese, and Soviet Governments in the adherence of Ethiopia had been given.

Draft of Letter From President Roosevelt to the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I) 884.001 Selassie I/376

[Document 131]

Draft of Letter From President Roosevelt to the Emperor of Ethiopia (Haile Selassie I)36

undated

Your Imperial Majesty: I have received with great pleasure your kind letters of May 1, 1942 and of August 10, 194237 and thank you for your gracious remarks in regard to the American people.

It is a source of much satisfaction to me and to the people of the United States that your country, which fought so courageously against a ruthless enemy, has regained its territorial sovereignty and self-government. The steadfast friendship of the American people and their sympathy with you in your period of trial will continue to be manifested during the days to come. That you and the gallant people of Ethiopia are determined as ever to defend your land and are willing to share in the joint sacrifices required to restore law and order in international relations is abundantly clear from the adherence of Ethiopia to the Declaration by United Nations.

I look forward to the day when, by reason of their sacrifices, the peoples of our respective countries will be free to resume the labors of peace and to harvest in bountiful measure the fruits of justice and good deeds.

In this spirit I send you greetings.

Your Good Friend,

36 Apparently signed by the President on October 23, 1942.

37 Latter not found in Department files.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 884.001 Selassie I/377

[Document 132]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

No. 280 Washington, October 27, 1942.

There are enclosed two communications addressed by the President to His Imperial Majesty Haile Selassie I, Emperor of Ethiopia.38 It is desired that these two communications be forwarded by the Legation to the Consul at Asmara, Eritrea, by safe means and that the Legation request the Consul at Asmara to arrange for the transmission of these communications by safe means to the Emperor of Ethiopia at Addis Ababa.39

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Sumner Welles

38 Dated July 23, and October 23, p. 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130] and supra, respectively.

39 The letters were delivered to the Emperor on December 3, 1942, by Colonel Clark of the American Mission at Asmara.

Representations by the United States regarding certain exclusive features of the Anglo-Ethiopian Treaty of January 31, 1942Representations by the United States regarding certain exclusive features of the Anglo-Ethiopian Treaty of January 31, 1942

[133] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington, October 22, 1942.

884.796/12

[134] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

Washington , November 16, 1942.

884.796/13

[135] The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington, December 17, 1942.

884.796/13

[136] The British Minister (Campbell) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, December 29, 1942.

884.796/14

[137] The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the British Minister (Campbell)

Washington, January 11, 1943.

884.796/14

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 884.796/12

[Document 133]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington, October 22, 1942.

Excellency: The attention of your Excellency is invited to Article XI (c) of the Agreement between the United Kingdom and Ethiopia, signed January 31, 1942,40 in which it is stated that the Emperor of Ethiopia will not permit foreign aircraft, other than British aircraft, to fly to, in, or over Ethiopia without the concurrence of the Government of the United Kingdom.

In an aide-mémoire which this Department delivered to your Embassy on May 27, 194241 in reply to one from your Embassy of April 15, 1942,42 this Department referred to the air transport situation in the Near and Middle East and Africa, and expressed the hope that neither the Government of the United Kingdom nor the Government of the United States would set up arrangements which would exclude in these areas air transport lines of the other, except after consultation through diplomatic channels. In your Embassy’s aide-mémoire of July 28, 1942,43 it was stated that His Majesty’s Government concurred in this principle. In the circumstances it is assumed that your Government has no intention of opposing the granting to United States aviation interests of an equality of opportunity in Ethiopia.

I shall greatly appreciate it if you will inform me whether the provision in the Agreement with Ethiopia referred to above is to be interpreted by your Government in the manner indicated.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
A. A. Berle, Jr.

40 Signed at Addis Ababa, British and Foreign State Papers, vol. cxliv, p. 989.

41  Ante, p. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15].

42 Unauthenticated copies in the files of the Department are not printed.

43  Ante, p. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16].

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State 884.796/13

[Document 134]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to the Secretary of State

No. 913

His Majesty’s Ambassador presents his compliments to the Secretary of State, and has the honour to refer to Mr. Hull’s note of October 22nd on the subject of Article 11 (c) of the Agreement of January 31st, 1942 between the United Kingdom and Ethiopia.

Lord Halifax has been instructed to point out that negotiations leading to the signature of this Agreement were started and practically completed before the entry of the United States into the war. However, notwithstanding the terms of paragraph (c) of Article 11 of the Agreement, His Majesty’s Government have no intention, when dealing with the question of flights of United States aircraft across Ethiopia, of departing from the terms of the Embassy Aide-Mémoire of July 28th, 1942.44 Furthermore they are prepared now and at all times to facilitate as far as they can any United States air operations which are necessary for the successful prosecution of the war.

Washington , November 16, 1942.

44  Ante, p. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16].

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax) 884.796/13

[Document 135]

The Secretary of State to the British Ambassador (Halifax)

Washington, December 17, 1942.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s note of November 16, 1942, relative to the Agreement of January 31, 1942 between the United Kingdom and Ethiopia, Article XI (c) of which deals with air transport operating rights in Ethiopia, in which you indicated that His Majesty’s Government has no intention, when dealing with the question of flights of United States aircraft across Ethiopia, of departing from the terms of the Embassy’s aide-mémoire of July 28, 1942.44

I assume that the word “across” covers the three cases specified in the exact language of Article XI (c) of the Agreement referred to, which provides that the Emperor of Ethiopia will not permit foreign aircraft, other than British aircraft, to fly to, in or over Ethiopia without the concurrence of the Government of the United Kingdom. As it is understood that your Government has no intention of opposing the granting to United States aviation interests of equality of opportunity in Ethiopia, and in order that there may be no misunderstanding, I should appreciate confirmation that my interpretation of your Government’s policy, as indicated in your note of November 16, 1942, is correct.

Accept [etc.]

For the Secretary of State:
A. A. Berle, Jr.

44  Ante, p. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16].

The British Minister (Campbell) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 884.796/14

[Document 136]

The British Minister (Campbell) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, December 29, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Assistant-Secretary: I am writing to you on the subject of the State Department’s official note No. 844.00/53745 of December 17th regarding air transport rights in Ethiopia.

The word “across” does not appear in our original instructions from the Foreign Office. It was inserted by the drafter of our note No. 913 of November 16th, in a mistaken endeavour to make the position clear. Our instructions from the Foreign Office on this point read as follows:— “Notwithstanding the terms of paragraph (c) of Article 11, we have no intention as regards United States aircraft to depart from the terms of your aide-mémoire of July 25th [28th],46 and we are prepared now and at all times, etc.”

You can therefore be assured that no special significance attaches to the use in our note No. 913 of the word “across”. You may think it desirable that we should send you a revised text of the aide-mémoire of November 16th, substituting for the words “when dealing with the question of flights of United States aircraft across Ethiopia”, the words “as regards United States aircraft”. Perhaps you would let me know?

Very sincerely yours,

R. I. Campbell

45 Now filed under 884.796/13, printed supra.

46  Ante, p. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16].

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the British Minister (Campbell) 884.796/14

[Document 137]

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the British Minister (Campbell)

Washington, January 11, 1943.

My Dear Sir Ronald: I acknowledge the receipt of your communication of December 29, 1942 concerning the Department’s note of December 17, 1942 to the Embassy, relative to the interpretation of the Agreement of January 31, 1942 between the United Kingdom and Ethiopia as it affects American aviation interests.

It is observed that in the submission of the Embassy’s note of November 16, 1942 there was no intention of departing from the terms of the aide-mémoire exchanged between the Department and your Embassy, which dealt with the subject of air transportation in Africa. Under the circumstances, it is felt that the placing of your explanation on record in the Department will be sufficient and that it will not be necessary to submit a revised text of the Embassy’s note of November 16, last.

Sincerely yours,

A. A. Berle, Jr.

Iran:Iran:

Contents

I. Participation of the United States in decisions regarding supply and distribution of food for Iran (Documents 138-144)

II. Iranian appeals for direct American aid; complaints by Iranians and by American Minister in Iran concerning British economic policies in Iran (Documents 145-173)

III. Negotiation of agreement between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Iran regarding food supply for Iran, signed December 4, 1942 (Documents 174-219)

IV. Representations by the United States regarding British policy in Iran (Documents 220-238)

Concern of the United States regarding danger of food shortages in Iran threatening famine and internal disorder:Concern of the United States regarding danger of food shortages in Iran threatening famine and internal disorder:

Contents

I. Participation of the United States in decisions regarding supply and distribution of food for IranI. Participation of the United States in decisions regarding supply and distribution of food for Iran

[138] The Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission (Saleh) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

New York, N. Y., February 24, 1942.

891.48/303

[139] The Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission (Saleh)

Washington, March 7, 1942.

891.48/303

[140] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, April 1, 1942—11 p.m.

891.24/178a: Telegram

[141] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 6, 1942—4 p.m. [Received April 7—8:46 p.m.]

891.24/179: Telegram

[142] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 14, 1942.

891.24/185

[143] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 23, 1942—3 p.m. [Received April 23—1:21 p.m.]

891.24/182: Telegram

[144] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, April 30, 1942—11 p.m.

891.24/182: Telegram

The Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission (Saleh) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) 891.48/303

[Document 138]

The Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission (Saleh) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

1181 New York, N. Y., February 24, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Murray: You may be already informed that as a result of shortage in the supply of wheat my Government has been having difficulties in assuring the supply of bread in many cities of Iran.

The United Kingdom Commercial Corporation which had promised to supply the needed amount of wheat has been unable to do so as a result of transportation difficulties.

Due to these circumstances the Minister of Finance in Teheran discussed the matter with the Honorable William Bullitt, United States Special Envoy to the Middle East, and Mr. Bullitt was good enough to promise that upon his return to Washington he would try to make arrangements for the shipment to Iran of certain quantities of wheat which might be sent on board steamers bound for the ports of the Persian Gulf.

I have now received a cable from the Minister of Finance, stating that the question of bread supply in many towns of Iran is becoming extremely acute and asking whether any decision has been taken on the subject of wheat shipment as discussed with Mr. Bullitt.

I had in mind to go to Washington in order to discuss this matter with you personally but, as you know, it is nearly impossible to make reservations at any hotel in Washington, and the matter being of an urgent nature I decided that I should write to you while awaiting for hotel arrangements.

No person realizes better than yourself the importance of this question in the situation in Iran. Bread being the chief food of the country, a shortage of it would naturally result in famine and I am confident that your Government would like to take any steps that are possible to prevent such a forthcoming condition.

May I, therefore, request you to be good enough to see what can be done on this subject before it is too late and to inform me of your decision so that I can send a telegram to the Minister of Finance.

With my best wishes.

Very sincerely yours,

Allah Yar Saleh

The Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission (Saleh) 891.48/303

[Document 139]

The Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission (Saleh)

Washington, March 7, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Saleh: Reference is made to your letter of February 24, 1942 regarding the possibility of assistance by this Government in furnishing wheat for Iran. As you are aware as a result of subsequent conversations with you regarding this matter, the question which you have raised is being given careful consideration.

Sincerely yours,

Wallace Murray

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/178a: Telegram

[Document 140]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, April 1, 1942—11 p.m.

80. Department informed that British Ministry of Food has program contemplating shipment of approximately 17,000 tons Canadian wheat monthly to Iran consigned to “Irano-British Trading Corporation” for consumption by civilian population and Allied Military Forces. Please telegraph available information on following points: 1. Has execution of any such program begun?

2. Is it satisfactory to Iranian Government?

3. On what basis is distribution made?

4. Is Iran at present importing wheat from any other source for its own needs? In what quantities?

5. Estimated imports required to satisfy minimum Iranian needs?

6. Do you consider that Ministry of Food program, if carried out, would eliminate necessity for other imports of wheat?

In any discreet inquiries which you may make in this connection, you should avoid giving the impression (a) that the United States is thinking of leaving question of Iranian food supply entirely in British hands, or (b) that we doubt good faith and good intentions of either Iranians or British.

Reference Department’s 66, March 13,1 for your confidential information, it has been found that Canadian wheat can be purchased in open market more cheaply than American. Consequently, Saleh has purchased about 10,000 long tons Manitoba wheat and is trying arrange shipment small quantity early next month. Lend-Lease machinery not involved but this Government is giving active assistance in obtaining shipping space and expediting export license.

Welles

1  Post, p. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327].

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/179: Telegram

[Document 141]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 6, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received April 7—8:46 p.m.]

97. Following answers to numbered paragraphs of Department’s No. 80, April 1.

(1) British Minister1a assumes the 17,000 tons referred to by Department consists of 8,000 tons and 8,800 flour (half of latter for Polish army in Iran) to be delivered in April only. None has arrived but first consignment expected shortly.

(2) Iranians allege that British promises of 8,000 tons monthly not being fulfilled, only about 6,000 being received. British express annoyance that Iranians would prefer Allied seamen to risk lives to bring wheat rather than make local hoarders disgorge.

(3) All of above wheat for Iranian Government which is responsible for distribution.

(4) British state they have furnished Iran 40,000 tons since August mostly from India. They are now sending 3,000 tons monthly to East Iran from India. Iranian Government has purchased some 6,000 or 7,000 tons from Soviets and 10,000 tons bought in United States by Saleh.

(5) British and Iranians do not agree on minimum needs. Latter place minimum needs up to end of July at 60,000 tons of which 20,000 immediately. They further estimate they will need to import 100,000 tons from July 1942 (harvest time) to July 1943. British believe that promised April deliveries plus whatever they can send in May plus other Iranian purchases should tide Iran over until new crop comes in. British Minister informs me confidentially that in his opinion very little wheat need be imported after new crop comes in and that small amount needed might be obtained in Iraq where there should be surplus.

(6) Although Iranian estimate of 60,000 tons needed up to July seems high it may be that British estimate is too low and that some wheat from United States will be required. No estimate of needs after July can properly be made until new crop comes in. Iran although normally self-sufficient in wheat may have to continue importing as sowings this year were subnormal due to disturbed conditions.

This matter of economic assistance for Iran must be approached carefully since it involves not only our relations with Iran but also the British and hence our war effort. British as Department knows have had great difficulty with Iranians and have had to use question of supply of essential goods as a weapon to obtain some degree of cooperation. British relations with Iran have arrived at a critical stage as result of present dispute over issue of currency and exchange control (see Department’s No. 552 and my 82,3 83, 87 and 934 ). Iranians finally increased note issue by 700 million rials but refused to issue currency against sterling holdings because of lack of confidence in both British and sterling. Instead new issue is backed by gold and crown jewels.

[Here follows further report on exchange situation.]

I have consistently recommended avoidance of undue pressure on Iranians and advised against joining British in representations to Iran Government unless such action essential to war effort. I feel that present Iranian intransigence toward British is potentially harmful to war effort and I recommend we work in close harmony with British in question of supplies for Iran. While British themselves are somewhat responsible for their bad relations with Iran we cannot escape fact that Iranians by refusal to cooperate with our Allies are creating potentially harmful situation. Our economic policy with regard to Iran should dovetail with that of British in order to avoid placing our Allies in disadvantageous position and to prevent appearance of backing Iran against British.

Dreyfus

1a Sir Reader W. Bullard.

2 See footnote 94, p. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241].

3 Dated March 28, 9 a.m., p. 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343].

4 Telegrams Nos. 83, 87, and 93 not printed.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.24/185

[Document 142]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 14, 1942.

Mr. Saleh telephoned from New York to say that he had received a telegram from the Minister of Finance reading as follows: “Please insist that wheat be shipped to Iran with the greatest rapidity.”

I told Mr. Saleh that we were going into the whole question of supplies for Iran, and we hoped that a satisfactory solution could be found in the very near future. He volunteered the idea that it would be well for our Legation at Tehran to concert with the Iranian Government authorities and with the British authorities in arranging a supply program. I told him I was very glad to have this suggestion and that we would look into it.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/182: Telegram

[Document 143]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 23, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received April 23—1:21 p.m.]

119. My 118, April 22, 5 p.m.5 Discussions with the British Legation and Jackson, head of MESC,6 have elicited following: (1) Hitherto there has been no centralized British agency for dealing with Iranian economic needs. The UKCC,7 the British Commercial Counselor, and an Anglo-Iranian shipping committee have all in varying degrees recommended pressing needs, supplied commodities, or assisted in obtaining shipping space for exports and imports.

(2) Jackson proposes that a central supply committee be formed in Tehran to handle all matters of economic aid to Iran, the committee to be composed of one representative from each of the following organizations: Iranian Ministry of Finance, Iranian Ministry of Commerce and Industry, British Legation, American Legation, Imperial Bank, UKCC, MESC and possibly Ministry of Economic Warfare. It is proposed that all requests for economic assistance for Iran be made through this committee. Local merchants or importers will obtain import licenses from Iranian Ministry of Finance or Ministry of Commerce and Industry which will forward them to the committee. These Ministries will likewise put forward the requests of their Government. The committee will decide which commodities should not be supplied and will recommend quantities in case of commodities to be supplied, the American and British Legation delegates to decide on the latter point. The committee will also recommend method of handling requisitions i. e. whether by normal commercial methods in the case of private purchases, by Government purchase in the case of bulk articles such as cereals, sugar and tea, or by Lease-Lend.

(3) The Central Supply Committee will forward all recommendations to MESC which will classify requisitions as to priority in the case of commercial purchases, will arrange through British Ministry of Food for supply of Government purchases and sale by UKCC to Iranian Government, and will forward Lease-Lend requests to Washington. (It is contemplated Lease-Lend will be the exception, to be used only when normal commercial purchases or Government purchases cannot be arranged.) It is proposed in future to eliminate all independent purchases by Iranian Government.

(4) Distribution will be [arranged] as follows: An import license system will be established by Iranian Government for private imports. Government purchases and Lease-Lend material will be delivered only to the Iranian Government. It is proposed that a rationing system be adopted by the latter with the participation of the Supply Committee.

(5) Shipping space will be arranged as follows: Merchants possessing import licenses will forward these through Central Supply Committee to MESC which after according priority will in turn forward them to Ministry of War Transport representative in area from which goods are coming. Government purchases will be handled directly by Ministry of War Transport. Lease-Lend will be shipped through United States Maritime Commission.

Whereas under the proposed plan, the American representative would be outnumbered 5 to 1 in relation to the British, it is believed that a centralized agency to control economic aid is essential and that the advice of the Imperial Bank, the UKCC, and the British Ministry of Economic Warfare might be useful. It is recommended, therefore, that the proposed plan be accepted with two alterations: (a) That the committee be composed of the Ministers of Finance and Commerce and one representative each of the American and British Legations, the other representatives named in paragraph 2 above to serve in advisory capacity only; and

(b) That in case of disagreement between the American and British members as to type and quantity of assistance to be recommended, the disagreement be referred to Washington and London for settlement before being transmitted to MESC at Cairo. This would prevent the British from forwarding their recommendations to MESC through the British representative of the MESC in Tehran over the objections of the American representative.

Dreyfus

5  Post, p. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391].

6 Middle East Supply Center.

7 United Kingdom Commercial Corporation.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/182: Telegram

[Document 144]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, April 30, 1942—11 p.m.

106. Your 119 of April 23. Department has decided upon formal participation in the Middle East Supply Centre.8 There will be military and civilian representation. A member of the Legation in Cairo will serve as interim representative for civilian supplies until a representative is sent out from here.9

Your cable closely reflects opinion here as to organization and functions of Central Supply Committee in Tehran. Department concurs in your suggested alteration (a) but questions alteration (b) in view of above stated decision regarding M. E. S. C. Department believes that the M. E. S. C. including American representatives will have sufficient general knowledge of requirements of the several countries of the Near East and information on effective mechanics of operations to resolve most of the disagreements that might arise between American and British representatives on the local Central Supply Committee. Reference of such disputes to the M. E. S. C. would in no way impair the customary reference of questions and information directly to the Department, and would at the same time fix greater authority and responsibility for handling Near East supplies in the M. E. S. C. which is set up for that purpose.

In view of the above the Department designates you the American representative on the Central Supply Committee in Tehran and requests that you associate yourself with your British colleague with a view to immediate joint action on that Committee.

Hull

8 For correspondence, see pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.

9 Subsequently Frederick Winant was appointed United States civilian representative on the Middle East Supply Center.

II. Iranian appeals for direct American aid; complaints by Iranians and by American Minister in Iran concerning British economic policies in IranII. Iranian appeals for direct American aid; complaints by Iranians and by American Minister in Iran concerning British economic policies in Iran

[145] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] May 1, 1942.

891.24/202½

[146] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 5, 1942—8 p.m.

891.24/194: Telegram

[147] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 10, 1942—4 p.m. [Received May 10—1:55 p.m.]

891.24/195: Telegram

[148] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 23, 1942—4 p.m.

891.24/195: Telegram

[149] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 29, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 2:30 p.m.]

891.24/201: Telegram

[150] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 9, 1942—4 p.m. [Received June 9—12:22 p.m.]

891.24/203: Telegram

[151] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 18, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 7:55 p.m.]

891.24/207: Telegram

[152] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 18, 1942—midnight.

891.24/205: Telegram

[153] The Iranian Legation to the Department of State

Washington , June 19, 1942.

891.24/211

[154] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] June 19, 1942.

741.9111/70

[155] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 19, 1942—8 p.m.

891.24/203: Telegram

[156] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 25, 1942—2 p.m. [Received June 26—4:47 p.m.]

891.24/210: Telegram

[157] The Department of State to the Iranian Legation

Washington , July 1, 1942.

891.24/207

[158] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 7, 1942—4 p.m. [Received July 7—2:47 p.m.]

891.24/215: Telegram

[159] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 17, 1942—noon. [Received July 18—8:50 p.m.]

891.24/218: Telegram

[160] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 20, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 8:45 p.m.]

891.24/220: Telegram

[161] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 21, 1942—10 p.m. [Received July 21—6:18 p.m.]

891.5018/5: Telegram

[162] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 22, 1942—noon. [Received July 22—11:25 a.m.]

891.24/221: Telegram

[163] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, July 25, 1942—1 p.m.

891.24/218: Telegram

[164] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, July 25, 1942—6 p.m.

891.24/221: Telegram

[165] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 25, 1942—9 p.m.

891.24/222a: Telegram

[166] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 27, 1942—2 p.m. [Received July 27—12:37 p.m.]

891.24/222: Telegram

[167] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 29, 1942—7 p.m.

891.24/222a: Telegram

[168] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 5, 1942—3 p.m. [Received August 5—12:51 p.m.]

891.00/1900: Telegram

[169] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 5, 1942—5 p.m. [Received August 5—11:52 a.m.]

891.24/224: Telegram

[170] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 19, 1942—10 p.m.

891.5018/5a: Telegram

[171] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 26, 1942—noon. [Received 2:59 p.m.]

891.5018/6: Telegram

[172] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 29, 1942—5 p.m.

891.5018/6: Telegram

[173] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 10, 1942—noon. [Received September 10—11:54 a.m.]

891.5018/7: Telegram

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 891.24/202½

[Document 145]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 10

[Washington,] May 1, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Allah Yar Saleh, Chief of Iranian Trade and Economic Commission

Mr. Murray11

Mr. Alling12

Mr. Fred Winant (DE13 )

Mr. Jernegan

Mr. Saleh said that he was disturbed by an apparent tendency on the part of the Iranian Government to feel that no results could be expected from attempting to deal directly with the United States on the question of supplies. He had the impression that the Tehran authorities might shortly conclude that his mission in the United States was useless. This attitude, he believed, was largely due to the failure to obtain the wheat which he had been instructed to purchase and also to statements made by the British representatives in Iran to the effect that needed commodities could best be secured through the United Kingdom Commercial Corporation. Mr. Saleh said that he himself was becoming rather discouraged, not because he, personally, would mind being recalled to Iran but because he felt that American-Iranian relations in general would become less close if the Iranian Government should conclude that the United States no longer took an interest in the welfare of Iran. He himself had always worked for closer relations and looked to the United States to do much for Iran.

Mr. Murray assured Mr. Saleh that we were far from losing interest in Iran, quite the contrary. He explained, as Mr. Winant had already done, that the difficulties in connection with the wheat had arisen because of the existence of a previously drawn-up British program of supply about which we had not been informed. On account of the very serious shipping shortage we were unable to insist upon the shipment of additional wheat, except for the 5,600 tons for which arrangements are now in process, but we were definitely watching to see that the British program was carried out. Mr. Saleh was informed that our Minister in Tehran is keeping us currently informed regarding the situation, with special reference to actual arrivals of wheat in Iran. According to a recent telegram, some 7,000 tons had been received since the first of April, which seemed to indicate that British deliveries were, in fact, being kept up. Mr. Saleh said that he was exceedingly glad to hear this, since his greatest worry had been that the American Government was not itself investigating but merely accepting without question the assurances given by the British. He said that for a time British deliveries had been suspended entirely, which had caused the Iranian Government to lose all faith in British promises in this respect.

Mr. Murray then referred to the organization now being set up for handling Iranian supply requests, whereby a central supply council is to be established in Tehran with Iranian, British and American representation. This council will consider the needs of Iran and pass on its recommendations to the Middle East Supply Center in Cairo, on which the United States will also be represented. The M. E. S. C. will then forward recommendations to London and Washington, for final consideration. It was explained that this would afford the American Government a triple opportunity to make sure that everything possible was done to meet Iran’s requirements. Mr. Saleh expressed himself as very pleased that such an arrangement was to be put into effect.

Mr. Murray emphasized that Mr. Saleh’s mission would still play a very important role here under the new arrangement, since he would be needed to supervise the actual procurement of goods in the United States and to deal directly with the various agencies of the American Government concerned. In this connection, Mr. Winant said that he felt it would be most desirable to have Mr. Saleh available to present the Iranian case whenever a request should come up for consideration. He said that there was a plan under study to establish a central committee with authority to pass on foreign requests, and he hoped that it would be possible to have foreign representatives appear, either directly or indirectly, before that committee whenever a matter affecting their country was brought up. Mr. Murray went on to say that the State Department attached great importance to Mr. Saleh’s continued presence in the United States and very much hoped that the Government at Tehran would not get the impression that he no longer served a useful purpose here. He said that we would cable our Minister in Tehran to explain what we are doing here, our views on the supply situation in general and on Mr. Saleh’s mission in particular, in order that the Minister might keep the Iranian Government informed.

Mr. Saleh reiterated several times his belief that the United States should deal directly with the Iranian Government in matters of supplies, rather than permit everything to be channeled through the United Kingdom Commercial Corporation. He said that Iran much preferred not to have to deal with the British and only acquiesced in their intervention out of necessity. For example, last fall he had attempted to obtain a quantity of tires. There were considerable delays, and finally the British had told the Iranian Government that the tires could be obtained only through the U. K. C. C. and had persuaded the Tehran authorities to agree to a distribution of 40% of the tires to the U. K. C. C. for British use in Iran, 40% for the Iranian Government and 20% for Iranian civilian use. Despairing of getting the tires through the American Government direct, Tehran had agreed to this arrangement.

10 A report of this conversation was sent to the Minister in Iran in telegram No. 115, May 5, midnight, not printed.

11 Wallace Murray, Adviser on Political Relations.

12 Paul H. Alling, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

13 Division of Exports and Defense Aid.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/194: Telegram

[Document 146]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 5, 1942—8 p.m.

113. British have presented requisition to Lend-Lease for 24,230 tires, which constitutes final lot of total 68,000 tires scheduled by British for shipment to Iran in 1942. This latest requisition is to be consigned to U. K. C. C. which proposes allocate tires 40 percent for transportation supplies to Russia, 40 percent for Iranian governmental and military uses and 20 percent for Iranian civilian use, all under direction of U. K. C. C.

British consider their program of 68,000 sufficient for Iranian needs this year and further believe tires should be distributed and controlled entirely by U. K. C. C. in order to insure most efficient use in furtherance of war operations and maintenance essential Iranian economy. They therefore request approval their requisition and denial any independent Iranian request which may be made.

Please telegraph urgently your views on following, bearing in mind Anglo-American participation in local supplies committee and M. E. S. C. and at the same time Department’s desire to maintain American prestige on its present high level and keep American-Iranian relations on as direct a basis as war controls will allow:

1. Whether British program of 68,000 tires sufficient for minimum needs Allied military and Iranian civilian transportation this year;

2. Advisability of leaving distribution of tires and consequent indirect partial or total control highway transportation in hands of U.K.C.C.

If possible please report number of trucks now operating in Iran, differentiating between those under British, Russian and American control and those controlled by Iranian Government and private citizens.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/195: Telegram

[Document 147]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 10, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received May 10—1:55 p.m.]

147. Department’s No. 113, May 5, 8 p.m.

1. Following estimate of motor vehicles in Iran compiled by Legation after consulting Iranian Government, private sources, and UKCC. (a) Trucks now operating 4,000, laid up for lack of tires and parts, 1500. This includes all Government and private trucks except Russian and British military. UKCC have about half of these 4,000 trucks under contract and in addition are expecting arrival soon of some 2500 Lease-Lend trucks for their use. (b) Busses, 600. (c) Passenger cars now operating 3,000, laid up 1,000. (d) Motorcycles, 400. Almost all of above vehicles are in private hands.

2. Estimate of tire needs: Allowing 12 tires per truck per year (mortality rate is high due to bad roads) and 2 for each passenger car, it would appear that British estimate of 68,000 fairly reflects minimum needs for Allied military and Iranian civilian use. Iranian Government is unaware that orders for 68,000 tires have been placed; they themselves having ordered only 24,000 through UKCC. If 68,000 tires actually arrive in Iran and are distributed roughly along lines suggested by UKCC, I am of opinion that Iran’s minimum needs would be met.

3. Distribution: This is delicate and controversial point. The UKCC wishes to control distribution of tires because (1) they do not trust Iranians to do it honestly (2) they believe they can do it more efficiently and (3) it would be an excellent economic weapon. The Iranians ardently desire to have tires delivered directly to them and to control distribution. Iranian Government has recently given to UKCC virtual control over tire imports because they had become convinced that only the UKCC wielded sufficient influence to obtain tires. Thus, the 24,000 tires in question were ordered through UKCC. Now however that Lease-Lend aid has been granted Iran,14 the Iranian Government would be most displeased if control over tires was placed in hands of UKCC.

I should be most reluctant to see tire control vested solely in UKCC because (1) it would aggravate Iranians and some of the blame might be placed on us, (2) it would increase the strangle hold which the UKCC is gradually acquiring over Iranian economy. In addition I do not see why British should have the credit for this transaction which might well be handled as Lease-Lend aid to Iran. On other hand I do not have confidence in ability or honesty of Iranian Government to make equitable distribution. The best solution would be in the sending of Lease-Lend representative or commission to control matters of this kind. The Iranians would welcome such an official and the British could hardly object since they have frequently suggested that the Iranians engage an American to supervise distribution of essential goods. The next best solution would be distribution of these by a mixed commission of Iranians, British and Americans, a procedure to which the Iranian Government has indicated it would agree.

Dreyfus

14 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] ff.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/195: Telegram

[Document 148]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 23, 1942—4 p.m.

133. Your 147, May 10, last paragraph. Could not the Central Supply Committee recommended in your 119, April 2315 and authorized by Department’s 106, April 3016 act in a general supervisory capacity to direct distribution of the tires in question as well as other commodities furnished by the United States under Lend-Lease or otherwise? Would it be practicable and advisable to consign such goods to the Iranian Government in care of your Legation or the Central Supply Committee—distribution policies to be decided upon by the Committee and actual distribution to be done by existing UKCC or Iranian agencies under supervision of the Committee? It is Department’s tentative thought that such an arrangement would have desirable effect of integrating entire supply and distribution system.

If you concur, please indicate what if any additional staff you would need to participate fully in the work of the Committee on this basis.

Please keep the Department informed of progress made in setting up Central Supply Committee.

Hull

15  Ante, p. 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143].

16  Ante, p. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144].

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/201: Telegram

[Document 149]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 29, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]

175. Department’s 133, May 23.

1. General. I concur in Department’s suggestion that tires be consigned to this Legation or Central Supply Committee and distributed under Committee’s supervision although this procedure will be bitterly opposed by UKCC. Committee will hold first meeting today and will appoint Transportation Subcommittee to consider this problem. I will report on results of meetings which I will attend.

Prime Minister16a suggests that the Food and Supply Administrator whom he has requested Department to obtain for Iranian Government17 might with an adequate staff direct distribution of tires, spare parts, and trucks as well as foods and other commodities. He states he will cable his Legation in Washington again today concerning employment of this expert. British Legation informs me Department is considering Mr. Acheson18 for this post but that no action taken because Iran has not made formal request.

2. British attitude. UKCC is insisting on obtaining monopoly on import and distribution of tires, trucks, and spare parts in order control all road transport. This coupled with control of other imports through MESC and British control of railways would complete their strangle hold on Iran economy. British Commercial Secretary, on return from MESC meeting in Cairo, without consulting this Legation or Iranians, delivered to Iran Government a note setting forth quotas for next 6 months and told Minister Finance verbally that Iran must accept the quotas or receive nothing. These quotas provide for no trucks for Iran and that tires and spare parts importation and distribution be monopoly of UKCC. I am forwarding copy of this note and enclosures19 by air today.

3. Iranian view. I have discussed matter at length with Prime and Finance Ministers who are indignant at British attitude and leave no doubt that they will refuse to accept the tire and truck procedure suggested. While they wish to receive tires and trucks themselves, they are willing to deliver percentage to be agreed on to trucks for vital war work. Remainder they wish to distribute but are willing to submit to control by an American expert or any committee we suggest. They complain with reason that British already monopolize 90% of railway capacity and that more than half country’s trucks are laid up or under contract to UKCC. This leaves Iran without sufficient transport and fully at UKCC mercy. Result will be depletion of Iran’s road transport.

4. My opinion. I consider the British attitude in general and the UKCC position on tires and trucks in particular to be highhanded and completely lacking in consideration for Iranians. The result of such procedure could only be to embitter British-Iranian relations, which have recently been improving, and to reduce greatly our own high prestige. I do not propose giving Iran more than the bare minimum needs. I do propose however to hear the Iranian side and keep an open mind until the matter can be seriously discussed by the committee. I have therefore asked the Ministers of Finance and Commerce to comment freely and fully on the British note. I feel frankly that the British are endeavoring to turn Iran’s unfortunate position to their advantage and to our disadvantage. I don’t for example see why UKCC should get 2500 Lease-Lend trucks while Iranians received one or why distribution of any commodity should be turned over to a foreign agency against Iranian wishes. While my relations with British Legation to date have been excellent I realize they may be harmed by my opposition in this matter and that I lay myself open personally for attack. This will not deter me although will make every effort to be tactful and friendly.

I recommend (1) that tires be imported and distributed as suggested in first paragraph, (2) that trucks and spare parts be similarly treated and (3) that we keep an open mind as to Iran’s needs until the matter can be seriously considered.

5. Staff. I will need no extra staff if Acheson or some other person comes with an adequate staff to take over these duties.

If this is not done I would need one or two officers experienced in commercial matters and some additional subordinate personnel.

Dreyfus

16a Ali Soheily.

17 For correspondence regarding American advisers for Iran, see pp. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240] ff.

18 Barclay Acheson, Associate Editor of Reader’s Digest.

19 Not printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/203: Telegram

[Document 150]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 9, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received June 9—12:22 p.m.]

192. Reference my No. 175, May 29. Central Supplies Committee has held first meeting and appointed permanent subcommittee and transportation subcommittee which also have had first meetings. Committee is endeavoring to induce Iranian Government to introduce effective July 1 import licensing system which is considered necessary to proper functioning of MESC. Iranians will I believe consent to system of import licenses but they object to small quotas established (see despatch no. 272, May 2820 ). However Committee is prepared to discuss quota increases if adequate reasons advanced.

There is danger that British are endeavoring to use Committee to further British trade. In addition to selfish attitude of UKCC which I have reported, following serves as an example. Yesterday agent of Socony Vacuum complained to me he cannot continue to import lubricants because Committee have given Anglo-Iranian Oil Company a monopoly for importation from England.

I explained to Hobson (sent here from MESC Cairo to head Central Supplies Commission) that under no circumstances should the Committee be used as a trade or political football and he agreed consider question of lubricants at next meeting.

UKCC are still intent on obtaining monopoly on import and distribution of tires, trucks and parts. Prime Minister told me he is unwilling to submit to UKCC control and he said confidentially that the Soviet Ambassador feels similarly. Prime Minister said he hopes soon to obtain from Majlis plenary powers for control of both food and transportation.

For the Prime Minister’s information I should appreciate following details with regard to Lease-Lend.

(1) Is a formal agreement with Iran contemplated and

(2) How will Lend-Lease fit into MESC picture.

Dreyfus

20 Not printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/207: Telegram

[Document 151]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 18, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 7:55 p.m.]

204. Referring my 192, June 9, Iranian Government has now agreed to institute import licensing system and is naming a committee to meet with CSC to work out details. They agreed with reluctance because they are displeased with Allied treatment in matter of supplies particularly with quotas established (see my despatch 272, May 2821 ).

Iranian displeasure with Allied treatment arises from following: (1) Allies have not lived up to promises to provide essential supplies to Iran; (2) Allies fail to take into consideration fact that Iranian reserves have been depleted to great extent by Allied armed forces and Polish refugees; (3) transport facilities of Iran are being depleted by Allies. Railway is being used 80% for Allies; United Kingdom Commercial Corporation has taken over all heavy and large part of light trucks and now propose give Iranians no trucks or tires thus placing them at mercy of British; Iranians are unable now to move troops and soon will be unable move wheat, beets, and other goods.

Iranian officials growing more critical of us on grounds that while we promise to assist them in economic sense nothing actually is done. They make a point particularly of their right to receive tires and trucks because British have depleted their transport facilities. There is much merit in Iranian case and I recommend immediate steps be taken to make tires available to them along lines suggested in my no. 175, May 29. I also recommend that heavy and light trucks be made available to Iranians as soon as possible to enable them to move troops (now being handicapped by immobility in action against tribes) and to move the harvests and other essential goods. These tires and trucks to be of value must arrive soon. I suggest therefore that a portion of the Lease-Lend trucks now arriving in Iran be earmarked for immediate delivery to Iranian Government. If we do not take some action soon to fulfill our promises of aid to Iran the incipient wave of criticism of United States is sure to grow.

Dreyfus

21 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/205: Telegram

[Document 152]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 18, 1942—midnight.

158. Your despatch no. 272, May 28.22 We note that British Minister’s letter of May 27 to you lists 1 American and 7 British members of Central Supplies Committee and that apparently Iranians are not represented.

Your telegram 119, April 2323 proposed a committee composed of American and British Ministers and representatives of Iranian Ministries of Commerce and Finance, with other British representatives acting in an advisory capacity only, and it was on this basis that Department authorized your participation. (See Department’s 106, April 30.)24 Department’s suggestion that tires and other American supplies be distributed under supervision of Central Supplies Committee was made on understanding that Committee would be a joint Anglo-American-Iranian body. If this is not the case, we may have to reconsider our attitude.

Please telegraph exact composition of committee as now functioning and whether any changes are contemplated.

Hull

22 Not printed.

23  Ante, p. 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143].

24  Ante, p. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144].

The Iranian Legation to the Department of State 891.24/211

[Document 153]

The Iranian Legation to the Department of State

No. 619

Verbal Note

The matter of food and distribution of supplies in different parts of Iran has become more and more difficult, the main reason being the lack of transportation facilities. Iran is a very vast country; there is no transportation by water (sea or river) and there is only one railway line, which links the northeast to the southwest, and this is used now principally for Allied military supplies. Therefore all the country depends entirely upon transportation by motor truck. Iran has obtained practically all supplies of trucks and tires for many years from the United States. From the beginning of the war the export of cars, trucks and tires has been reduced to a very small quantity. During the last year exportation has been practically zero. Moreover, the need for transportation of war materials and other Allied activities have brought about the appropriation of a considerable part of existing trucks. The question of transportation in Iran has, therefore, reached an acute stage, as a result of which the economic condition of the country is daily becoming critical, so that in case urgent action is not taken to furnish Iran with trucks and tires, it is feared that famine will break out all over the country, and a situation will be created which will be impossible to remedy.

One other aspect which is not less important is that for maintaining order in the country it is necessary to have sufficient trucks for the expeditious movement of the gendarmerie, police and military forces to cope with uprisings. If the Government is unable to send quickly the necessary force to places of unrest, unruly activities will increase. Such a situation would certainly not benefit the program instituted by the United States Government at this time for that part of the world.

The Iranian Government and its people have shown by their cooperation their friendship toward the United States in these difficult times. Upon the official announcement of the President of the United States that Iran is a beneficiary of the Lease-Lend Act,24a the hopes of the Iranian people have risen in regard to receiving the necessary supplies from the United States.

We are sure that the United States Government desires to give Iran every possible aid and we understand the difficulties facing this country in regard to tires, but it is my duty to draw the attention of the United States Government to the fact that if quick action is not taken in this matter, a situation will be created in Iran which cannot be easily remedied.

The need of Iran, which has been estimated very carefully, is for one thousand trucks and eighty thousand tires and tubes. The question was presented to the proper authorities in Washington months ago but nothing definite has resulted. The United States has been for long years, and is especially now, the only source of supply for trucks and tires for Iran, and there is no doubt of the immediate need of the country for these commodities. Therefore it will not be necessary to refer that question to the Supply Committee in Teheran or to the Central Supply Committee in Cairo. A decision should be taken here in Washington to authorize the exportation of that quantity of tires and tubes directly to Iran, but if it is really impossible to do so, the Iranian Government should be notified of the fact so it can explain the situation to the people of Iran.

Washington , June 19, 1942.

24a Approved March 11, 1941; 55 Stat. 31.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 741.9111/70

[Document 154]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] June 19, 1942.

The Minister of Iran25 called to see me this morning and took up with me in extenso the question dealt with in the aide-mémoire which he handed me and which is attached herewith.26

I told the Minister that I would be glad to have this question looked into immediately and I would undoubtedly give him some precise reply by the middle of next week.

Before the Minister left he inquired whether the subject of Iran had come up for discussion in the conversations which had taken place during the time of Mr. Molotov’s visit to Washington.27 I replied that no special mention had been made of Iran in these conversations and that I could assure the Minister that the whole tenor of the conversations in Washington was entirely in line with the declarations made by Mr. Molotov to the Supreme Soviet which had been made public, and that this Government was informed that the agreements entered into in London had been made public in their entirety and that, as the Minister knew, the British Government had officially and publicly announced that no secret agreements had been consummated. I repeated that the policy of this Government, as was well known, was governed by the principles set forth in the Atlantic Charter28 and that such policy would be maintained by the Government of the United States. I stated that I had every reason to believe that the policies and positions of the British Government with the Soviet Union would be guided by the same principles.

S[umner] W[elles]

25 Mohammed Schayesteh.

26  Supra.

27 For correspondence regarding the visit of the Soviet Foreign Minister, see vol. iii, pp. 543–599, passim.

28 Joint statement By President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/203: Telegram

[Document 155]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 19, 1942—8 p.m.

162. Your 192, June 9, last three paragraphs.

1. Formal Lend-Lease agreement with Iran is contemplated and will be drawn up in due course. It is proposed to conclude agreements with United Nations before beginning negotiations with other countries.

2. Lend-Lease will probably be handled on same general basis as other Government orders. Requests would be channeled through Central Supplies Committee and MESC before presentation to Lend-Lease Administration here. Exact manner of delivery in Iran has not yet been decided. Question of Lend-Lease delivery and distribution in Iran is under consideration here and decision will probably depend largely upon ultimate composition of Tehran Central Supplies Committee and the attitude adopted by the British regarding use of that committee to supervise supply distribution. Question may also be affected by appointment of American supply adviser, if satisfactory man is obtained.

In talking with Prime Minister, you should emphasize American participation in MESC. An officer of the Department29 will shortly proceed to Cairo to head our representation on that body.

Hull

29 Frederick Winant of the Division of Exports and Defense Aid.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/210: Telegram

[Document 156]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 25, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received June 26—4:47 p.m.]

214. Department’s No. 158, June 18, midnight. There was, as Department indicated, considerable deviation from original understanding of Legation as to constitution of CSC. I was, as shown in despatch 272,30 presented with fait accompli as to quotas and organization of Committee and the Iranians also were not consulted. I have not accepted this arrangement as final but have been in constant negotiations with Iranians and British to find some suitable plan. Delay in arriving at agreement has been caused principally by Iranian reluctance to accept licensing system because of what they consider inadequate quotas and because Iranians did not appoint representatives to discuss question. The matter has now been settled along following lines, if Department agrees thereto:

The CSC will consist of eight persons as indicated in the British note attached to despatch 272 but it has been agreed that in all matters considered, the opinions of the British and American Ministers will be the deciding factor. This I believe takes care of our preoccupation about being outvoted 7 to 1. At the first meeting of the CSC on May 29, two subcommittees were formed: (1) Permanent subcommittee for doing routine work of CSC consisting of delegates of following: MESC (chairman), American Legation, UKCC, MEW,31 Imperial Bank of Iran and British Legation.

(2) Transport subcommittee to consider transport problems and supplies, consisting of Anglo-Iranian Oil Company official as chairman, American Legation, UKCC, MESC, MEW, Transportation Directorate and British Legation. Minor32 represents Legation on both committees and sits with me unofficially on CSC.

Question of having Iranian delegates on CSC proper was given serious consideration but it was consensus of opinion that discussion of vital war work such as shipping position and supplies to Russia made this [un?] desirable. Since I insisted on Iranians being heard, the Iranian Government was invited to form a committee of its own to meet with permanent subcommittee. After much delay following strong committee of five was named: Director General Ministry of Commerce, Director General of Customs, head Imports Department, official of Ministry of Commerce and head Foreign Transaction Department.

Committee met with our permanent subcommittee on Monday in atmosphere of cordial understanding and another meeting will be held today. Iranian committee agrees in principle to institution of licensing system although details have yet to be worked out. They have taken immediate steps to ascertain outstanding orders placed abroad by Iran merchants and action on this preliminary phase is expected soon. I believe formation of this committee meets our desire to have Iranians fully heard. I might say that Minister of Finance expressed his satisfaction with this arrangement—Iranians do not care about machinery but are interested only in results. Although a good atmosphere now prevails I must warn Department that great difficulty will be encountered soon since Iranians are dissatisfied with quotas and finally consented to cooperate only on promise of reconsideration of many items. I am in a difficult position between intransigent British on one hand and grasping Iranians on other. It seems likely the increasingly difficult shipping situation will preclude any possibility of radical readjustment upwards of quotas. However Iranians should be given satisfaction on matter of tires and trucks (see my 175, May 29).

The only present discordant voice is that of UKCC which not only wishes to monopolize Iranian transport and distribution of tires and trucks but seems reluctant to submit to CSC on grounds that it is governmental agency. I have been, and intend to continue to be, adamant on this point—nothing can be accomplished unless CSC is supreme in matter of supplies to Iran. UKCC apparently does not want to give up its private trade which is lucrative for present and holds promises for British trade for future. I do not object to UKCC trade if British Government desires that procedure but I insist that UKCC submit to UKCC [CSC?] as would any other trader. If they do not I would suggest we counter with reservation of right to proceed outside CSC with Lend-Lease goods. I might add that UKCC are receiving 4000 Lease-Lend trucks and intend that none be allotted to Iranians.

Dreyfus

30 Not printed.

31 Ministry of Economic Warfare.

32 Harold B. Minor, Second Secretary of Legation.

The Department of State to the Iranian Legation 891.24/207

[Document 157]

The Department of State to the Iranian Legation

Aide-Mémoire

On June 19, 1942 the Iranian Minister spoke to the Under Secretary of State regarding Iranian needs in connection with highway transportation and requested the assistance of the United States Government in obtaining tires and trucks for use in Iran. This matter has been under study by the Department.

The American Government is, of course, well aware of the importance of motor transport to the Iranian economy. Consequently, it fully intends to do everything possible, consistent with the war effort of the United Nations, to ensure the supply to Iran of minimum essential supplies of tires and trucks.

In line with this policy, the Department has been glad to learn that the British Government has already obtained and has in process of shipment, or actually en route, approximately 44,000 tires for use in Iran. Further, the British Government has submitted to the Office of Lend-Lease Administration a requisition for an additional 24,230 tires and tubes. The American Minister at Tehran has reported that this order, which has been approved by the Lend-Lease Administration, was placed at the instance of the Iranian Government.

It appears, therefore, that Iran should receive during the current year a total of about 68,000 tires. A report from the American Minister at Tehran indicates that this quantity should be sufficient to meet the essential needs of Iranian and Allied motor transport in Iran for a period of one year.

As the Iranian Minister is aware, the United States and Great Britain have recently formed in Tehran an Anglo-American body known as the Tehran Central Supplies Committee which is to consider, in conjunction with a similar Iranian committee, the import requirements of Iran. Should the Iranian Government feel that further quantities of tires are needed, the United States would be willing to consider, in the light of available supplies and shipping space, any request which may be made in this sense to the Tehran Central Supplies Committee.

With respect to trucks, the Department would like to have further information before giving a definite answer. The American Minister at Tehran has reported that in May, last, approximately 1,500 trucks in Iran were not in use because of lack of tires and spare parts, and it is felt that attention should first be directed to returning those trucks to operation. However, as in the case of tires, this Government would be prepared to consider any Iranian request for trucks which might be made to the Tehran Central Supplies Committee.

Washington , July 1, 1942.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/215: Telegram

[Document 158]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 7, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received July 7—2:47 p.m.]

226. I appreciate helpful attitude outlined in Department’s 180, July 3.33 However, Department’s attention is called to fact that credits for the 24,230 tires were formally transferred to UKCC by Iran Government since latter felt itself impotent to obtain tires. Thus, entire 68,000 are consigned to UKCC, which states openly it will not give one tire or truck to Iranians to distribute, but rather will dole them out as it sees fit.

A deadlock has now been reached in my relations with UKCC and Transport Subcommittee of CSC over tires and trucks. UKCC stands fast in its attitude which may be summed up as follows: (1) UKCC has built a large and efficient transport organization in Iran which alone is capable of distributing and using tires and trucks efficiently; (2) trucks and tires delivered to Iran Government would be wasted and war effort harmed; (3) if an organization parallel to UKCC is set up by Iranians to distribute tires and run transport, there will be waste, destructive competition, and overlapping. CSC, with exception of American representatives supports UKCC fully.

My attitude remains unchanged. I feel British are treating Iranians in high-handed manner and that they are unfair in assuming Iranians are incapable of distributing tires equitably under foreign supervision. However, if we thus oppose UKCC and CSC, we are placed in position of suggesting workable alternative. Since time is important, would it not be possible to send immediately the American official mentioned in last paragraph of Department’s 180. This official might be able to reorganize and supervise the tire distribution and transport service already set up in Ministry of Finance. Further, if Iranians are to get any of the 68,000 tires, steps will have to be taken to consign part to the Legation or earmarked for Iranian Government rather than all to UKCC.

Iranian transport problem is urgent and present problem of moving harvest and goods cannot be solved by delivery of tires after several months. I am confidentially informed UKCC have 14,000 tires in stock, but since these are reserved for essential war work, there is little hope of any being turned over to Iranians.

I have suggested to Iranian Government that the immediate problem might be met by using the plenary powers they now hold in transport field to requisition tires which have found their way into black market, where they sell for up to $2,000 each, and [in?] hands of hoarders, and to requisition trucks not now doing essential work. The Iranian Government has been weak in these internal matters and should be required to help itself before turning to us. I should appreciate a frank expression of Department’s opinion concerning merits of this dispute and as to its possible solution.

Since drafting above, I have talked at length to Finance Minister who said he was grateful for information contained in Department’s No. 180 which he used to good advantage in Majlis today in supporting the Government’s position. He expressed great irritation at treatment being given Iran by British. He especially resented recent case in which British military “stole” 3,000 tires which arrived for Iranian Government (part of tires originally shipped on Steel Navigator). He needs these tires badly and intends to make strong representations to British Government. He added that the Automobile Section of his Ministry is already equipped to handle problems of tire distribution and transport and that he would welcome an American to supervise it.

Dreyfus

33 Not printed; it transmitted a summary of the Department’s aide-mémoire of July 1, supra, with an additional paragraph with regard to sending to Iran an American representative to supervise distribution of supplies from the United States (891.24/195).

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/218: Telegram

[Document 159]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 17, 1942—noon.
[Received July 18—8:50 p.m.]

237. Reference Department’s Nos. 80, April 1,34 94 April 21, and 115, May 5;35 and my Nos. 97, April 636 and 224, July 7 [6].37 Wheat situation has become more critical with resultant acute shortage of bread. Since stocks on hand in Tehran are adequate for only few days Government is urgently endeavoring to uncover stocks in provinces to tide country over until new crops harvested. This situation as suggested in my No. 25 [225], July 7,37a is one of main causes of present political crisis.

British Legation, Tehran, has maintained up to present a rather intransigent attitude taking view that the 60,000 tons imported are sufficient, that no wheat should be furnished Iran after the harvest and that Government should requisition stocks alleged to be in hands of hoarders before requesting imports. Iranians have taken view that arrivals have been inadequate, that 100,000 tons will have to be imported before 1943 harvest and that relatively small stocks are in hands of hoarders. Iranian views as to hoarding has been proved substantially correct by recent investigations which failed to reveal large stocks in hands of persons designated by British. British Legation in staff memorandum takes stand that Iranians are largely responsible for present situation by failing to bring true facts to its attention. This explanation is in my opinion weak since Iranians have frequently pointed out to Allied representatives the urgency and seriousness of the matter.

British now recognizing seriousness of situation, are lending Iran 5600 tons of wheat from military stores to be repaid by wheat purchased by Saleh and now en route.

They also are trying to obtain one five thousand tons of barley to be mixed with wheat for bread. Soviets have promised to return 3000 tons of wheat they borrowed. These measures will assist in tiding country over until new crop is harvested during July and August. The transport problem is grave (see my 226, July 7); Iranian transport is so depleted that crops cannot be moved unless UKCC furnishes tires.

British Minister has proposed to me and Soviet Ambassador formation of an Anglo-American-Soviet-Iranian food committee to handle matters of this kind and has suggested that an Iranian Ministry of Food be established. Soviet Ambassador does not favor the committee but has consulted his Government. For my part I feel such a committee would be useful but that it might better be formed as a subcommittee to CSC. A definite step forward would be afforded by designation and early arrival of American food adviser the Department is seeking for Iranian Government.

As to future wheat needs for Iran, I recommend an open mind until the harvest is finished. If crop is normal it may be possible under guidance of competent food adviser to squeeze through next year without imports. We must, however, carefully watch 1943 crop indications since a crop failure then might result in wide-spread famine.

Dreyfus

34  Ante, p. 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140].

35 Neither printed.

36  Ante, p. 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141].

37 Not printed.

37a Not printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/220: Telegram

[Document 160]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 20, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 8:45 p.m.]

238. Reference my No. 226, July 7. Relations between Iran Government and UKCC over matter of tires is approaching breaking point. At a meeting Saturday attended by delegates of Ministry of Finance, UKCC and Minor a high Iranian official found it necessary in describing UKCC activities to use such expressions as abuse of confidence, dishonest and unfair treatment. He took violent exception to what he called theft of tires by British (my 226) and said that strong and formal representations will be made to British Legation on subject. Specific question now at issue is disposition of 24,230 tires ordered by Iran Government credits for which were delivered to UKCC. Iran Government insists that UKCC acted only intermediary for obtention of tires for Government while UKCC state tires are theirs and that they will retain and distribute them. Result of UKCC viewpoint if carried would be to place Iran Government at UKCC mercy.

General British attitude in this and other matters is one of destructive criticism of Iranian competence and honesty rather than one of constructive suggestion, a condition of mind which has contributed in no small degree to British unpopularity here. I took matter up yesterday with recently returned British Minister. While he is unduly critical in general of Iranians he seeks a solution on a broad and fair basis. He reacted favorably to a plan suggested by Ministry of Finance under which tires and trucks would be distributed by that Ministry under supervision of a joint Allied-Iranian committee and stated he would support idea in a meeting he is having with UKCC today.

I feel that due largely to UKCC obstruction and deception we are fiddling while Rome burns. Iranians are in a desperate position for road transport and will be unable to move corps [crops] without outside help. I venture to suggest following specification[s:] (1) That we approve distribution of tires and trucks by Ministry of Finance under CSC direction

(2) that we suggest return of tires belonging to Iran Government which [were] requisitioned by British Military, a political act instigated by UKCC

(3) that we consign the 24,230 tires to Iran Government in care of this Legation or CSC

(4) that American expert to supervise distribution of American goods be sent to Iran without delay in order to assist in this matter and

(5) that representations be made to British Government with a view to obtaining UKCC cooperation with Iranian Government in place of its present attitude of obstruction.

Dreyfus

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.5018/5: Telegram

[Document 161]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 21, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received July 21—6:18 p.m.]

4050. We have received a communication from the Foreign Office which in substance reads as follows:

The Foreign Office has been giving much thought recently to the supply situation in Iran with particular reference to the need for insuring more efficient collection and distribution of foodstuffs if famine conditions such as arose in the last war are to be avoided.

The Allies have been obliged during the last 9 months to import into Iran over 50,000 tons of wheat from all sources including the United States. This was necessary as an emergency measure to prevent famine conditions during the winter. But the shipment of such bulky commodities as wheat to Iran by sea besides placing an additional strain on Allied shipping resources can only be effected at the expense of supplies for the Soviet Union to which the largest possible share of Iranian port and transport capacity must be devoted. At the same time it is clearly desirable in [on] grounds both of humanity and interest to see that Iran does not go short of supplies and that order is preserved within an area so vital to Allied communications.

The problem therefore is to find means of insuring that Iran is adequately provisioned without the need for large imports. Normally Iran is self sufficient in all staple foodstuffs except sugar. Recent shortages have been mainly local and are due partly to the breakdown of administration following the Anglo-Soviet occupation38 last autumn and partly to transport difficulties resulting from war conditions. Given suitable administrative action the Foreign Office feels that these difficulties should not prove insuperable but the Iranian Government “who have many awkward tasks on their hands have not yet shown themselves able to deal adequately with the food problem”. The British Legation at Tehran has done everything possible to impress the Iranian Government with the gravity of the present position but fears that more positive steps are necessary to prevent famine. If famine occurs, the Allies would be faced with the alternatives of allocating more shipping, which can ill be spared, for the transport of supplies to Iran or allowing disorder and distress to continue unchecked.

The British Government have already appointed additional officers to service in certain Iranian provincial towns whose main duty is to assist the authorities in the collection of this year’s harvest. But the British Chargé d’Affaires believes some more effective central control is necessary to effect any substantial improvement in the food situation. He has accordingly suggested that a food board should be constituted, with American, British, Soviet and Iranian members; and that this board should have executive power and direct the food policy of the country in all its aspects. The British Chargé has not yet sounded the Iranian authorities whose agreement would clearly be necessary, “but he has reason to believe that the scheme would not be unwelcome to them.” He states that the American Minister has expressed himself as personally in favor of some such scheme provided the Iranian Government agrees, and feels that one of the United States relief experts “for whose services the Persian Government are understood to have applied, might usefully represent the United States on such a board”.

The Foreign Office concludes that the proposal is at present “a tentative one only” but that it is anxious to have the views of the United States Government and the Soviet Government before any steps are taken to put it to the Iranian Government. If the American and Soviet Governments agree in principle that some such measures are desirable, it is the Foreign Office idea that the details could be worked out “by our representatives in Tehran in collaboration with the Persian Government.”

Winant

38 For correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 383 ff.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/221: Telegram

[Document 162]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 22, 1942—noon.
[Received July 22—11:25 a.m.]

240. Reference my 238, July 20. Sir Frank Nixon, London director of UKCC now in Tehran, has intervened personally in difficulties between UKCC and Iran Government. He called on me yesterday to explain his action and viewpoint. He admitted that great mistakes had been made by UKCC in Tehran, especially in riding rough shod over Iranian susceptibilities, and that he now plans to correct these errors. He has begun by reorganizing the company, dismissing some, transferring others, and taking two of most objectionable out of jobs where they have contact with Iran officials. He has called on Dramini, a leading official of Ministry of Finance, to apologize for his employees and to offer cooperation in future. He states he and his new transport manager favor establishment of Allied-Iranian Committee to supervise distribution tires and trucks and that they will give all possible cooperation.

In view of above I recommend we await further developments before making representations I suggested in (5) of my No. 238.

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/218: Telegram

[Document 163]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)39

Washington, July 25, 1942—1 p.m.

191. Your 237, July 17. Department agrees with your view that it would be preferable to handle food matters through a subcommittee of CSC rather than an independent body. Soviet representatives might be invited to sit on subcommittee in advisory capacity if it should be found necessary.

With respect to British Minister’s suggestion that Iranian Ministry of Food be established, Department would authorize you to support this proposal, provided a) you think idea would be acceptable to Iranians and b) you are convinced such a Ministry would increase efficiency in food supply matters within a reasonable time. However, in view of inevitable delays in organization and resulting confusion, we are inclined to think it would be well to postpone any such undertaking at least pending the arrival of an American food and supply adviser.

Hull

39 Repeated to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom as telegram No. 3460, July 25, noon.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/221: Telegram

[Document 164]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, July 25, 1942—6 p.m.

192. Your 238, July 20, last paragraph, and 240, July 22.

1: Department approves distribution of tires and trucks by Iranian Finance Ministry under CSC (or other Anglo-American) direction.

2: We are instructing London to take up informally matter of tires requisitioned by British military.

3: For technical reasons, 24,230 tires have been consigned UKCC, but question of ultimate distribution remains open for decision by appropriate British and American authorities. In light of your 240, we assume British and Iranians will agree to joint distribution in manner satisfactory to all parties. Please take this question up and report developments.

4: Department is endeavoring to obtain a representative to go to Iran to collaborate with British and Iranians in distribution of American supplies ordered by Iranian Government or sent under Lend-Lease requisition for civilian use in Iran. It is hoped he will be able to depart in immediate future. Following his arrival, it is contemplated all American supplies in above categories will be consigned to him. We assume this would be acceptable to Iranians. He would, of course, work closely with Iranians, CSC, UKCC and other agencies in supervising distribution. We are informing British Government, via London, of our plans in this connection; and stating our willingness to discuss in advance instructions given to this American representative.

5: In accordance your 240, Department will make no representations to British at this time, except in regard to tires requisitioned by military.

Please advise Department promptly of all developments, with special reference to details of arrangements worked out for joint Anglo-American-Iranian distribution of tires, trucks and other essential items.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.24/222a: Telegram

[Document 165]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 25, 1942—9 p.m.

3475. In recent months our Minister at Tehran and Iranian Minister here have repeatedly called to our attention bitter dissatisfaction of Iranians with exclusive control exercised by UKCC over importation and distribution in Iran of tires, trucks and other essential articles. They have insisted that Iranian transportation needs were not receiving due consideration and that entire internal transportation system, which depends heavily upon trucks, was on the verge of breakdown which would have disastrous results. General attitude of UKCC toward Iranians was reported as overbearing and uncooperative. On July 20 Minister Dreyfus reported relations had reached breaking point over question of tire distribution and recommended that Department make representations to British Government looking toward modification of UKCC attitude.

On July 22, however, Dreyfus cabled that Sir Frank Nixon, London head of UKCC, was in Tehran and had intervened personally to direct adoption of a more conciliatory policy. Nixon told Dreyfus that UKCC had made great mistakes in Iran, especially in riding rough shod over Iranian susceptibilities, and that he planned to correct errors. He has reorganized corporation’s staff in Iran and has apologized to Iranian Finance Ministry for past attitude of UKCC employees. Nixon favors joint Allied-Iranian supervision of tire and truck distribution, which it is understood Iranians will accept and which is entirely acceptable to Department.

Consequently, Department has decided to await developments before taking up the question with the British Government. Please inform Foreign Office, however, that we feel that a greater degree of American participation in the distribution of supplies sent from the United States would tend to reassure the Iranians and enlist their cooperation in solving the many delicate problems involved, problems which are reported to have given rise to considerable friction between the Iranians and the UKCC. You should add that we are gratified to learn that very recently there have been indications of a UKCC policy of conciliation toward the Iranians, which we believe will have a good effect upon the serious economic and political situation. In view of its frequent suggestions that American advisers of various kinds be sent to Iran, we assume the British Government agrees with the viewpoint that American participation in supply distribution would be helpful. Accordingly, we propose to send to Iran in the immediate future an American representative to collaborate with the Iranian and British authorities in directing the distribution of all civilian supplies sent to Iran from this country in consequence of Iranian Government orders or Lend-Lease requisitions made by or on behalf of the Iranian Government. It is thought that it may be desirable to name a consignee other than the UKCC for such orders, but such a change would in no way affect proper distribution in the light of Allied and Iranian requirements. The American representative would, of course, work closely with UKCC and other British agencies in accordance with general policies determined by consultation between British, American and Iranian authorities, and we should be glad to discuss his instructions with the British Government.

In accordance with Iranian request, supported by British Government, we also hope to send a food and supply adviser for Iranian Government within next few weeks.

The procedure indicated above does not, of course, contemplate any modification of existing arrangement whereby Iranian import requests are to be submitted to Central Supplies Committee at Tehran and forwarded through Middle East Supply Center.

When discussing this with Foreign Office, please take occasion to mention informally a recent instance in which British military in Iran requisitioned 3,000 tires ordered by Iranian Government from United States. We are informed Iranians strongly resent this action and that they plan formal protest. You should indicate that this Government hopes that the Allied forces may find that, without jeopardizing their own requirements, these tires, or at least a portion of them, can be returned to the Iranians for distribution under Allied supervision. Such action, we feel, might have a very beneficial effect in terms of good will.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/222: Telegram

[Document 166]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, July 27, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received July 27—12:37 p.m.]

242. I appreciate helpful views expressed in Department’s 192, July 25. I am glad to report UKCC shows signs of abandoning obstructive tactics in favor of friendly cooperation and that negotiations are proceeding in more cordial atmosphere. UKCC yesterday formally informed Ministry Finance that it consents to immediate delivery to Iran Government of the 3000 requisitioned tires (see paragraph 2 of Department’s 192).

American and British Legations have prepared memorandum which will be delivered to Iran Government tomorrow suggesting solution along following lines:

(1) A transport committee will be set up in Ministry of Finance headed by Iranian official with rank of Under Secretary. American and British representatives will sit on the committee and no objection will be raised to Russian inclusion if desired. Duties of committee would be (a) to organize and supervise Iranian transport, (b) submit to DSC Iranian request for tires, trucks and parts, (c) supervise tire distribution and consider gasoline rationing, (d) prepare legislation to give effect to its findings and (e) explore possibility of increased use of animal transport.

(2) UKCC would restrict its transport activities to (a) goods to Russia, (b) British military needs and (c) Polish military and civil needs. UKCC has expressed approval of plan and offered cooperation. I feel certain Iranians will be pleased to accept plan perhaps with some modification.

This arrangement if successfully carried out would I believe go far toward solving Iran’s transport problem. Iranians would receive as many of the tires and trucks consigned to UKCC as the committee, on which they would be heavily represented, believe necessary. British Minister has already telegraphed for British expert to serve as technical member of committee and he suggests we do same. Meanwhile British Commercial Secretary and Minor will sit on committee. I suggest expert mentioned paragraph 4 Department’s 192 be sent soon as possible to assist in this work.

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.24/222a: Telegram

[Document 167]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 29, 1942—7 p.m.

3533. Department’s 3475, July 25. Tehran reports UKCC has advised Iranian Finance Ministry that 3,000 requisitioned tires will be delivered immediately to Iranian Government. Consequently, you may disregard last paragraph of telegram under reference.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1900: Telegram

[Document 168]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 5, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received August 5—12:51 p.m.]

250. My 248, August 2.40 Qavam41 has assumed duties as Prime Minister and is actively engaged in forming Cabinet which he expects to present to Majlis next Sunday. United Press and Associated Press representatives in interview with Qavam yesterday were much impressed with evident warmth of his statements that he desires strengthen relations with the United States and to obtain American advisers. He spoke of things American to exclusion other topics. When asked what his program would be Qavam picked up a piece of bread from his desk and replied “This is my program, if I can put bread of good quality in hands of all Iranians other problems will be easy to solve”. There are indications Qavam will form relatively strong Cabinet and that he intends to deal with Iran’s pressing food, transport, security and other internal problems with dispatch and energy. I see no reason to believe he will fail to cooperate with Allies. Perhaps to test him on this point British Minister is seeing him today to insist on arrest of a number of persons suspected of pro-German activities.

Dreyfus

40 Not printed.

41 Ahmad Qavam.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/224: Telegram

[Document 169]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 5, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received August 5—11:52 a.m.]

251. Reference my 237, July 17 and Department’s 191, July 25. Wheat situation continues serious. Legation view is that “unless wheat situation is taken seriously in hand, famine with all its accompanying difficulties may soon become a reality”. I agree with this view. Minor food riots in provincial towns continue and cavalry has been parading in Tehran to forestall riots here.

I met with British and Soviet envoys today to discuss situation. It was decided for each of us to approach Qavam, the new Prime Minister, (my 250, August 5 as to Qavam’s status and attitude) to urge that transport board, mentioned in my 242, July 27, be set up without delay and that most energetic steps be taken by Iran Government to obtain control of wheat now being harvested. Qavam, it is reported, intends to set up Ministry of Food and Supply in his Cabinet.

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.5018/5a: Telegram

[Document 170]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 19, 1942—10 p.m.

217. In an interview with Under Secretary August 17 Saleh stated that Iran is facing a critical situation due to food and transport shortage and that despite all assurances given during past months no supplies to remedy this condition have been received. Please telegraph available information on following points: 1. What steps are being taken to relieve wheat shortage? Do you consider situation so serious that Department should press for shipment of wheat despite shortage of shipping space?

2. Do you believe wheat shortage could be relieved without imports if internal transport and distribution were improved?

3. What steps are being taken, through Central Supplies Committee or otherwise, to relieve transport situation? British have repeatedly informed us some 44,000 tires were being sent to Iran (in addition to the 24,230 requisitioned on Iranian behalf and now about to be shipped from this country). Have any of these tires been received and distributed for civilian supply use? Are spare parts and accessories being obtained to place in service large number trucks previously reported laid up? Are additional trucks being obtained from any source?

4. What is status of proposed transport committee?

5. Please cable summary of Iranian requests so far presented to CSC, action taken by Committee and action taken by MESC on any recommendations forwarded by CSC. Do you consider CSC and MESC are functioning efficiently with respect to Iran?

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.5018/6: Telegram

[Document 171]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 26, 1942—noon.
[Received 2:59 p.m.]

271. Department’s 217, August 19. Following answers to Department’s numbered paragraphs.

1. Wheat. See my number 251 August 5. It is doubtful if there is an actual wheat shortage in Iran. The problem is primarily an internal one of collecting in rural areas and distributing to urban areas wheat crop which has just been harvested. Iran is normally self-sufficient in wheat and this year’s crop is on whole fair. The Government has been delinquent in locating the wheat and making the hoarders disgorge and hence a serious shortage in urban centers has developed. Other [Rather?] than take strong measures [to] correct this internal situation the Iranians prefer to have Allies ship 100,000 tons of wheat which will cause prices to fall and hoarders sell. British Legation in note to Prime Minister August 19 takes stand that Allies have fulfilled their obligation by providing Iran with 80,000 tons of wheat which carried them over to the harvest, that since present harvest is good the country should have sufficient wheat for all for the greater part of the coming year and that before turning to Allies Iran should take energetic steps to collect wheat and apply hoarding laws. On Iranian side it may be said that collection is extremely difficult under present circumstances and it may be impossible with the best of good will to obtain control of a large portion of the crop. For example the crop in Azerbaijan is excellent and should help in supplying the urban centers with the 350,000 tons a year they need but it is not expected Soviets will permit surplus to be shipped out.

My recommendation is that we support British stand and insist that Iranians take necessary measures to help themselves before asking us to provide vital shipping space for imports but that we keep an open mind as to necessity of later shipments if these measures fail to remedy situation.

2. Transport and distribution are important phases of wheat problem but it is believed they can be satisfactorily dealt with if basic problem of finding and obtaining control of wheat can be solved.

3 and 4. Active steps are being taken to solve transport problem.

Iranian Government has employed Birkle, formerly UKCC manager here and a transport expert, as director of transport and is now forming after much delay the transport board outlined in my 242, July 27. Iranian Government has obtained possession of part of the 3000 tires mentioned in my 242 but will need considerable stocks in near future. The 44,000 tires imported by British, part already received, are strictly for use of UKCC in war transport and can not be released for civilian use. UKCC has some 17,000 tires in stock and it may be possible for them to lend tires to transport board against eventual return from 24,230 allocated to Iran. Spare parts are being received to place laid up trucks in service. Trucks are not being received from any source. It is hoped that above measures will result in substantial improvement in transport picture.

5. CSC. See my Nos. 192, 204 and 214 of June 9, 18, 25. Iran Government has now called in all outstanding orders (those placed before June 21) and is in process of classifying and submitting them to CSC. So far two commodity groups have been presented to CSC which immediately approved them substantially as presented and passed them on to MESC whose action is as yet unknown. These included 16,000 tons sugar, 398 tons tea, 150 tons paper. Other commodity groups are in process of preparation and CSC is ready to deal with them as soon as presented. Future orders under quotas (see despatch 272 May 2842 ) will be dealt with as soon as outstandings are completed. It is my opinion that CSC and MESC are functioning energetically and efficiently with regard to Iran. Delays have been caused by Iranians first in approving import licensing system; second, in publishing notices; and third, in examining and transmitting outstanding orders to CSC.

Summary. Saleh’s statement that Iran faces critical situation is true but his inference that blame therefor lies entirely with Allies is unfair. It has been very difficult to get Iranian cooperation and there has been great delay, confusion and inefficiency on part of Iranian Government. Both British Minister and I have had to press Prime Minister repeatedly in above matters and our efforts are just now beginning to bear fruit. It will never be possible to satisfy Iranians fully in matter of supplies since they are unable to appreciate basic fact of acute shipping shortage.

Dreyfus

42 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.5018/6: Telegram

[Document 172]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 29, 1942—5 p.m.

227. Your 271, August 26. Department approves your recommendation and authorizes you to join British in insisting that Iranians take all possible steps to effect efficient control and distribution of domestic wheat supplies before requesting further imports.

In taking this action we have in mind imminent departure of Sheridan,43 who should be of great assistance in straightening out internal organization.

Kidd,44 who should be able to help with work of transport board, was to leave London August 27 for Tehran via Cairo.

Welles

43 J. P. Sheridan, appointed as Food and Supply Adviser to the Iranian Government.

44 Philip Kidd, Lend-Lease representative in Iran.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.5018/7: Telegram

[Document 173]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 10, 1942—noon.
[Received September 10—11:54 a.m.]

287. Transport Board mentioned in my 271, August 26, has been organized and held first meeting. It is headed by Ali Motamedi, young Iranian of good record and reputation, and includes delegates for Police and Finance Departments. British Legation is represented by its Commercial Secretary and this Legation by Minor, both of whom will serve until suitable experts can be obtained. Committee considers nationwide registration of motor vehicles in different categories is necessary before it can proceed with tire and gasoline rationing or other essential duties. It has requested authority of Council of Ministers to proceed therewith without delay.

Dreyfus

III. Negotiation of agreement between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Iran regarding food supply for Iran, signed December 4, 1942III. Negotiation of agreement between the United States, the United Kingdom, and Iran regarding food supply for Iran, signed December 4, 1942

[174] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 17, 1942—10 p.m. [Received October 18—12:08 p.m.]

891.00/1922: Telegram

[175] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 19, 1942—8 p.m.

891.00/1922: Telegram

[176] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 19, 1942—10 p.m.

891.00/1922: Telegram

[177] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 20, 1942—5 p.m. [Received October 20—1:33 p.m.]

891.00/1923: Telegram

[178] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 21, 1942—7 p.m. [Received October 23—11:55 a.m.]

891.00/1925: Telegram

[179] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 22, 1942—8 p.m. [Received 8:50 p.m.]

891.24/266: Telegram

[180] The Iranian Legation to the Department of State

Washington, October 23, 1942.

891.5018/18

[181] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 23, 1942—4 p.m. [Received October 23—12:41 p.m.]

891.00/1926: Telegram

[182] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 24, 1942—2 p.m. [Received October 24—11:21 a.m.]

891.00/1928: Telegram

[183] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, October 24, 1942—5 p.m. [Received October 25—7:53 a.m.]

891.00/1927: Telegram

[184] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 26, 1942—5 p.m.

891.00/1925: Telegram

[185] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, October 26, 1942—5 p.m.

891.00/1927: Telegram

[186] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 26, 1942—5 p.m.

891.24/266: Telegram

[187] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 28, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 9:20 p.m.]

891.24/271: Telegram

[188] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 p.m.

891.00/1926: Telegram

[189] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 30, 1942—5 p.m. [Received November 1—1:38 p.m.]

891.00/1933: Telegram

[190] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, October 31, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 8:59 p.m.]

891.00/1934: Telegram

[191] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 4, 1942—6 p.m. [Received November 4—5:25 p.m.]

891.00/1936: Telegram

[192] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 5, 1942—5 p.m.

891.00/1933: Telegram

[193] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 5, 1942—8 p.m.

891.24/271: Telegram

[194] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 6, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 8:38 p.m.]

891.00/1938: Telegram

[195] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 6, 1942—10 p.m.

891.24/271: Telegram

[196] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 7, 1942—1 a.m. [Received 12:25 p.m.]

891.00/1937: Telegram

[197] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 7, 1942—6 p.m. [Received November 7—4:52 p.m.]

891.24/280: Telegram

[198] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 7, 1942—7 p.m.

891.00/1938: Telegram

[199] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 9, 1942—6 p.m. [Received November 10—7:56 a.m.]

891.00/1940: Telegram

[200] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 10, 1942—8 p.m.

891.00/1937: Telegram

[201] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 10, 1942—8 p.m.

891.24/280: Telegram

[202] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 10, 1942—9 p.m. [Received November 10—6:47 p.m.]

891.00/1939: Telegram

[203] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 10, 1942.

891.5018/18

[204] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1942—6 p.m. [Received November 11—3:30 p.m.]

891.24/284: Telegram

[205] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 12, 1942—5 p.m.

891.00/1940: Telegram

[206] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] November 13, 1942.

891.24/284

[207] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 13, 1942—5 p.m.

891.24/284: Telegram

[208] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 14, 1942—2 p.m. [Received November 14—10:45 a.m.]

891.24/287: Telegram

[209] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 14, 1942—midnight. [Received November 14—7:54 p.m.]

891.00/1941: Telegram

[210] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 17, 1942.

891.24/301

[211] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 18, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 10:36 a.m.]

891.00/1944: Telegram

[212] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 18, 1942—6 p.m.

891.24/284: Telegram

[213] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 18, 1942—8 p.m.

891.00/1944: Telegram

[214] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 19, 1942—7 p.m. [Received November 19—5:12 p.m.]

891.24/296: Telegram

[215] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 20, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 9:31 p.m.]

891.00/1951: Telegram

[216] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 24, 1942—10 p.m.

891.00/1938: Telegram

[217] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 25, 1942—9 p.m. [Received 9:07 p.m.]

891.00/1953: Telegram

[218] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 1, 1942—5 p.m.

891.00/1944: Telegram

[219] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 4, 1942—7 p.m. [Received December 5—3 a.m.]

891.24/312: Telegram

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1922: Telegram

[Document 174]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 17, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received October 18—12:08 p.m.]

327. The political situation in Iran has suddenly deteriorated and position of Qavam Cabinet is precarious. The situation derives from strong calling for issue of 2 billion additional rials coupled with widespread dissatisfaction at British refusal to furnish wheat and general discontent at treatment accorded Iran as Allies [ally]. These matters were brought to fore by statement made to press by Sheridan,45 pertinent passages of which follow: “I would like to emphasize that before leaving my country I was assured that the United Nations will not permit Iran to suffer through no fault of our [your?] own. Unfortunately Iran occupies a geographical position which makes it necessary for the United Nations to use your roads and railroads for your [our?] transport of war supplies to Russia. This has caused a complete disruption of your transport services and this as I said above is all due to absolutely no fault of the Iranian people. Every freedom loving individual in the world, yourselves included, must do everything they can to aid the destruction of the German menace.

Rest assured therefore that both the United States and Great Britain have a sincere desire to help you in every way possible but you must help yourselves up to the maximum limit of your own resources. As the months progress if we find that your own resources are insufficient then I assure you that you will have a sympathetic and helping hand from both Britain and America.”

British took exception to Sheridan’s statement since they felt he had no right to bind them to furnish wheat to Iran. Sheridan has assured me he will make no further statements of political nature without consulting me. Situation was further aggravated by Casey46 who, on a short visit to Tehran, offered to trade Iranians 5,000 tons of wheat (half for Iranian Government and half for British troops in Iran) in exchange for 25,000 rifles. Iranians refused on grounds that British have not yet paid for 100,000 rifles and 1,000 machine guns bought several months ago. Casey, because of this refusal and urged on by British Minister who takes stand that no wheat should be supplied Iran, then told Iranians British did not intend to furnish them any wheat and that “I know more about the shipping situation than Mr. Sheridan.”

Prime Minister was then in throes of facing a rebellious Majlis over question of issue of 2 billion additional rials in currency (see my No. 319, October 12.47 The amount was changed to 2 billion to allow 1 billion for Allied war needs and 1 billion for internal needs, principally wheat program which calls for huge subsidy in wheat price to endeavor to bring wheat out of hoarding). The Government and Majlis feel it is useless to make sacrifices for the Allies when the latter refused to furnish wheat or other commodities and when Allies take their potatoes, vegetables and cattle out of Iran. Qavam is discouraged and wishes resign. Majlis in fear inflation and starvation do not wish pass monetary bill.

Prime Minister has telegraphed Churchill48 and Shah telegraphed King asking for benevolent British cooperation in present acute situation.

Crux of situation is wheat. British maintain there is sufficient wheat in hoarding to take care Iran’s needs. I have consistently (see my No. 271, August 2649 and Department’s 277 [227] August 2950 ) advised an open mind on wheat shipments until we can determine whether measures being taken will bring sufficient wheat to light. I recommend we await Sheridan’s judgment after he has had more time to study food situation. Iranians are at present one jump ahead bread shortage which here is tantamount to starvation. Sheridan has been able keep no more than 2 days’ supply wheat on hand in Tehran and is working desperately to bring in stocks from provinces; he is confident can obtain 35,000 tons in Azerbaijan and 15,000 tons in Khorassan if only he can obtain cooperation of Soviet railway and military authorities. My opinion is there will be wheat shortage within few months and we should keep in mind possible necessity of shipping some 50,000 tons.

Iranians seek promise from Allies their essential needs especially in wheat will be met before they commit themselves to further cooperation or issue of currency. If Qavam Cabinet resigns bill for additional currency must necessarily be tabled in which event Allies will be placed in difficult position of suspending war work or taking matters in own hands. I would recommend we give Iran Government guarantee we will undertake, on Sheridan’s statement that he is unable to uncover enough wheat to last till next harvest, to furnish deficit or at least much as we are able. This would I realize run counter to British policy in Iran. I have impression that British Legation is playing again game of divide and rule and may be endeavoring force out Qavam and obtain more suitable Quisling. It is rumored they favor Tadayyan for Prime Minister. At any rate British policy here seems to me to lack comprehension and vision.

Dreyfus

45 J. P. Sheridan, Food and Supply Adviser to the Iranian Government.

46 Richard G. Casey, British Minister of State Resident in the Middle East.

47 Not printed.

48 Winston S. Churchill, British Prime Minister.

49  Ante, p. 153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171].

50  Ante, p. 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1922: Telegram

[Document 175]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 19, 1942—8 p.m.

279. Your 327, October 17. Department concurs in your recommendation regarding assurance to be given Iranian Government if Sheridan determines wheat supply will be insufficient to last until next harvest. However, you should give no guarantee to Iranians pending further instructions. We are sending summary of your telegram to London and instructing London Embassy to endeavor to obtain British agreement to joint assurance. Winant51 at Cairo is also being informed and authorized in his discretion to take question up with British Middle East authorities.

Hull

51 Frederick Winant, United States civilian representative on Middle East Supply Center.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1922: Telegram

[Document 176]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)52

Washington, October 19, 1942—10 p.m.

5155. Tehran’s telegram no. 327, October 17 reports crisis has arisen as result of severe wheat shortage and British Government’s refusal to furnish wheat. Situation is complicated by need for issuance of large additional supply of currency. (Bill has been presented to Iranian Legislature calling for issuance of 2 billion additional rials).

Iranian Government contends its recent harvest will fall far short of meeting domestic requirements for wheat and insists that Allies make up deficit. J. P. Sheridan, newly arrived American food and supply adviser to Iranian Government, has made public statement that Iran must help itself to maximum extent of its resources but that if those resources prove insufficient, Britain and America will extend “a sympathetic and helping hand”. British authorities Middle East have taken exception to Sheridan’s statement. Minister of State Casey offered Iranians 5,000 tons of wheat in exchange for 25,000 rifles. Iranians refused and Casey is reported to have informed them Britain would furnish them no wheat, adding “I know more about the shipping situation than Mr. Sheridan”.

Iranian Cabinet and Legislature unwilling to make sacrifices for Allies in view of refusal to furnish wheat and other urgently needed articles, and Prime Minister Qavam threatens to resign. Legislature does not wish to authorize proposed currency increase. Shah and Prime Minister have cabled King and Churchill requesting benevolent cooperation in present acute situation.

Wheat supply appears to be crux of situation and present shortage appears largely due to hoarding by growers, shortage of transportation material, and inefficient organization for internal distribution. Both British and American Governments have urged Iranian Government to take strong measures to deal with hoarders before requesting supplies of foreign wheat. It is hoped that Sheridan will be able to deal with this situation and to improve transportation and distribution. It is further expected that he will be able to provide exact information regarding available domestic supplies of wheat and whether or not imports will be necessary. Accordingly, our Minister recommends, and Department agrees, that no final decision regarding imports should be taken until Sheridan has had time to survey the situation and make a report. He is fully occupied at present in maintaining the day to day supply of wheat in Tehran.

Minister Dreyfus believes, however, that there will be a real shortage within a few months and that Iranians must be given some assurance from the Allies with regard to meeting their future needs before further cooperation may be expected of them. He points out that if present Cabinet resigns, currency increase bill will be tabled and Allied military forces will find themselves unable to obtain Iranian currency to carry on operations. In addition, Department feels that frequent Cabinet changes are undesirable from point of view of United Nations, since they tend to increase existing Iranian confusion and to foster discontent with regime sponsored by Allies.

Please inform Foreign Office urgently that this Government believes it advisable to give Iranian Government an immediate assurance with respect to future wheat supplies if and when it is determined such supplies are necessary. Therefore, we propose that the British and American Ministers at Tehran be instructed to advise Iranian Prime Minister that if Sheridan in due course reports domestic wheat supplies are insufficient to meet minimum requirements for current year, Britain and United States will see to it that within the full limit of their ability wheat from other sources is furnished to make up the deficit.

In support of this proposal you may inform Foreign Office that this Government feels it is essential to the proper functioning of the supply route to Russia through Iran that the Iranian people should be adequately fed. A starving and rebellious population would, we feel, be an extremely serious obstacle. The United States Government is especially concerned on this account because of the recent arrangement whereby the American Army is to take entire charge of the transportation of supplies to Russia through Iran. As an instance of the difficulties created by the food shortage, you may mention that Colonel Shingler, present head of the American military mission in Iran and Iraq was recently forced to make a special trip to Tehran to urge that bread be provided for the Iranian workers in Persian Gulf ports in order that work on the transshipment of Russian supplies should not be interrupted.

Hull

52 Repeated to the Minister in Egypt for Mr. Frederick Winant as No. 1272 with the following instruction: “In your discretion you may discuss this matter with British authorities and endeavor to obtain their agreement with Department’s viewpoint. Please report immediately any action you may take.”

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1923: Telegram

[Document 177]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 20, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received October 20—1:33 p.m.]

333. Reference my 327, October 17, 10 p.m. After protracted discussions between Prime Minister, Soviet Ambassador, British Minister and myself the Prime Minister has been persuaded to present and defend the currency bill in the Majlis provided American and British Governments agreed to provide any cereal deficiency which may occur up to end of war or at least until next harvest. Prime Minister informs me he will go to Majlis today to seek legislative authority for immediate issue of 500 million rials of currency for purchase of wheat, of which he will then earmark 150 millions for Allied war use. This amount should last about a fortnight. If Allied assurance as to cereals is given he would then press for authority to issue remainder of 2 billion rials.

Because of urgency of currency question we have been seeking a formula which will solve this problem and at same time save the Qavam Government and quiet Iranian fears of starvation. A joint Anglo-American declaration that Iran’s cereal deficiency will be met if such deficiency is clearly established and if Iran takes certain steps to help herself has been suggested by the British Legation and the Prime Minister as a way out of present impasse. A draft declaration is now being worked on and will be cabled to Department as soon as completed. Such a joint declaration would have decided advantage over unilateral declaration recommended in my No. 327 in that it would also find the British and would prevent British from obtaining impression that we are backing the Iranians against their interests. British Legation is recommending to London approval of this declaration.

British Legation is dissatisfied at these recurring financial crises and favors solution along following lines: (1) Legal limit on currency issue to be removed; (2) setting up of a currency board consisting of an Iranian, Russian, American and British members; (3) relimitation on issue of further currency except by sales of foreign exchange in order to prevent continuance of Government’s present policy of avoiding taxation by expediency of long term borrowing. It is doubtful if Iranians would voluntarily approve setting up of currency board suggested. It might be advisable to await Millspaugh’s53 arrival before making any commitment in this regard.

An important factor in Iran’s wheat problem is Azerbaijan surplus of about 35,000 tons. While Soviet officials have expressed willingness to assist in transport of this wheat to Tehran little actual cooperation has been given. I have impressed upon [them] the fact every ton of wheat shipped into Iran means one less ton of vital raw materials for Russia and I hope this argument will have some effect. There are strong indications however that the Soviet military intends buying up this wheat for their own use. Department may wish to call to attention of Soviet Government the harmful effects to Iranian economy of their purchases of large quantities of wheat, cattle and other goods in Iran.

Dreyfus

53 Arthur C. Millspaugh, appointed head of American Financial Mission to Iran.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1925: Telegram

[Document 178]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 21, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received October 23—11:55 a.m.]

334. Section 1. Refer my 333, October 20. There is quoted in section 3 below text of a draft prepared by British Legation of a proposed joint Anglo-American declaration.

Iran Government has prepared and telegraphed to its Legation in London a counterdraft which differs from British draft in following main respects: (1) The joint declaration is changed to an agreement between Iranian, British and American Governments.

(2) Iran Government has struck out paragraph (b) of the engagement which British draft would have imposed on them and agrees only to put into [effect food] and road transport measures recommended by Sheridan.

(3) Iranians have introduced new clause which British had stricken from an earlier draft as objectionable. Clause states British and American Governments are at once importing into Tehran 25,000 tons wheat to be stored in silos as reserve to be supervised by Ministry of Food and Sheridan and disposed of only case necessity and then only on consent of majority of following: Minister of Food, Sheridan, American and British Legations.

Section 2. Iranian draft should be changed to place responsibility for measures regarding road transport on Anglo-Iranian-American Transport Committee which is supreme in such matters.

British state that Iranian allocation on railway is only 200 tons a day so that it would take 125 days to move 25,000 tons of wheat to Tehran from the port to the exclusion of other goods. This argument is hollow for if Iran’s pressing need for essential goods is established it is the duty of the Allies to lend their assistance. In view of length of time involved in shipping wheat and transporting it to Tehran and considering great possibility of a wheat deficiency I am of the opinion that we should approve the Iranian Government’s demand for a reserve of 25,000 tons.

Section 3. Draft declaration dated October 19, 1942: “The Governments of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America bearing in mind that the responsibility for feeding the people of Iran rests primarily upon the Imperial Iranian Government, and having in mind the economic distress that war conditions may bring to the people of Iran, and the desirability of ensuing [ensuring] the supply of bread for the people of Iran until the 1943 harvest, thereby declare as follows:

In consideration of the undertaking given by the Imperial Iranian Government to carry out, (a) All the measures recommended by the American adviser to the Ministry of Food, such as measures to prevent hoarding and the introduction of rationing of foodstuffs, and

(b) All such recommendations of the Road Transport Committee as are certified to be essential for the regulation of the means of road transport in Iran by the majority vote of the following three members of the Committee, namely, the Iranian Chairman and the British and American members of the Committee respectively designated for the purpose by the British and American Ministers in Tehran.

Then, if the Iranian Minister of Food, with the concurrence of his American adviser, and the American and British Legations in Tehran, by a majority vote, are satisfied that all practicable steps have been taken by Iranian Government in accordance with their undertaking referred to above, and that nevertheless the supply of cereals (wheat and barley) which has been or can be collected in and transported to the various centers of consumption, or any one of them, is likely to prove insufficient to feed the population of such center or centers, the following procedure shall be observed: (a) In the case of a deficiency in the total supply of cereals (wheat and barley) the Governments of the United States of America and United Kingdom undertake to arrange for the importation into Iran and delivery to the various centers of consumption of the quantity of cereals (wheat and barley) necessary to make good the deficiency until the following harvest, at such times as may be necessary to obviate the possibility of famine.

(b) In the case of a temporary deficiency in the supply of cereals (wheat and barley) at any particular center (whether there should simultaneously be a general deficiency) the Governments of the United States of America and the United Kingdom undertake to provide and deliver to the particular center of consumption the amount of the temporary deficiency at such times as may be necessary to obviate the possibility of famine.”

Dreyfus

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.24/266: Telegram

[Document 179]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 22, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received 8:50 p.m.]

5908. We discussed the situation in Iran as outlined in Department’s 5155, October 19, 10 p.m., with the Foreign Office and stressed the advisability of giving the Government of Iran an assurance as to future wheat supplies. Foreign Office, however, had just received a message from the British Minister at Tehran transmitting the text of a statement which the Government of Iran desires to publish. In it the public would be told that the British and American Governments have assured the Iranian Government that under certain conditions supplies of wheat, if needed, would be furnished. Foreign Office stated in this connection that it understood that a copy of this proposed statement had been telegraphed to the Department by Minister Dreyfus.

Foreign Office feels that it would be well if the Government of Iran were to issue some form of public statement but the Foreign Office does not approve of the proposed statement of the Government of Iran as presented through the British Minister at Tehran. When a decision has been reached as to the kind of statement the Foreign Office feels might well be issued, Foreign Office will inform us of the proposed text.

In discussing the question further with the Foreign Office of giving the Government of Iran joint assurance as to future wheat supplies, it would be very helpful for us to have the Department’s views on the advisability of the issuance by the Government of Iran of some form of public statement.

Winant

The Iranian Legation to the Department of State 891.5018/18

[Document 180]

The Iranian Legation to the Department of State

Washington, October 23, 1942.

In a three day conference between the British and American representatives and the Iranian Government officials in Teheran regarding the shortage of the food supply of Iran, and taking into consideration the suggestions made by the American and British, the following points have been decided upon: Declaration

The Government of Great Britain and North Ireland, the Government of the United States of America and the Imperial Government of Iran declare:

Though the responsibility of feeding the population of Iran rests primarily upon the Government of Iran, due to the impact of war and the economic difficulties arising therefrom, the three above mentioned governments, in order to provide the minimum subsistence (wheat) until the 1943 harvest is at hand, have agreed: 1. The Iranian Government accepts all the recommendations of the American Adviser to the Iranian Ministry of Supply, such as: the prevention of hoarding, the enforcement of food rationing and the reorganization of transportation facilities.

2. If the Iranian Minister of Supply (in consultation with his American Adviser) and the American and British Legations in Teheran conclude by majority that, after having all the practical measures mentioned in article one carried out by the Iranian Government, there still exists shortages of the primary staple commodities (wheat and oats), the following should be done: (a) In case there is a general shortage of wheat and oats below the minimum requirements of the entire country, the Governments of the United States and Great Britain agree to make arrangements to import an amount equivalent to the deficiency of these two staple commodities and to distribute them to the different centers of consumption at the proper times to prevent famine throughout Iran.

(b) In case there are temporary shortages in certain localities, whether there is a general shortage or not, the Governments of the United States and Great Britain agree to supply the necessary quantity of wheat and oats to those centers at the time of need.

3. To make possible the execution of paragraphs (a) and (b) of the second article, the American and British Governments will immediately bring to Teheran 25,000 tons of wheat, which will be stored in the Government elevators and will be kept there as a reserve under the supervision of the Iranian Ministry of Supply and his American Adviser, who will be responsible for its safe keeping. This will be utilized only in case of urgent necessity and after referring to the majority mentioned in article two.

The British Minister insists that he will not agree to article three with regard to the 25,000 tons of wheat for reserve. The fact is that agitation among the people has risen to such a degree that the only way to achieve the people’s confidence and to improve conditions would be the acceptance of this article. That is the same quantity which His Majesty The Shah asked from His Majesty The King of England and the Iranian Prime Minister asked Mr. Churchill about it. That is based upon the judgment and recommendation of the American Adviser to the Iranian Ministry of Supply. The Iranian Government is sure that a declaration without article three will be ineffective. If such a proposition is agreed to, the emotional tension will be lessened and the Government would then be able to defend in the Madjless the bill for the issuance of the new quantity of bank notes. If the declaration, and especially the third article, is not agreed upon, the threat of famine would make internal revolution inevitable.

A period of two weeks has been set for a reply. We hope that this small help, which we deem necessary for the amelioration of the situation, will be agreed upon. While awaiting the reply, as a proof of our good faith, we would arrange by a special emergency bill to issue a small quantity of bank notes to meet the British need.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1926: Telegram

[Document 181]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 23, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received October 23—12:41 p.m.]

339. Refer my 334, October 21. Soviet authorities in Iran have presented Iran Government formal request for purchase of 5,000 tons of wheat, 15,000 tons barley and 30,000 tons rice. British Minister is trying to exact from Soviets promise that if this request is met they will make no further demands until next harvest, that they will lend every assistance to Iran Government in collection of wheat in Azerbaijan and Khorassan and in its transport by rail or road to Tehran even to extent of providing military trucks to railhead and that they will help Iranians build up wheat reserve in Tehran to give Allies time to meet new situation caused by their purchases. In my opinion there is no assurance Soviets will refrain from making additional demands. For example Sheridan says they informed him that they wish to buy 15,000 tons of wheat.

British Minister telegraphed his Government requesting 20,000 tons wheat be sent Iran soon as possible to meet situation caused by Soviet purchases. In note to Soviet Embassy British Minister stated success this operation will depend on extent of Soviet cooperation and that if Soviets intend to request additional grain later this be made clear at once to British and American Legations. Note calls attention to fact that political situation of Allies in Iran is weakened by Soviet purchases and argument heretofore used that since Iran sorely needed its own wheat for its internal use Allies were not buying Iranian wheat is no longer valid.

This Soviet demand brings out into open what has been known for some time—that Russians, British and Poles are buying up large quantities of Iran food products to detriment of local food situation. It appears to me likely Soviets will not pay cash for grain but rather will offer to pay in cash or goods at some later date.

It is becoming obvious that frantic Iranian appeals for wheat in recent months have been based on more than avarice or caprice. British are slowly swinging around to view this Legation has held for several months, that a wheat shortage would probably develop and that we should be prepared to meet it. There are strong indications Iran’s food situation will become acute during winter and that it would be well in my opinion to begin wheat shipments to Iran without delay.

Dreyfus

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1928: Telegram

[Document 182]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 24, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received October 24—11:21 a.m.]

340. Refer my telegrams of past week on wheat and finance. Developments in [apparent omission] disturbing effect on public opinion and have brought about a state of political confusion and uncertainty. Majlis is in state of near rebellion criticizing Government and the Allies openly and bitterly. Bill for issue of additional 500 million rials had literally to be jammed through Majlis. Not at all certain if Qavam will be able force through bill for issue of remainder of 2 billion rials even if he obtains promises of wheat shipments from Allies. Deputies fail to understand Iran’s basic monetary questions or to comprehend the urgent and overriding nature of Allied problems in Iran. They are so obsessed with dangers of inflation and starvation they cannot see conditions in realistic or practical light. Qavam on other hand while personally distrustful of British shows every indication of basic comprehension of problems and of desire to cooperate in practical sense. Present situation in Majlis is unsatisfactory and if it continues must inevitably end in one of two alternatives—either Qavam Cabinet will fall or Qavam will be compelled dissolve Majlis on grounds it does not represent will of people because improperly elected during former regime.

Press and public also deeply stirred, taking generally view Allies are pushing Iran into inflation and starvation. While American prestige is still high there is growing tendency group Americans with British and Russians and to hold us to certain extent responsible for present conditions. Prices are soaring and poor classes can hardly afford to buy bread, their only staple food. Profiteering is scandalous and Government has not taken corrective measures such as taxation or price control. Financial situation is so unsatisfactory and chaotic that every effort should be made to hasten departure of Millspaugh.

Dreyfus

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1927: Telegram

[Document 183]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, October 24, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received October 25—7:53 a.m.]

1872. Department’s 1272, October 19, 10 p.m.54 Following from feed Winant.

“The British Middle East authorities in Cairo have included me in their deliberations regarding the present crisis in Iran. Their present attitude is reported below and will, I believe, in general conform with the viewpoint of the Department as expressed in telegram under reference. The telegram incidentally was not mentioned by me, although I did inform the Ministry of State that I would telegraph to the Department a report of our discussion.

British authorities here felt that there were three possible solutions to the problem: (a) Application of force, (b) assurance of financial assistance, (c) assurance of material assistance.

(a) In the discussion regarding the application of force, I expressed aversion in principle to the use of force in such instances and pointed out objection to any action that might precipitate fall of the present Government. This viewpoint was generally held by those present and for this and other reasons the resort to force was not recommended.

(b) There appears to be an opinion that by assuring the Iranians of financial assistance the present difficulty could be resolved. However, as this opinion was not generally held, the use of this method of solution was accepted only to the following extent: That a currency commission be established for dealing with future note issues and that the general monetary situation be further explored. The situation in this regard has been temporarily eased by the action of the Iranian Government in agreeing to pass a note issue sufficient in size to provide the necessary rials to cover the next 2 weeks’ requirements.

(c) There was a general agreement that the most practical method of solving the present difficulty was by assurance of material assistance; that is, the protection of the cereal requirements.

On the subject of Persian wheat the British authorities here feel strongly that there is needed a realistic substantiation of the true situation regarding supply. They cannot reconcile an acute shortage of wheat in Tehran, based on any lack of wheat in the country, with the fact that the current harvest has just been gathered. They believe that the difficulty is the direct result of unsatisfactory mechanics of Iranian distribution; that is, inability of the Iranian civil authorities to prevent large scale hoarding, inadequacy of the motor transport system and ineffective administrative organization for internal distribution.

The British authorities therefore insist on receiving more accurate information on the present supply and an adequate control for the handling of wheat supplies in the future. To this end there is proposed the establishment of a joint Anglo-American-Russian-Persian food board.

It is contemplated that there will be a board of five and consisting of the Iranian Minister of Supply, probably as chairman; Sheridan, the American adviser; and a representative from each British, United States and Soviet Governments. The board would be governed by a majority.

The Iranian Government will be asked to agree to abide by the findings of the board, expressed by its majority vote, in all matters affecting the supply of cereals, and to put into effective execution all instructions concerning wheat and such correlated subjects as motor transport, bread rationing, bread adulteration, hoarding.

Upon the guaranteed compliance of the Iranian Government to these requirements of the proposed food board, the British authorities propose a declaration, or a notification to the Iranian Government on the part of the three respective Allied Governments to the effect that:

If the joint food board determines that there is not sufficient quantities of cereals to avert famine and this notwithstanding the measures advocated by the board and acted upon in good faith by the Iranian Government then one or more of the contracting governments will undertake to provide for sale to the Iranian Government wheat in sufficient quantities to avert the threatened famine.

The British are fully aware of the importance of avoiding unrest and disorders in a country used as a supply route to Russia. It is in the interest of maintaining supplies to the Russian front that the British authorities are loath to import for delivery in Tehran a commodity such as wheat which will necessarily displace the hauling of an equal amount of war munitions.

It is hoped that by closer cooperation with the Russians there may result a better system for handling the Persian cereal situation. For instance instead of importing wheat to Basra for hauling over the railroad to Tehran it might prove better for the war effort to draw on some of the wheat stocks in the Russian zone.

Any further discussions occurring here which might bear on the Iranian situation will be promptly reported to the Department.”

Not repeated to Tehran.

Kirk

54 See footnote 52, p. 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176].

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1925: Telegram

[Document 184]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 26, 1942—5 p.m.

289. Your 334, October 21.

1: Iranian Minister has presented his Government’s draft, which appears to be in form of joint Anglo-American-Iranian declaration.55 We are studying this together with British draft transmitted in your telegram.

2: We are inclined to agree, tentatively, that road transport measures should be decided by Transport Committee, provided that body is disposed to give full consideration to Sheridan’s suggestions. It is assumed he will be member of committee or at least have full opportunity to express his views at all times.

3: We are also inclined to concur in Iranian request that 25,000 tons wheat be made available without delay, but we believe wording of draft should be slightly modified. As presented to Department it reads “the American and British Governments will immediately bring to Tehran 25,000 tons of wheat”. It would seem preferable to substitute something like the following: “the American and British Governments undertake to transport to Tehran at the earliest possible date 25,000 tons of wheat”.

4: We would suggest that the general undertaking of the American and British Governments, as stated in the second paragraph (a) of third section your telegram, be qualified somewhat as follows: “the Governments of the United States and United Kingdom undertake to do everything within their power to arrange etc.” It is impossible to foresee developments in the transportation field during coming months, and Department fears an unqualified undertaking might later lay us open to a charge of breach of faith.

5: We would like an explanation of the reasons for second paragraph (b) third section your message. It is not understood why Anglo-American Governments should undertake to remedy temporary local deficiency of cereals, in the absence of a general shortage. This would seem to be primarily question of internal transport and distribution, with which Iranian Food Ministry and Transport Committee should deal.

6: London informs us Foreign Office favors some form of public declaration but does not agree to text transmitted by British Legation. Foreign Office has promised to give us text which it would approve.

7: We are asking Cairo to repeat to you its 1872 to Department56 which reports British authorities there propose formation of Anglo-American-Russian-Iranian food board to handle all phases of grain situation.

8: Foregoing is for your information and comments and for use in consultation with your British colleague.

Hull

55 See note from the Iranian Legation, October 23, p. 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180].

56  Supra.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 891.00/1927: Telegram

[Document 185]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, October 26, 1942—5 p.m.

1304. For Winant. Department’s 1272, October 19,57 and your 1872, October 24. Department and Foreign Office London are now considering suggested Anglo-American-Iranian announcement whereby British and American Governments would undertake, under certain conditions, to make good any deficit in Iranian cereal supplies which may be determined by Food Adviser Sheridan. Foreign Office and Department approve announcement in principle but are studying possible modifications of draft prepared at Tehran.

British understood to object to Iranian request for clause binding Allies to provide immediately 25,000 tons wheat as reserve at Tehran in order to restore public confidence in ability of Iranian Government to maintain food supply. You may wish to consult MESC on this point and may say Department favors Iranian request, which is supported by our Minister Tehran. Dreyfus indicates food situation will become acute during winter and feels steps should be taken now to meet anticipated situation. Soviets are asking Iranians for 5,000 tons wheat, 15,000 tons barley and 30,000 tons rice. If made, these purchases will aggravate situation and increase responsibility of Allies for ensuring Iranian supplies.

Please repeat your 1872 to Tehran. Solutions so far reported by Tehran have not mentioned proposal to form Anglo-American-Russian-Iranian food board but have placed responsibility for determining need and for organizing distribution on Iranian Food Minister, Food Adviser Sheridan, Transport Committee, and American and British Ministers.

Hull

57 See footnote 52, p. 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.24/266: Telegram

[Document 186]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 26, 1942—5 p.m.

5300. Your 5908, October 22. Department is studying draft announcement prepared by British Legation Tehran and alternative draft drawn up by Iranian Government. It is understood both drafts have been submitted to Foreign Office.

Principal divergences appear to be (a) that Iranians place responsibility for road transport organization on Food Adviser Sheridan, whereas British leave this authority in Anglo-American-Iranian Transport Committee; and (b) Iranians request undertaking by British and American Governments to transport 25,000 tons wheat to Tehran immediately in order to constitute a reserve which would improve public confidence in Iranian Government’s ability to maintain food supply. British Minister Tehran objects to this request.

Department approves proposed announcement in principle and favors Iranian request for early supply of 25,000 tons wheat. However, pending clarification of certain points on which we are consulting Tehran, we are not prepared to make a decision as to the exact terms or wording. In this connection we should be glad to have any text agreed upon by Foreign Office and we shall submit our own as soon as sufficient information is received.

From reports which we have received, we believe food situation in Iran is becoming steadily more serious and that it may become disastrous if preparations are not made now to meet later contingencies. Minister Dreyfus reports that Soviets are seeking to buy substantial quantities of Iranian wheat, barley and rice. Such purchases will, of course, aggravate shortage in Iran and will also place a greater and more direct responsibility upon the United Nations for maintaining Iranian food supply.

Cairo now informs us British authorities there contemplate establishment of British-Russian-American-Iranian food board to deal with all phases of grain supply and distribution. We should be glad to have Foreign Office reaction to this proposal.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.24/271: Telegram

[Document 187]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 28, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 9:20 p.m.]

6015. Reference is made to paragraph 3 of the Department’s telegram 5300, of October 26, 5 p.m. concerning draft announcement dealing with situation prevailing in Iran. The following is the text of the announcement as approved by the Foreign Office: “The Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the Imperial Persian Government;

Considering that the responsibility of feeding the people of Persia rests primarily on the Imperial Persian Government, but that it is desirable, as war conditions may bring economic distress to the people of Persia and it is the general policy of the Governments of the United States and the United Kingdom to safeguard the economic existence of the peoples of the Middle East against such distress, to take all possible steps to ensure the supply of bread for the people of Persia until the gathering of the harvest in 1943;

Having regard to the undertaking given by the Imperial Persian Government to carry out (a) all measures recommended by the United States adviser to the Ministry of Food, including measures to prevent hoarding and the introduction of the rationing of foodstuffs, and (b) all recommendations of the Road Transport Committee which are certified to be essential for the regulation of the means of road transport in Persia by the majority votes of the following three members of that committee, namely the chairman appointed by the Imperial Persian Government and the members designated by the British and United States Ministers at Tehran respectively;

Have agreed as follows: (1) If the Persian Minister of Food, with the concurrency of the United States adviser, and the United States and British Ministers at Tehran decide, by a majority vote, that they are satisfied that all practical steps have been taken by the Imperial Persian Government under their undertakings referred to above, and that nevertheless the supply of cereals (wheat and barley) within Persia is insufficient to cover the minimum needs of the population of Persia for the current year ending with the gathering of the 1943 harvest, the Governments of the United States of America and of the United Kingdom will take all steps, within the full limit of their powers, to ensure that supplies of cereals will be brought to Persia from other sources sufficient to make up the deficiency.

(2) The Imperial Persian Government are responsible for the distribution of cereals within Persia and for ensuring that a deficiency in one area is met by supplies from another area in Persia when the total supply of cereals within Persia is sufficient for the needs of the population of the country as a whole. The Imperial Persian Government are also responsible for the distribution to necessitous areas of any supplies brought into Persia from other sources in fulfilment of the undertaking of the other two Governments in article 1 above. The Governments of the United States of America and of the United Kingdom will take all steps, within the full limit of their powers, to ensure that the means of transport at the disposal of the Imperial Persian Government shall be sufficient, if put to the best possible use, for the proper distribution of these cereals. In witness whereof the undersigned, being duly authorized to this effect by their respective Governments, have signed the present agreement and have affixed their seals.

Done at Tehran this . . . . . day of . . . . . in triplicate.”

The text of the announcement has been telegraphed to the British Minister at Tehran with instructions to hold it until informed by Minister Dreyfus that the Department’s concurrence has been given. The Foreign Office is of course prepared to consider any changes in this proposed announcement that the Department might wish to make. It is also prepared carefully to consider any draft which the Department prepares.

With reference to making some wheat available as soon as possible Foreign Office states that it has advised the Ministry of War Transport here that it approves supplying 20,000 tons. Foreign Office adds in this connection that it would not object to having up to 25,000 tons supplied, the figure mentioned by the Department.

In order to meet the serious currency situation Foreign Office states that in agreement with the Iranian authorities arrangements have been made within the framework of the Anglo-Iranian Financial Agreement of May 26, 1942 for issuing rial currency in an amount estimated to be sufficient to meet needs at least until November 2 of this year. Foreign Office is very much concerned over the currency situation and feels strongly that an early solution of this problem must be found. With a view to facilitating this Foreign Office inquires whether the Department would not consider instructing Minister Dreyfus to tell the Iranian authorities that the Department regards the carrying out of the terms of the Anglo-Iranian Financial Agreement to our interests as well.

As to the proposed British-Russian-American-Iranian Food Board mentioned in the Department’s telegram 5300 of October 26 Foreign Office states that it feels that before new steps are taken in this respect the Soviet Ambassador in Tehran ought to recommend the establishment of such a board to his Government. The British Minister in Tehran has been asked to suggest to the Soviet Ambassador that he may care to submit such a recommendation to his Government.

Foreign Office like Department views situation prevailing in Iran as serious. It appreciates having been kept so fully informed of Department’s attitude and it wants to cooperate closely with the Department in meeting the situation there.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1926: Telegram

[Document 188]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 p.m.

299. Your 339, October 23. For your confidential information, the Soviets are asking America and Britain to supply a large quantity of wheat to Russia. Consequently, Department considers it unwise to raise any blanket objection to Russian purchases of Iranian wheat. It would seem advisable to allow reasonable quantity of Iranian wheat to go to Russia, making up any Iranian deficit with Anglo-American wheat.

However, we regard it as most important that Russian purchases should be carefully calculated to avoid stripping any part of Iran of the grain needed for local consumption. They should also be regulated in time and amount in such a way as to allow for inevitable time factor in shipment of Anglo-American wheat supplies to Iran. Department feels it would be extremely unfortunate if exports to Russia, or consumption by local Russian forces, should cause a critical shortage in the interim period before replacement supplies could arrive.

Accordingly, we concur in position taken by British Minister, as reported in your telegram under reference. In your discretion, you may join Bullard58 in representations along this line to Russian authorities.

Hull

58 Sir Reader W. Bullard, British Minister in Iran.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1933: Telegram

[Document 189]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 30, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received November 1—1:38 p.m.]

350. Department’s 289, October 26. British Legation has received authorization from Foreign Office to proceed with negotiations for a tripartite declaration on basis of amended version of rift [draft] given in my 334, October 21. Copy of amended draft is understood to have been furnished Department by British Government.

However British Legation is now of opinion this declaration does not meet situation fully for while British and Americans would be bound to supply wheat until next harvest the Iranians could again resort to what British term “blackmail” when the 2 billion rials are exhausted within a few months. The Minister has therefore proposed to London the abandonment of present basis of negotiation and proceeding along following lines (1) British and American Governments undertake to insure Iran’s wheat supply until war’s end and to ship 25,000 tons soon as possible, (2) Iran to remove legal limit tonnage issue, to take out of hands of Majlis right to restrict note issue, and to set up currency board outlined my 333 October 20.

Draft declaration given in my 334 had weakness from American viewpoint that while we were bound to supply Iran with wheat, the Iranians were not bound in the event of a breach of the British-Iranian financial agreement to supply us with rials.

Reference paragraph 5 of Department’s 289. Reason for insertion of paragraph (b) was that Iranians are afraid their internal transport will break down and wish a firm Allied pledge to assist in transport if necessary. The Iranians are not unreasonable in this since their road transport is badly depleted and since Allies have done little to help build it up by furnishing trucks and tires. I understand that British Foreign Office objected to this clause but that they are prepared to go much farther and give some sort of direct guarantee of aid to Iranian internal transport.

Dreyfus

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1934: Telegram

[Document 190]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, October 31, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 8:59 p.m.]

1908. Department’s 1304, October 26, 5 p.m. Following from feed Winant.

“Further discussions with Middle East authorities in Cairo regarding crisis in Iran bring out following points: (1) In view extreme emergency due to November 2 expiration date for further note issued [issue?] it is felt that it may be necessary to rely on notification to the Iranian Government to be simultaneously presented by the United States, United Kingdom and Soviet Governments requesting a continuance of the expiring time limit.

(2) Currency note issue still main stumbling block. London feels Iranian Government should observe terms of financial agreement entered into for duration of war and questions efficacy of proposed currency commission. Here there are suggestions of possible concessions on rate of exchange and convertibility of balances into gold. Unanimous British opinion that use of force is very much last resort.

(3) Food declaration in form of agreement to which Iranian Government would be party is fully agreed upon by British authorities. They question however the physical facilities of providing any immediate reserve of 25,000 tons of wheat in Tehran and also question location of any such reserve when it might be accumulated. They prefer location at ports to better service southern area and for reason that reserve in Tehran might prove deterrent to uncovering hoarded wheat. Also due to existing strained capacity of railroad Tehran should normally be supplied from adjacent and northern area.

(4) Fact that Russians seek to purchase from Iranian authorities some 20,000 tons wheat and barley is not understood here to mean that no further supply of cereals will be available for Tehran from Russian zone in Iran. Cooperation of Soviet Government is sought not only to assist Iranians in wheat for Tehran but also to preserve operation of railroad from South at maximum capacity for war supplies for Russian front.

To replace the 20,000 tons of cereals for which the Russians negotiated it is proposed to import into Iran a like amount of cereals as the shipping situation permits.

(5) In spite of scarcity of wheat in Tehran it is still felt here that motor transport is one of chief difficulties. Until appearance of civilian trucks scheduled for Persian Gulf area it is planned to provide lorries to assist temporarily Iranian Government in handling wheat. It is hoped to release 150 lorries over 1 month’s period for this work. Run from this area to Tehran requires about 17 days.

(6) In all discussions to date and in most telegrams seen point has been stressed of importance united and fully cooperative action on part of United States and British Governments through their Ministers in Tehran. The British here point out the necessary concern of the United States Government in the matter of an adequate supply of rials. They believe that the two Governments should present a firm common front regarding financial aspects as well as regarding material supplies covering cereal requirements. They further believe that if the present pressing problem may be met that it is unlikely that future situations will be as complicated particularly in view of the expected increased efficiency of the Iranian Government because of the additions of American advisers.”

Not repeated to Tehran.

Kirk

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1936: Telegram

[Document 191]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 4, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received November 4—5:25 p.m.]

359. A reply to my No. 350, October 30, is urgently requested as local situation continues to deteriorate and is rapidly reaching critical stage. Prime Minister informs me Allied delay in this matter is very embarrassing to him and is causing local situation to become hourly more critical. There have been a number of bread riots and suicides in last few days.

Prime Minister has placed another 100 million rials of the 500 millions recently voted by Majlis at disposal of Allies. This should last a maximum of 10 days [at] which time currency crisis will become acute. Allied food declaration should no longer be delayed. Its publication would not only relieve political situation somewhat but would also strengthen hands of Government in obtaining Majlis’ approval of pending currency bill.

It is quite possible that British are deliberately delaying solution of food and currency problems by making additional demands and suggestions, such as those outlined in my No. 350. I should not be surprised if they intend to occupy Tehran on pretext that Iranians have not lived up to agreement to furnish rials. This would be done with large forces which are now at Qum, having arrived there ostensibly for winter quarters and to make room in Kermanshah area for Polish troops.

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1933: Telegram

[Document 192]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 5, 1942—5 p.m.

306. Your 350, October 30. Department is advising London that we agree to Foreign Office draft announcement, with two minor changes of phraseology. Principal change is substitution of words “Iran” and “Iranian” for “Persia” and “Persians” throughout.

Provided British believe necessary shipping will be available, we are proposing that announcement be accompanied by simultaneous public statement that American and British Governments will transport to Iran as soon as possible 25,000 tons wheat to be stored under supervision Iranian Ministry of Food in whatever parts of country may seem most desirable, this reserve stock to be used only in an emergency and with approval of a majority of Iranian Food Minister, American Minister, and British Minister.

We are suggesting to Foreign Office that future currency needs would seem to be adequately assured if terms of Anglo-Iranian Financial Agreement of May 26 were strictly fulfilled by Iranian Government. To guarantee this fulfillment, we are suggesting that agreement be formally approved by Majlis, thus binding that body to take whatever legislative action may be necessary to carry out its terms, and we have offered to support British in requesting such approval as condition to our agreement to wheat undertaking.

Department feels this procedure would be less offensive to Iranians than suggested four-power currency board and would also present fewer administrative difficulties.

We are not inclined to favor British Minister’s proposal that we guarantee Iranian wheat needs for duration of war, as this would commit us too far in future and would also remove some of incentive for Iranians to put own house in order.

Department is somewhat puzzled at recurrent need for ever-larger Iranian note issues. Unless United Nations expenditures and general price level have risen to a point far higher than we have understood, it is assumed that the cause must be failure of currency to complete normal cycle and return to banks for reissue. Please let us have your comments on this, taking into consideration following points: a) Is currency hoarded by laborers and farmers who receive it in first instance?

b) Is it hoarded by merchants, landlords and others of upper class who are unable to spend it and distrust banks?

c) Have prices risen to such an extent that increased note issue is absorbed in normal circulation?

d) If notes are being hoarded, what measures are being considered to bring them into circulation?

Department feels that urgent consideration should be given to some means of ensuring supply of rials to United Nations without continuous increases in currency circulation, which will soon be more than double June 1941 volume, and we are expressing this view to London.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.24/271: Telegram

[Document 193]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 5, 1942—8 p.m.

5534. Your 6015, October 28. Department agrees to text of announcement prepared by Foreign Office, with following minor changes: 1. Wherever the words “Persia” and “Persian” are used, we would very much prefer to substitute “Iran” and “Iranian”. We suggest this amendment not only because it accords with our own practice but because of the definite preference of the Iranian Government, which would be a party to the declaration.

2. For clarity, we suggest changing first part of second paragraph to read as follows: “Considering that the responsibility of feeding the people of Iran rests primarily on the Imperial Iranian Government, but that it is desirable, in as much as war conditions may bring economic distress to the people of Iran, and in as much as it is the general policy etc.”

Provided British are confident that necessary shipping will be available, Department suggests that simultaneous announcement be made that British and American Governments will transport to Iran as soon as possible 25,000 tons wheat, which will be stored under supervision of Iranian Ministry of Food in whatever parts of country may seem most desirable, this reserve stock to be used only in event of an emergency and with the approval of a majority of Iranian Food Minister, American Minister, and British Minister.

Department understands there is some apprehension lest proposed joint undertaking with respect to wheat leave Iranians free at some later date to raise new difficulties with respect to currency issue. We assume, however, that provisions of Anglo-Iranian Financial Agreement of May 26 would be adequate, from British point of view, to cover any situation which might arise, provided this agreement were strictly fulfilled by Iranian Government.

As we see it, the difficulty is that the agreement was never approved by the Majlis, which consequently does not consider itself legally bound to take the legislative action required to implement it. Accordingly, you may inform Foreign Office that this Government would be willing to support British in requesting that financial agreement be given Majlis sanction as a condition to our agreement to undertaking with regard to wheat.

We believe, however, that continuous expansion of Iranian currency circulation cannot be considered satisfactory solution of problem. It is pertinent to note that in June, 1941, authorized circulation was less than two billion rials, while it is now three billion five hundred million and it is proposed to increase it to five billion. In view of Iranian fears of inflation, further expansion of note issue at this rate would seem likely to encounter increasing official and popular opposition and might provide the basis for inflationary developments which would be difficult if not impossible to control. Consequently, we feel that urgent consideration should be given to some method of making rials available for the United Nations without repeated new issues. We should be glad to have views of Foreign Office on this matter, together with any information available to British which would shed further light on basic causes of existing situation.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1938: Telegram

[Document 194]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 6, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 8:38 p.m.]

361. British Minister informs me British Intelligence officers have uncovered widespread plot by German agents to seize power and commit sabotage in case Germans near Iran. Plot is alleged to have been discovered as result of seizure of documents belonging to a German named Meyer. British commanding officer Iran said to have asked London for permission to take action at his discretion.

Situation here is already so critical that should attempt be made by British to arrest large number of prominent Iranians said to be involved in this plot Qavam Government would probably fall and conditions become so chaotic military occupation of Tehran would be inevitable.

It is not beyond realm possibility that British have exaggerated or manufactured this plot as excuse for military occupation of Tehran (see last paragraph my 359, November 4).

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.24/271: Telegram

[Document 195]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 6, 1942—10 p.m.

5581. Department’s 5534, November 5. Following telegram has been received from Tehran:

[Here follow first two paragraphs of telegram No. 359, November 4, 6 p.m., from the Minister in Iran, printed on page 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191].]

Please convey substance of above to Foreign Office and state that Department hopes action on wheat declaration and announcement regarding shipment 25,000 tons wheat may be taken immediately. Please advise us urgently of British decision.

For your information and comments there is quoted below Section 2 of Tehran telegram under reference:

[Here follows text of last paragraph of telegram No. 359.]

Additional demands and suggestions mentioned included removal of currency control from Majlis and establishment of four-power currency board.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1937: Telegram

[Document 196]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 7, 1942—1 a.m.
[Received 12:25 p.m.]

362. My 359, November 4. British Legation has again altered attitude toward food declaration and now takes view that [in] view [of] serious deterioration of situation in Iran, the declaration should be made only against greater concessions and assurances on part Iranians. They believe it is useless to obtain satisfaction on currency matter alone only to be presented later with new problems and demands which will require concessions and negotiations. They consider now is time set stage for complete Iranian cooperation. British Minister is therefore telegraphing London recommending British and American[s] (if United States agreement can be obtained) are prepared support Qavam or any other Iranian Government only in following circumstances: 1. Iran Government must be prepared support war effort and to give assurances that hoarding laws will be enforced, rials guaranteed, price control instituted, press controlled and security maintained.

2. To enable Government carry out these engagements Government should seek full powers from Majlis for 6 months or year.

3. Allies may call on Prime Minister to modify Cabinet as they see fit.

4. Food declaration will be given only against Iranian acceptance above condition.

British Minister in his cable admits this course of action may lead to fall of Government and even necessity of use of force but states that alternative is political and economic chaos. He also states he is now considering composition of alternative governments.

Seems to me certain that Majlis will not grant these full powers nor even those outlined in my 350, October 30. Result of attempts to obtain their compliance will be fall of Qavam either through resignation or no confidence vote. In this event British must be prepared (1) to install alternative government which will close Majlis, throttle press and generally do Allied bidding or (2) occupy Tehran and set up Quisling government.

It would appear that British have determined on policy of presenting Iranians with demand that could not possibly be accepted with ultimate intention of occupying Tehran and setting up puppet government. Their reasons for this are not clear but may include (1) honest belief that present confused and unsatisfactory situation can only thus be remedied or (2) intention of getting Iranian situation under control (see my 361, November 6 as to Fifth Column plot) in view of possibility of German threat toward Iran this winter.

I am in agreement with British that Government should seek full powers from Majlis and have gone so far as to suggest this course informally to Prime Minister. This is necessary to eliminate destructive influence of Majlis, to be able to control irresponsible press and to accomplish anything substantial. However, I am not convinced that the British have chosen the proper method of accomplishing this aim and I cannot conscientiously recommend that we support these new British demands. I am hopeful that the same thing can be accomplished by the use of informal and friendly, but firm, pressure on Government.

I am anxiously awaiting Department’s reply to my 350 in order to inform Qavam who has been summoned to Majlis session Sunday for interpellation on food situation. I fear the new British move reported above will so confuse the situation that Qavam’s position will become untenable.

Dreyfus

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.24/280: Telegram

[Document 197]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 7, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received November 7—4:52 p.m.]

6257. Substance of Department’s 5534, November 5, 8 p.m. and of first three paragraphs of Department’s 5581, November 6, 10 p.m. conveyed to Foreign Office. Replies and comments to date of Foreign Office on points dealt with in Department’s telegram are:

1. Foreign Office agreeable to the minor changes in the proposed announcement on Iran which are suggested by the Department in paragraphs 1 and 2 of its 5534 of November 5. Foreign Office asks that Department inform American Minister at Tehran accordingly and give him the necessary instructions to enable immediate publication of announcement.

2. Foreign Office also requests that Department seriously consider instructing our Minister at Tehran actively to support British Minister at Tehran in his discussions with the Iranian authorities on proposals to find a long-term solution of the currency situation, the first step towards such a solution being a proposal to divest the Majlis of control over currency matters and to vest this control in a currency commission.

3. With reference to the immediate shipment of a supply of wheat to Iran Foreign Office states that it is trying to arrange for the shipment of 20,000 tons, this figure having been taken because that is the amount of wheat and barley which it is understood the Soviets have purchased in Iran and the 20,000 tons serve, therefore, as a replacement for Soviet purchases. If after arrangements have been completed for shipping these 20,000 tons, the Department still desires that an additional 5,000 tons be shipped the British authorities, Foreign Office states, would probably not object.

Foreign Office adds that it prefers to have the 20,000 tons of wheat looked upon as a replacement for that which the Soviets have purchased rather than as a reserve. Foreign Office prefers this because it believes that if the Iranian authorities look upon this supply of wheat as a “reserve” rather than a replacement, they will be less inclined to cooperate in meeting the situation that has arisen in Iran.

With further reference to the shipment of wheat Foreign Office states that it has been told by the British shipping authorities that it will be very difficult to find the tonnage necessary for transporting immediately 20,000 tons to Iran. Moreover, it is felt that the arrival of the whole amount at once would increase the delay of clearing other goods through the ports of Iran. It has consequently been decided to ship 5,000 tons of the wheat this month, another 5,000 tons in December and the remaining 10,000 tons as soon thereafter as possible.

Mr. Casey at Cairo has been asked to advise the Middle East Supply Center of the shipping arrangements that have been made and to tell the Middle East Supply Center to make the necessary local adjustments. Mr. Eden59 in the meantime has told the Soviet Ambassador here, Mr. Maisky, of these arrangements pointing out at the same time that the shipment of this amount of wheat to Iran would necessarily entail a reduction proportionately in the transportation of supplies to Russia over the Iranian route.

Foreign Office adds further that the Ministry of War Transport is very anxious that those authorities of the United States Government having charge of shipments to the Iranian Gulf should understand the situation fully so that arrangements will be made for shipments to Russia to be reduced in proportion to the quantity of wheat sent to Iran. Such arrangements must be made in time, it is stressed, to avoid serious congestion at the Iranian gulf ports.

4. Foreign Office also states that when Mr. Eden informed Mr. Maisky of the proposed announcement on Iran Mr. Maisky replied that he thought his Government would like to become a party to the announcement and also to participate on the Road Transport Committee mentioned in the announcement. Mr. Eden told Mr. Maisky that he saw no objection to that so long as the Soviet Government assumed the obligations accompanying such participation. Mr. Maisky then said he would consult his Government, which he has done, but he has not as yet received a reply.

When informing us of the foregoing the Foreign Office made it very plain that it felt that the efforts that are being made to find a solution for the critical problems that have arisen in Iran should not be slacked in any way pending further word from Mr. Maisky nor, specifically, should the issuance of the announcement on Iran be delayed.

5. With reference to section 2 of Tehran’s telegram referred to in the Department’s 5581, of November 6, we can say emphatically that at no time during the discussions which we have had during the past weeks with British officials on Iran have we felt that the British were trying to delay the finding of a solution of the food and currency problems. On the contrary these officials have throughout shown great concern and full appreciation of the seriousness of the situation prevailing in Iran and of the necessity of finding a solution as quickly as possible.

Winant

59 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1938: Telegram

[Document 198]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 7, 1942—7 p.m.

5604. Following telegram has been received from Tehran:

[Here follows text of telegram No. 361, November 6, 5 p.m., from the Minister in Iran, printed on page 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194].]

Please urgently advise Foreign Office that we hope British authorities will proceed with utmost caution and regard for Iranian sensibilities in any action which they may take with respect to alleged conspirators. We consider it especially desirable that no public action of any kind be taken against Iranian nationals until tension caused by wheat and currency problems has relaxed.60

Hull

60 The foregoing paragraph was repeated to the Minister in Iran as Department’s No. 311, November 7, 8 p.m., with the following instruction: “In your discretion you may inform British authorities Tehran that above represents Department’s attitude.” (891.00/1937)

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1940: Telegram

[Document 199]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 9, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received November 10—7:56 a.m.]

365. Department’s 306, November 5. Iran Government has suggested following changes in food declaration: (1) They seek assurance that declaration in no way changes British obligations under British-Soviet-Iran treaty: (2) they wish to alter article 1 of declaration to provide that we will “undertake to arrange for importation of cereals” rather than merely to take all steps within the full limit of our powers; and (3) they desire that in article 2 we undertake to move cereals from an area with a surplus to a necessitous area in case they are for reasons beyond their control unable to do so. In making last two suggestions Iranians have in mind both heavy Allied purchases of their food and constant Soviet obstruction to shipment of wheat from Azerbaijan. British agree to comply with 1 but firmly refuse to agree to 2 and 3.

Both British Minister and I have informed Prime Minister that Anglo-Iranian financial agreement of May 26 must be ratified by Majlis as condition to our making food declaration. Prime Minister is taking British refusal to accede to his suggested [suggestion] under consideration and promises early reply. An expression of the Department’s attitude toward these proposed changes will be appreciated in case Prime Minister persists.

Iranians base their requests enumerated above on sincere belief that Allies, far from having lived up to their pledges to Iran, have pillaged the country to such an extent that a firm and inescapable rather than a vague promise must now be obtained. There is much to be said for Iranian viewpoint for the country has been indeed pillaged of food and transport by Allies. Allies have taken over Iran railways; UKCC has taken 1700 Iranian trucks and Soviets 400 while newly formed Iranian transport organization has only 180. UKCC has created major passenger crisis by taking about 200 of Tehran’s 300 buses. British appear to be bent on obtaining a puppet government. British Minister hinted to me that if necessary he is prepared to seize bank notes in Banque Mellie by force. In my 362, November 7, I suggested two possible reasons for this British attitude. A third reason might be that British wish to entrench themselves solidly in Iran for fear that ever increasing American influence and activity here may have adverse effects on their long range interests. British Legation is cold and harsh in dealing with Iranians. For example, aide-mémoire presented to Iranians today began: “Irrespective of any other consideration His Majesty’s Government intends to secure the fulfillment of the financial agreement and the necessary supply of rials.”

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1937: Telegram

[Document 200]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 10, 1942—8 p.m.

314. Your 362, November 7 and Department’s 306, November 5.

1. London telegram dated November 7, 6 p.m. states Foreign Office agrees to our suggested changes in draft announcement on wheat and “asks that Department inform American Minister at Tehran accordingly and give him the necessary instructions to enable immediate publication of announcement.” Complete text of draft is being sent you separately.61 Please present this to Iranian Government and British Minister and request their agreement to its immediate publication. We assume Foreign Office has sent corresponding instructions to British Minister.

2. London is trying to make arrangements for shipment of 20,000 tons wheat as replacement for equal quantity said to have been purchased by Russians. It is proposed to ship this as follows: 5,000 tons in November, 5,000 tons December and remainder as soon as possible thereafter. Foreign Office considers earlier shipment impracticable because of shipping situation and probable congestion at Persian Gulf ports. Additional 5,000 tons may be sent if United States considers it essential.

3. Foreign Office prefers to consider this shipment as replacement, rather than as emergency reserve, since otherwise Iranians “might be less willing to cooperate in meeting situation which has arisen.”

4. Department is not informed regarding conditions which Foreign Office may wish to attach to use of this “replacement” shipment, but we consider it desirable that they should not exceed those originally proposed for suggested 25,000 ton reserve, namely, approval by majority vote of Iranian Food Minister, American Minister and British Minister.

5. Department approves your attitude toward additional demands proposed by British Minister. We are opposed to repeated changes in the bases of negotiation in a period of crisis such as the present. We believe any action which would bring about fall of cabinet is to be avoided if possible, since we fail to see how repeated cabinet changes may be expected to bring about greater order or enhance public confidence in Government. We are even more strongly opposed to forced suppression of Majlis and constitutional procedures or military occupation of Tehran. In our view, such advantages as might be gained would be more than offset by adverse reaction of Iranian people and probable repercussions among other Moslem peoples. We feel the more strongly on this matter because of the added responsibilities being assumed by United States in Iran through operation of supply routes to Russia and furnishing of numerous American advisory missions, notably the financial group to be headed by Dr. Millspaugh, which will need the willing cooperation of a stable Iranian Government with popular support. Department is expressing above views to London and, if you see fit, you may convey their substance to British Minister as representing Department’s attitude.

6. In your discretion, you may formally urge upon Prime Minister advisability of seeking full powers from Majlis. You may also urge fulfillment of terms of Anglo-Iranian financial agreement and, if it seems advisable, approval of that agreement by Majlis. However, neither these nor any other measures need be considered as essential conditions precedent to issuance of wheat announcement. Department leaves to your discretion whether any assurances should be obtained from Iranians prior to publication of announcement. We gather that Foreign Office is prepared to go ahead at once on wheat and work out other questions later, and we agree with your opinion that our objectives should be sought by use of informal and friendly pressure rather than by ultimatum.

7. Foreign Office now appears to favor four-power board as long-term solution of currency problem. We are not convinced that this is best procedure and are again stating our view that strict fulfillment of Anglo-Iranian agreement should be sufficient. However, in making any recommendations in this connection, you may wish to take into consideration probability that American expenditures in Iran will soon increase greatly and fact that we are not covered by Anglo-Iranian agreement.

Hull

61 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.24/280: Telegram

[Document 201]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 10, 1942—8 p.m.

5640. Your 6257, November 7.

1. We are instructing our Minister Tehran to propose immediate publication of wheat announcement as amended. We assume Foreign Office has sent similar instructions to British Minister Tehran.

2. By telegram dated November 7, 1 a.m., Minister Dreyfus reports British Minister is now recommending that wheat announcement be made conditional upon following Iranian undertakings: (a) Iran must support war effort, give assurances that hoarding laws will be enforced, guarantee supply of Iranian currency to United Nations, institute price control, institute control of press, and maintain internal security; (b) Iranian cabinet must seek full powers from Majlis for 6 months or year; (c) Allies to have right to call upon Prime Minister to modify cabinet as they see fit.

3. Dreyfus believes these demands would be unacceptable to Iranians and would result in fall of cabinet. Ensuing situation would probably compel Allies to set up alternative puppet government, undertake military occupation of Tehran, or both.

4. Department maintains its previously expressed view that any action leading to fall of cabinet would be unfortunate. Please so advise Foreign Office and explain our conviction that advantages of Allied military occupation of Tehran or establishment of puppet government would be more than offset by adverse reaction of Iranian people and other Moslem peoples. Even if another cabinet could be formed without undue Allied interference, we fear that repeated changes cannot fail to increase general disorder and undermine public confidence in government.

5. Accordingly, we are instructing Dreyfus that wheat announcement may be made, in his discretion, without attaching any conditions precedent. It is our understanding that this is desire of Foreign Office. If Dreyfus considers it desirable, however, we are authorizing him to suggest that Prime Minister seek full powers from Majlis, and we are likewise giving him discretion to urge strict fulfillment of Anglo-Iranian financial agreement.

6. Please inform Foreign Office that we are much disturbed by apparent tendency on part of British authorities Tehran to make repeated changes in bases of negotiation during a period of crisis such as the present. It is our view, and we gather from your telegram under reference that Foreign Office takes same position, that the wheat situation should be cleared up without further delay, leaving other problems to be worked out in the more favorable atmosphere which should be created by the announcement agreed upon. We feel the more strongly about this matter because of the added responsibilities being assumed by United States in Iran through operation by our Army of supply routes to Russia and furnishing of numerous American advisory missions, notably the financial group to be headed by Dr. Millspaugh, which will need the willing cooperation of a stable Iranian Government with popular support.

7. We would not object to Russian participation in announcement and in Road Transport Committee, provided Soviets assume corresponding obligations and provided such participation does not in any way delay issuance of wheat announcement.

8. We would appreciate explanation of reasons causing British Government to favor four-power currency board. As stated in our 5534, November 5, we feel that Anglo-Iranian agreement of May 26 should be adequate to cover British needs if it is fulfilled by Iranians.

9. We shall advise appropriate authorities regarding contemplated shipment 20,000 tons wheat, and we should appreciate being kept currently posted on developments in this connection. We understand, however, that Middle East shipping programs are primarily decided in London and assume Foreign Office is taking necessary steps at that end.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1939: Telegram

[Document 202]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 10, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received November 10—6:47 p.m.]

6327. For the Secretary and the Under Secretary. Immediately on receiving the Department’s 5604, November 7, 7 p.m., the last paragraph was called to the attention of the Foreign Office. I felt, however, because of the confidential insert in paragraph 262 that I should take this subject up at length with Mr. Eden himself. I did so this morning. I read to him the entire message excepting the confidential section. He confirmed the statement of a German plot and told me he was in agreement with the message. I then went on to say that there has again arisen some question as to British policy in Tehran. We went into this in great detail and, I am certain, with complete frankness on his part. I saw both the secret minutes of the Cabinet meeting on this situation and the file of his exchanged messages with his Minister in Tehran. Eden does not want to occupy that country and in this he has the support of the War Cabinet. The plot was not manufactured for political reasons but was a seriously organized conspiracy by the enemy. It was discovered by General Wilson, a general I know, who has a great deal of common sense and is not at all interested in politics. In a recent message to his Minister, Eden explained that no occupational program could be undertaken without first consulting both the United States and Russia.

It is true, in my opinion, that the British would take action if military necessity required it but after notifying us. The strategic value of this area has, I believe, taken on added importance since the British victory in Egypt and our African operations. I am certain that Eden is set against any intrigue to take over this country for selfish British interests.

Winant

62 Last paragraph in telegram No. 361, November 6, 5 p.m., from the Minister in Iran, p. 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194].

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 891.5018/18

[Document 203]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 10, 1942.

Participants: Brigadier General Wedemeyer, Operations Division, General Staff Corps, War Department.

Mr. Murray63

Mr. Jernegan

Mr. Murray explained that recent reports from Tehran had caused the Department to fear that a situation might be created in which the British Government might occupy the whole of Iran and set up a puppet government. This situation had been brought into being by a critical food shortage, and the British and American Governments had been in consultation with a view to issuing a tri-partite Anglo-American-Iranian declaration whereby Great Britain and the United States would undertake to make up any deficit in Iranian grain supplies until the 1943 harvest should be gathered. Although we appeared to have reached an agreement on this subject with the Foreign Office at London, the British Minister at Tehran seemed to be disposed to exact progressively greater concessions from the Iranian Government as a condition to the proposed agreement. The British Minister’s latest proposals were sweeping, (including a demand that the Allies have the right to modify the Iranian cabinet at will) and we considered that they were not only morally unjustifiable but would be entirely unacceptable to the Iranian Government and would cause the fall of the cabinet and create a condition of general chaos. Because of the War Department’s direct interest in Iranian conditions, arising out of the Army’s undertaking to operate transport routes to Russia through Iran, we had wished to advise General Wedemeyer of these developments and obtain his views.

General Wedemeyer replied that the Army was indeed interested in maintaining stable conditions in Iran and realized the importance of feeding the Iranian people. He agreed that the concessions suggested by the British Minister seemed entirely improper and impolitic. He explained, however, that the British military authorities still retain the dominant voice in all operations in Iran. The American Army, he said, has undertaken merely to carry on the physical operation of the Trans-Iranian Railroad and the truck transport of supplies to Russia through Iran. Contrary to the wishes of the War Department, it had been forced to agree that the British authorities should retain the final voice not only in matters connected with the occupation of the country but also in determining the priorities of goods to be moved over the Iranian transport system. Consequently, General Wedemeyer indicated that the Army would not be disposed at this time to take a strong stand with respect to measures which the British Government or military authorities might decide to take.

Mr. Murray expressed the opinion that in the future, as in the past, the British would be unable to obtain Iranian cooperation in anything and that sooner or later the United States would have to assume a dominant role in Iran. It seemed to him that our own military authorities should properly control all questions pertaining to transport of goods on the Iranian routes which we are to operate. General Wedemeyer agreed and said that possibly within a few months the American Army might find itself in a position to reopen the question with the British. He indicated that at that time the War Department would be glad to have the cooperation of the Department of State in its negotiations.

With reference to the proposed undertaking to supply wheat, it was explained to General Wedemeyer that the British Government is trying to arrange the early shipment of 20,000 tons to take care of immediate needs. The Foreign Office had indicated that a corresponding reduction in other shipments (of Lend-Lease goods to Russia, military supplies, etc.) to Iran would have to be made. In addition it was to be expected that further shipments of wheat would be necessary at a later date; this would also require a reduction in shipping space for other types of goods.

General Wedemeyer said that he felt the best method of bringing this to the attention of the proper authorities in Washington would be to address a letter to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who would take it up with any other agencies concerned, such as Office of Lend-Lease Administration and War Shipping Administration. It was agreed, accordingly, that the Department would prepare such a letter.

Reference was also made to the acute currency situation in Iran, with the recurring need for additional issues of Iranian bank notes. It was explained to General Wedemeyer that in formulating policies to deal with this situation the Department felt it would be helpful to know the approximate volume of expenditures which the American forces now being sent to Iran were expected to make. General Wedemeyer said that in this case also he felt a letter to the Joint Chiefs of Staff would be indicated.

With respect to the American forces going to Iran, General Wedemeyer stated that they would ultimately total 25,000 but that they were primarily technical units capable only of limited defense operations for the protection of the supply routes. In other words, they would not be suitable to undertake the occupation of the country nor any serious combat operations. He said that a large quantity of supplies for their use and for the improvement of the Iranian transport system would be sent out in the near future and this would necessarily impose a further strain upon the available shipping space and capacity of the Persian Gulf ports. This equipment, he felt, should be given first priority since its object was to increase the capacity of the ports and transport system and would thus be, in the long run, beneficial from every point of view.

63 Wallace Murray, Adviser on Political Relations.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.24/284: Telegram

[Document 204]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received November 11—3:30 p.m.]

6340. The substance of Department’s 5640, November 10, 8 p.m. concerning Iran has been given to the Foreign Office and the various points raised by the Department have been discussed with the Foreign Office.

1. Foreign Office confirms report that British Minister at Tehran has recommended that the announcement on wheat be made conditional on undertakings by Iran as outlined by the Department. Foreign Office has already advised British Minister that it does not view the proposed undertakings favorably. Foreign Office, however, now states definitely that it wishes the announcement on wheat to be “bound up” with a long term solution of the currency problem. It feels as pointed out in the Embassy’s 6257 of November 7, 6 p.m., that the establishment of a currency commission with full control over currency matters would be an effective approach to such a solution.

2. Foreign Office agrees with Department that Anglo-Iranian agreement of May 26 would be adequate to meet British needs if fulfilled by the Iranians. Difficulties as frequently created by the Majlis, however, make fulfillment questionable. The Foreign Office believes therefore that the creation of a purely Iranian currency commission, the only kind of a commission which it feels there is possibility of getting authority to set up, would not only result in more expeditious meeting of currency and related problems but it would at the same time remove the danger of the Majlis obstructing solutions in the hope of gaining further concessions. Foreign Office feels strongly that unless the establishment of such a commission is insisted on now before the announcement on wheat is issued a good opportunity for finding a long term solution of the currency problem will be lost. British authorities, the Foreign Office stresses, do not want to be left in the position where whenever a solution to some pressing phase of the currency situation has to be found, the Majlis has to be approached.

3. Foreign Office states that the proposed wheat announcement, as amended, has been presented to the Iranian authorities for their information and that the Iranian reaction to it is favorable. British Minister has, however, been instructed not to agree to its publication until, as indicated above, the establishment of a currency commission has been authorized.

4. Foreign Office today referred to the view which was expressed in the Department’s 5534, November 5, 8 p.m., that a continuous expansion of the Iranian currency could not be considered a satisfactory solution. It stated in this connection that it is in entire agreement with the Department’s view and that it had, consequently, placed all pertinent facts before British Treasury officials with the request for suggestions on how the currency problem in Iran might be met without resorting to repeated expansions of the currency.

5. With reference to the final paragraph of the Department’s telegram 5640, Foreign Office states that it will be glad to keep us informed of developments in connection with the shipment of wheat. It stated further that the Department’s understanding that Middle East shipping programs are decided here is correct and added that it is taking all the necessary steps here.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1940: Telegram

[Document 205]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 12, 1942—5 p.m.

317. Your 365, November 9. Regarding undertaking to import wheat, Department feels unable to give stronger guarantee than that contained in text of agreement cabled you, nor do we see how Iranians could expect us to do more than “take all steps within the full limit of our powers”.

With respect to internal distribution, we assume Iranians fear that Soviets will interpose physical obstacles to movement of wheat from Russian-occupied zone, even if adequate transport is available. We cannot undertake to control action by Soviets, nor could we well use British or American trucks to bring wheat out of Azerbaijan and Khorassan in the face of Russian opposition. However, in your discretion, you may assure Prime Minister that this Government will, if occasion arises, endeavor to use its influence with Soviet Government to ensure that Iranians are permitted to move surplus grain from Soviet zone to other parts of Iran.

Russian Ambassador London has stated his Government may wish to become a party to wheat declaration and also participate in Transport Committee. Department and Foreign Office seem to be agreed that there would be no objection to this, provided Russians assume corresponding obligations and provided conclusion and publication of wheat agreement is not, thereby, delayed. If Russians, in fact, join in wheat undertaking, you are authorized to propose insertion in draft agreement of a provision by which the American, British and Soviet Governments would undertake not to interpose obstacles to the free transportation of cereals, from whatever source derived, from one part of Iran to another.

Hull

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 891.24/284

[Document 206]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] November 13, 1942.

Mr. Welles: As you will recall, when I spoke to you the other day about the Iranian situation, it was suggested that you might take an early opportunity to express to Lord Halifax64 our fears that a too-aggressive British policy would have unfortunate results. You have undoubtedly seen London’s telegram no. 6340, November 11 (attached65 ), from which it appears that the Foreign Office is now adopting an attitude substantially similar to our own on this question. (Our rather strong telegram of November 1066 may have had a good deal to do with this.)

Although things seem to be shaping up better at the moment, I wonder whether you would not consider it still worth while to have a talk with the Ambassador? It might help to ensure a continuance of the apparently improved state of affairs, if it were impressed upon him that we hope the moderate attitude prevailing in London will be reflected in the policy of the British Minister at Tehran, who has hitherto manifested a complete disregard for Iranian interests and sensibilities.67

Wallace Murray

64 British Ambassador.

65  Ante, p. 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204].

66 No. 5640, p. 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201].

67 Marginal note by Mr. Welles: “I shall do so.”

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.24/284: Telegram

[Document 207]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)68

Washington, November 13, 1942—5 p.m.

5687. Your 6340, November 11. Provided Iranian consent can be obtained without objectionable pressure, Department has no fundamental objection to creation of purely Iranian currency commission as condition precedent to wheat agreement. Our previous opposition to commission was based upon understanding it was to be composed of British, Russian, American and Iranian members, which we felt would have been unacceptable to Iranians.

We assume Foreign Office contemplates action by Majlis to vest full control of currency in proposed commission. Please confirm this and indicate what would be relation of commission to Iranian Cabinet.

As Foreign Office is aware, Iranian Government is engaging a financial mission, under leadership of Dr. Millspaugh, in this country. It is also seeking an American to act as technical director of Banque Mellie, Iran. Under terms of Millspaugh’s proposed contract, which Iranians are reported to have accepted, he will have extensive responsibility for, and control over, Iranian national finances, and he will necessarily be vitally interested in the currency question. The technical director of the Banque Mellie will, of course, be directly concerned with currency matters.

Consequently, we feel that if the proposed commission is formed, there should be a definite understanding that upon the arrival of Dr. Millspaugh and the Banque Mellie adviser they will become members.

If you deem it advisable, you may point out to Foreign Office that inclusion of these two men would not change the essentially Iranian character of the commission, since they will be employees of the Iranian Government and will not in any way represent the American Government or any American business or financial interest.

We are repeating this to Tehran.

Hull

68 Repeated to the Minister in Iran as No. 320.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.24/287: Telegram

[Document 208]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 14, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received November 14—10:45 a.m.]

6414. Foreign Office informed of substance of Department’s 5687, November 13, 5 p.m.

Foreign Office states that while it has taken the view that the manner of vesting full control of currency in a commission is a matter for the Iranian authorities to decide in accordance with established Iranian procedure it has, nevertheless, assumed right along that action by the Majlis would be necessary. It has not as yet given thought to what the relationship of such a commission, if established, would or should be to the Iranian Cabinet. In fact, Foreign Office adds, that at present it has no ideas or suggestions to offer on this point.

With reference to the membership on the proposed commission of Millspaugh and of the technical adviser of the Banque Mellie, Foreign Office says that it has no objection whatever. On the contrary it regards the proposed membership as entirely sound. It feels however that the whole question of the composition of this proposed commission should be left to the British and American Ministers at Iran to work out jointly with the Iranian authorities.

Winant

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1941: Telegram

[Document 209]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 14, 1942—midnight.
[Received November 14—7:54 p.m.]

375. Department’s 317, November 12. Wheat situation in Tehran has taken even more critical turn. Sheridan has only a half day supply in silo and wheat is coming in from provinces very slowly. Famine may come at any time and Sheridan is preparing to open soup kitchens if necessary.

In view of this dangerous situation I feel we should take positive and immediate steps, with British consent or without it. I recommend that Department arrange urgently for shipment of wheat to Iran from India at rate of about 5,000 tons a month and further that 5,000 additional tons referred to in paragraph 2 of Department’s 31469 come forward without delay. Wheat from India could (1) be considered to represent the 20,000 tons British [apparent omission] Indian Government against replacement by wheat from other sources. Shipment from India is recommended because wheat from more distant places might not arrive in time to meet the crisis should it arise. While Sheridan may possibly be able to obtain sufficient wheat to tide country over for several months, my opinion is that we cannot afford to gamble while the lives of several thousand people are at stake.

In line with the views expressed in paragraph 6 of Department’s 314, November 9 [10] with which I am in full accord, I have urged British Minister to agree to immediate publication of wheat declaration but he prefers first to obtain definite assurance of Iranian concessions, particularly as to unlimited supply of rials. Prime Minister informs me he is presenting declaration to Majlis tomorrow.

My suspicions that British are carrying on machinations to obtain a puppet government or even occupy Tehran (see my No. 362 November 4 [7]) have been confirmed by two documents which originated in British Legation, copies of which have fallen into my hands. One of these outlines an entirely new Cabinet with Mohamad Sadig Tabatabai as Prime Minister and containing many persons known to be pro-British or British tools. The other gives a proposed Government program which would reduce powers of Shah, increase number and powers of American advisers, control press, set up war council with American military adviser as one member, require more Iranian cooperation with Allies and make Government more subservient to British.

Copies of these documents are being sent Department by next airmail.70

Dreyfus

69 Dated November 10, 8 p.m., p. 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200].

70 Despatch No. 384, November 18, not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 891.24/301

[Document 210]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] November 17, 1942.

Participants: Mr. W. G. Hayter, First Secretary British Embassy

Mr. G. F. Thorold, First Secretary

Mr. Murray—PA/M

Mr. Alling—NE

Mr. Jernegan—NE

Mr. Nielsen—DM71

Mr. Hayter and Mr. Thorold called, under instructions from the Foreign Office, to explain the British point of view with regard to the existing critical situation in Iran.

Mr. Jernegan set forth the Department’s understanding of the developments of the past several weeks, explaining that we had agreed to the Foreign Office suggestion that the establishment of a purely Iranian currency commission should be made a condition precedent to the issuance of the Anglo-American-Iranian wheat declaration. We had not agreed to attaching any other conditions. We assumed that the British Minister in Tehran would proceed with the signature of that declaration, in conjunction with our Minister and the Iranian Government, as soon as agreement had been reached on the currency commission question.

Mr. Hayter said that this was substantially his understanding, except that he gathered that the Foreign Office wanted a very definite assurance at this time that a long-term supply of rials would be made available to the Allied forces. He was not clear as to the exact form this assurance would take, and he agreed that if the proposed currency commission were given, by the Majlis, full powers over note issue, this would probably meet the desires of the Foreign Office.

Mr. Hayter emphasized that the supply of rials was vital to the maintenance of the supply route to Russia and that the British Government did not wish again to be faced with the prospect of a complete stoppage of rial sales. In this connection, he said that the British need for Iranian currency was largely caused by the necessity of operating and protecting the Russian supply route and that, therefore, Britain was really acting on behalf of all the United Nations in dealing with this knotty problem.

Mr. Murray, Mr. Alling and Mr. Jernegan stressed very strongly the view of the Department that every other alternative should be employed before resorting to force, or the overthrow of the Iranian Government, to ensure the supply of rials. We agreed that it was vitally essential to obtain currency, and that it was conceivable that a situation might arise in which the Allies would be compelled to use force. However, we did not feel that things had come to such a pass as yet. Even failing Iranian agreement to the proposed currency commission, Great Britain and the United States could still go ahead with the wheat agreement, on the understanding that the Iranian Prime Minister would then, as he had assured our Minister some weeks ago, obtain from the Majlis authority to issue an additional 1,500,000,000 rials in bank notes. This amount would take care of our needs for a few months, at least, and in the meantime Dr. Millspaugh’s financial mission would have arrived and conditions in general might have improved. In our opinion, the Allied policy should be to play for time, carrying on by such expedients as might prove practicable, and avoid forcing the issue to a showdown which might compel us to undertake military occupation of the entire country. In this connection, Mr. Murray recalled the views expressed by Mr. Berle72 at the time of the previous financial crisis last spring, to the effect that more could be obtained from the Persians by kindness than by bludgeoning. Mr. Murray also said that Mr. Welles has been much concerned over the present critical situation in Iran and planned to speak to Lord Halifax about it.

Mr. Hayter said that the Foreign Office entirely agreed that the use of force should be avoided if at all possible, and he pointed out that although the British had been in occupation of Iran for more than a year, they had not yet resorted to force on a single occasion, despite the fact that they had no other means of pressure open to them. However, he appeared to feel that the Iranians should be made to understand that as a last resort force would be used.

With reference to the wheat shortage, Mr. Hayter and Mr. Thorold were informed of the latest report, dated November 14, from Minister Dreyfus, in which he stated that Tehran stocks were sufficient for only half a day and urged that immediate shipments be made from India. Mr. Thorold said the Embassy had received a cable from Tehran dated November 13 reporting that the Soviets had agreed to release 7,500 tons of wheat from Russian-occupied Azerbaijan for the Tehran population. It appeared that 3,500 tons of this was being sent forward at once. The total amount would take care of the city’s consumption for a little less than a month. According to Mr. Thorold the British Minister at Tehran had taken a very strong line with the Russian authorities in order to obtain release of this wheat, as he felt that the city ought to have a reserve good for at least four months. It was agreed that if the 7,500 tons should reach Tehran in the near future it would relieve the situation to some extent, but Mr. Alling and Mr. Nielsen pointed out that this amount would be used up before the 20,000 tons being sent by the British Government could possibly arrive. Accordingly, it was asked that Mr. Thorold consult his Government on the possibility of making immediate shipment from India or from the “wheat pool” of the Middle East Supply Center. Such advances could be replaced later by the contemplated shipments from North America. The suggestion was also made that a total of 25,000 tons, instead of 20,000, should be programmed.

It appeared that the British Government had been thinking of a possible new financial agreement with Iran, and that it would be prepared, if necessary, to convert Iranian sterling holdings into gold up to 60% or even 100%.

In passing, Mr. Thorold mentioned that the Soviet Government was very much interested in maintaining in power the present Iranian Cabinet, headed by Ahmad Qavam.

71 Orsen N. Nielsen Division of Defense Materials.

72 Adolf A. Berle, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1944: Telegram

[Document 211]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 18, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 10:36 a.m.]

378. Reference that part Department’s 306, November 5 dealing with finance.

(a) Causes of Iran’s currency crises are: (1) Large Allied war expenditures of about 400,000,000 rials monthly. Iranian note issue increased from 1550 million rials in August 1941 to 3 billions in October 1942. It is now proposed to issue some 2 billions additional for Allied war needs and Iranian wheat purchasing program. (2) Rise in price level. Banque Mellie price index rose from base of 100 in 1937 to 193 in August 1941 and 331 in September 1942. Cost of living index for same periods was 100, 209 and 418. This is perhaps main cause of need for ever larger note issue and also an effect of increased circulation. (3) Failure of notes to complete normal cycle and return to banks for reissue. This due to: First—lack of confidence in rial which causes Iranians to keep their money turning over by purchase of lands and goods rather than placing it in banks. Second—speculation by all classes has reached huge proportions. Third—hoarding of notes by workers and farmers exists but sum involved is probably not great. Hoarding of money by upper classes is not appreciable.

(b) Possible remedies might include: (1) Prohibition of export of foodstuffs and the importation of essentials to extent possible, (2) drastic credit restrictions by banks, (3) excess profits, (4) rationing, (5) drastic laws to control prices, rents and speculation, (6) severe enforcement of hoarding laws, (7) control of Allied buying to prevent present payments of exorbitant prices, (8) putting silver token coins into circulation, and (9) last but most important the floating of an Anglo-American rial loan repayable 60% in pounds or dollars and 40% in gold. Iranian Government is giving consideration to all of above measures but is awaiting arrival of Millspaugh before proceeding. (Allied help will be required to accomplish most of these objectives.)

(c) Iranian currency law. A high Iranian finance official suggests Iranian currency law along following lines and has taken matter up urgently with Prime Minister: (1) Iranian gold and silver holdings to be revalued on basis of world prices which would result in profit to Banque Mellie of almost 800,000,000 rials. (2) Issue of notes to be divorced from banking section of Banque Mellie and placed in special department under supervision of present currency board with Millspaugh a permanent member (Iranians object violently to any suggestion of an Allied Iranian currency board).

3. Of total note issue 942,000,000 rials would be covered by crown jewels as collateral security. Remainder of note issue would be fully covered (a) 60% by gold and silver (silver only to extent of present holdings) plus those dollars and pounds which are freely convertible into gold in conformity with agreements with Allies, and (b) 40% by those dollars and pounds which are not freely convertible, but which would be guaranteed by Allies against depreciation in terms of gold.

4. Exchange rate would be fixed scientifically.

Agreement with American Government on various points especially gold conversion would be necessary. British have expressed willingness to increase gold conversion of sterling to 60% instead of 40% provided in Anglo-Iranian agreement.

Foregoing is given in full in order that Millspaugh may have opportunity to study it before his departure. Iranian Government would appreciate any comment he may wish to make. Millspaugh’s presence in Tehran is most urgently required and I urge his immediate departure.

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.24/284: Telegram

[Document 212]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 18, 1942—6 p.m.

5788. Your 6340, November 11 and previous. Tehran telegram 375 November 14 reads, in part, as follows:

[Here follows text of first two paragraphs of telegram No. 375, printed on page 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209].]

Please ask Foreign Office to give urgent consideration to possible immediate shipment of wheat from India or Middle East, rather than North America. Quantity furnished to meet Iranian emergency could, of course, be replaced later by shipments from this loading area.

We are asking New Delhi to make inquiry in this regard of the Government of India.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1944: Telegram

[Document 213]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 18, 1942—8 p.m.

327. Your 375, November 14. We are asking Foreign Office London and Indian Government New Delhi to give urgent consideration to immediate shipment wheat from India or Middle East rather than more distant loading areas. Could you not arrange through Frederick Winant for temporary loan of wheat from so-called “MESC wheat pool”?

Department considers it unwise, from standpoint of general policy, to attempt shipment without British concurrence. Furthermore, such action would seem impracticable, since all possible sources in Middle East and India are under direct or indirect British control and British authorities, as we understand it, control priorities in handling of cargo in Iranian ports and within Iran.

Reference Department’s 320, November 13,73 Foreign Office has expressed its agreement with Department’s views on currency commission and approves inclusion of Millspaugh and Banque Mellie adviser. It feels, however, that exact composition of commission should be worked out with Iranian authorities by you and British Minister. Foreign Office further considers that manner of vesting full control of currency in commission is matter for Iranians to decide in accordance with established Iranian procedure.

Please advise present status of negotiations with respect to currency issue and wheat declaration. What is exact nature of assurance British Minister is seeking with respect to rials? Is he still asking concessions with respect to other matters as well?

In conversation with British Embassy here November 17, Department strongly expressed view that force should be used to secure currency supplies only as last resort. Rather than use force, we would prefer to issue wheat declaration without any conditions whatever, if by so doing there were a reasonable prospect of obtaining even a temporary supply of rials and improving general internal situation.

Hull

73 See footnote 68, p. 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.24/296: Telegram

[Document 214]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 19, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received November 19—5:12 p.m.]

6518. When wheat situation in Tehran, as described in Department’s 5788 of November 18, 6 p.m., was brought to attention of Foreign Office, Foreign Office informed us that it had received a telegram from the British Minister at Tehran, also dated November 14, in which he too stressed the critical trend in the wheat situation. Consequently the Foreign Office telegraphed Minister of State Casey on November 16 to do whatever he could to secure in Iraq or India 3000 tons of wheat for immediate shipment to Iran, on the understanding that this 3000 tons would be replaced from the shipment of 5000 tons previously scheduled for Iran for this month. (For schedule of shipments see Embassy’s 6257 November 7, 6 p.m.)

Foreign Office also informed us that it learned recently that 3500 tons of barley were available in Iraq and that it has telegraphed this information to the British Minister at Tehran and has asked him to try to arrange for a daily shipment of 500 tons of this barley by rail to Tehran.

No reports have been received as yet from Minister Casey and the British Minister at Tehran regarding the results of their efforts to get wheat and barley to Iran from the sources mentioned above.

Foreign Office, in giving us the foregoing information, added that unfortunately British authorities were not at present in a position to do anything further.

Winant

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1951: Telegram

[Document 215]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 20, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 9:31 p.m.]

386. Section 1. My 382, November 19.74 Majlis last night enacted bill quoted in section 3 surrendering its currency powers to the existing currency committee. Prime Minister promises delivery of rials to Allies from Banque Mellie tomorrow and immediate meeting of currency board to consider additional issue. British feel they have now received satisfaction on currency question and we are proceeding at once with wheat declaration.

Majlis was badly frightened by threat of dissolution and promised Shah to cooperate with Government. While I am not hopeful that Majlis intends permanently to alter its obstructive tactics there is no doubt that its action last night has considerably eased the political situation. Much, however, will depend on its reaction to a new bill presented last night in which Government asks for additional powers.

Section 2. Noteworthy in negotiations of last few days was helpful attitude of Russian Ambassador based on new instructions from his Government to take more active part in joint Allied dealings with Iranians.

I must express opinion that internal situation will go into another crisis if British carry out intention of arresting four very prominent Iranians including a deputy and two Generals on grounds of implication in plot (see my 361, November 6). I have pointed out to British Minister bad effect these arrests would have unless the evidence of guilt is conclusive but he seems determined to proceed on grounds of security.

Section 3. Article 1. From the date of the passing of this law authority for the issue of notes is vested in the Note Reserve Control Committee.

Article 2. The Director General of Finances, Doctor Millspaugh, will become a member of the Note Reserve Control Committee after his arrival.

Article 3. The conditions for the issue of notes, authority for which is vested by this law in the Note Reserve Control Committee, will be fixed by a decree of the Council of Ministers acting on proposals put forward by the Note Reserve Control Committee.

Article 4. Notes which are issued by virtue of this law must possess the following backing: (a) As to 60%: Gold at the official rate ruling in the international market at the present date and/or pounds and dollars convertible into gold. (b) As to 40%: Pounds and dollars guaranteed against depreciation in terms of gold at today’s rate.

Article 5. The backing for the notes to the value of three thousand five hundred million rials, authority for the issue of which has been given up till this date, will be on a basis of 60% gold and silver, valued at the international market rate and the jewels which were handed over to the National Bank in accordance with the law of twenty-five Aban. 13.16

Dreyfus

74 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1938: Telegram

[Document 216]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 24, 1942—10 p.m.

5924. In telegram dated November 20 Tehran reports Iranian action vesting control of currency in existing Iranian Note Reserve Control Committee. British Minister reported satisfied with this action and proceeding at once with wheat declaration.

Dreyfus feels this has relieved political situation but fears another crisis if British authorities in Iran carry out expressed intention of arresting four prominent Iranians, including a deputy and two generals, on grounds of implication in plot mentioned Department’s 5604 November 7. Dreyfus has pointed out to the British Minister effect such arrests would have unless evidence of guilt is conclusive but Bullard appears determined to proceed on grounds of security.

Please reiterate to Foreign Office views expressed our 5604. You may say this Government is no less anxious than British to preserve security of Allied position in Iran, but that we are most anxious to avoid another crisis, especially since the wheat–currency difficulties are still in process of settlement. If action against alleged conspirators is considered absolutely necessary, we hope British authorities Tehran will be instructed to proceed with all possible observance of Iranian laws and procedures. It would seem preferable to allow Iranian authorities themselves to make arrests and conduct proceedings.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1953: Telegram

[Document 217]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 25, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received 9:07 p.m.]

6651. Views expressed in Department’s 5604, November 7, 7 p.m., repeated to Foreign Office and substance of Department’s 5924, November 24, 10 p.m., conveyed to it.

Foreign Office states that it, too, feels that caution should be exercised, particularly as wheat and currency problems are not definitely settled, and that it has telegraphed British Minister at Tehran to this effect. In the same telegram it has asked for fuller information regarding the charges against the four prominent Iranians who the British authorities in Iran wish to arrest. Foreign Office adds that the possible arrest of these individuals will be considered by it in the light of the additional information that has been requested but that it hopes, in any event, that it will not be necessary to take any action against the wishes of the Iranian Government.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1944: Telegram

[Document 218]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 1, 1942—5 p.m.

352. Your 378, November 18, 1942. The Department has discussed the various points raised in your telegram with Dr. Millspaugh who has indicated the following views: 1. He believes that it would be very desirable to prohibit the export of foodstuffs and recognizes the fundamental importance of increasing essential imports. He feels that it would be advantageous to make an early announcement that a substantial volume of wheat imports are on the way and he suggests that this announcement should be made by an official of high authority. Care should be taken not to be precise as to the actual quantity involved. Such an announcement, he feels, would have an important psychological effect, tending to discourage hoarding and speculation.

2. He favors credit restrictions providing the intent is to restrict speculative credits rather than to restrict credits generally, which might adversely affect production.

3. With respect to excess profits his feeling is that the Iranian Government should begin immediately the collection of all relevant information on taxes and that such data should be translated into English. He feels that the question of taxing excess profits should be left until the whole tax system has been surveyed in the light of existing needs and conditions.

4. With respect to rationing and laws to control prices, rents, speculation and hoarding, Dr. Millspaugh feels that although such measures may be desirable he does not believe that he can comment usefully until he has had an opportunity to survey existing legislation and administrative enforcement.

5. With respect to control of Allied buying, although such control would appear to be highly desirable in principle, in the absence of detailed knowledge of the existing practices and procedures Dr. Millspaugh does not feel that he could attempt any detailed comment.

6. With respect to putting silver token coins in circulation, Dr. Millspaugh feels that this would be desirable if they are needed and if the necessary silver and alloy metals are available.

7. Dr. Millspaugh does not wish to comment on the American-British rial loan proposal in the absence of more complete information as to the purpose of the loan.

8. Dr. Millspaugh does not perceive any objection to the revaluation of the existing gold and silver holdings providing that the resultant profit remains in the Bank Mellie as part of the monetary reserve.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/312: Telegram

[Document 219]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 4, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received December 5—3 a.m.]

419. Food declaration was signed this afternoon by Foreign Minister, British Minister and myself.75 Text is substantially same as that given in Department’s 315, November 10 [9].76 British Minister and I simultaneously presented two notes to Foreign Office. First informed Iranian Government that British and American Governments are jointly arranging to bring into Iran 25,000 tons wheat. Second stated that if Soviet Government wishes to participate in declaration a revised text will be signed to replace present one. British Minister also presented note declaring that declaration in no way diminishes British obligations under Tripartite Post [Pact] of January 29, 1942. Original of declaration and copies of notes being forwarded airmail. Declaration will be published at once in Tehran and London.

Dreyfus

75 For text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 292, or 56 Stat. (pt. 2) 1835.

76 Not printed.

IV. Representations by the United States regarding British policy in IranIV. Representations by the United States regarding British policy in Iran

[220] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 3, 1942—4 p.m. [Received December 3—3:08 p.m.]

891.00/1956: Telegram

[221] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 3, 1942—5 p.m. [Received December 3—11:46 a.m.]

891.00/1957: Telegram

[222] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 8, 1942—6 p.m. [Received December 9—8:49 a.m.]

891.00/1958: Telegram

[223] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 8, 1942—8 p.m. [Received December 9—9:16 a.m.]

891.00/1959: Telegram

[224] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 9, 1942—10 a.m. [Received December 10—11:05 a.m.]

891.00/1961: Telegram

[225] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 9, 1942—4 p.m. [Received December 10—4:53 p.m.]

891.00/1962: Telegram

[226] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 9, 1942—7 p.m.

891.00/1959: Telegram

[227] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 9, 1942—8 p.m.

891.00/1959: Telegram

[228] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 9, 1942—11 p.m. [Received December 11—4:05 a.m.]

891.00/1963: Telegram

[229] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 10, 1942—9 p.m.

891.00/1938: Telegram

[230] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 10, 1942—10 p.m. [Received December 10—8:22 p.m.]

891.00/1960: Telegram

[231] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] December 11, 1942.

891.00/1985

[232] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 11, 1942—9 p.m.

891.00/1964a: Telegram

[233] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 12, 1942—noon. [Received December 12—10:28 a.m.]

891.00/1964: Telegram

[234] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 12, 1942—4 p.m. [Received December 12—2:05 p.m.]

891.00/1965: Telegram

[235] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 13, 1942—11 a.m. [Received December 14—1:55 a.m.]

891.00/1066: Telegram

[236] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 15, 1942—8 p.m. [Received December 15—6:09 p.m.]

891.00/1969: Telegram

[237] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 16, 1942—9 p.m.

891.00/1966: Telegram

[238] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 19, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 8:01 p.m.]

891.00/1972: Telegram

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1956: Telegram

[Document 220]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 3, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received December 3—3:08 p.m.]

412. Political situation continues to drift hopelessly. Relations between Majlis and Government unimproved, most deputies continuing to play their game of obstruction and opportunism. For example Budget Bill for year now nearing end not yet passed. The Full Powers Bill was referred to committee without mention of urgency.

Political intrigue against Qavam77 is increasing; leading candidates being mentioned are Soheily78 and Ali Mansour. Cabinet changes are imminent, principal one being dismissal of Gharagozlou as Minister of Justice.

It seems likely the rapidly developing food shortage will bring about new crisis which will result in Qavam’s fall or dissolution of Majlis. There can be no continuity or stability in Government as long as Majlis is composed of irresponsible elements intent on pursuing their own interests.

Dreyfus

77 Ahmad Qavam, Prime Minister of Iran.

78 Ali Soheily, former Prime Minister of Iran.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1957: Telegram

[Document 221]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 3, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received December 3—11:46 a.m.]

413. Department’s 327, November 18. Food situation Tehran is deteriorating and it is not unlikely a major crisis is at hand. Sheridan79 has only one day’s wheat supply in silo and is ready if necessary to open soup kitchens. He reports wheat from Azerbaijan is not coming as hoped but he attributes this more to Iranian inability to gather wheat than any lack Russian cooperation.

Reference Department’s No. 917 November 27.80 I am informed British Army can at present promise to furnish only 1500 tons flour and MESC reports it has no reserve stocks which could be made available. In my opinion British here do not take a sufficiently serious view of this situation. Could not Department urge British to arrange for loan of wheat from some nearby country against replacement from the 25,000 tons being shipped.

Dreyfus

79 J. P. Sheridan, Food and Supply Adviser to the Iranian Government.

80 Telegram No. 917, November 27, 5 p.m., was from the Chargé at New Delhi; not printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1958: Telegram

[Document 222]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 8, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received December 9—8:49 a.m.]

424. My 412 and 413, December 3. Political situation continues to deteriorate with relations between Majlis and Government at breaking point. Situation is aggravated by bread shortage, Tehran living today on reduced rations and with less than a day’s wheat supply in silo. Several thousand persons including women and children have been demonstrating all day in front of Majlis crying, “You may kill us but we must have bread!” Crowd is growing but so far has not got out of hand.

Situation was further aggravated by arrest today by British Army and internment at Sultanabad of General Zahidi, Governor General of Isfahan. (See Department’s 311, November 781 and my 386, November 20). This news was badly received by Prime Minister and Shah, both of whom take line that action was unfair since Iranian Government was not consulted and arbitrary because British had no right to make the arrest. Shah sent Ala to see me to register his protest against what he termed this unjustified action. Ala reports Shah said, “If the British can do this to my country they can do anything”.

Shah is now in a quandary as to proper course to pursue, whether to name a new Prime Minister, ask Qavam to reform Cabinet, or dissolve Majlis. One of these courses must be adopted at once.

Why British deliberately chose this delicate moment to arrest Zahidi is not at all evident.

Dreyfus

81 See footnote 60, p. 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199].

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1959: Telegram

[Document 223]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 8, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received December 9—9:16 a.m.]

425. My 424. Crowd is now out of hand and rioting has developed on widespread and severe scale. Shopping area is being looted by uncontrolled mobs. Police and army are coming belatedly into action. Damage is heavy and there have been casualties.

Dreyfus

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1961: Telegram

[Document 224]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 9, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received December 10—11:05 a.m.]

426. My 424, December 8. Situation quieter today though nervous tension is high and shooting is still to be heard in city. Tehran commerce tightly closed and potentially dangerous crowds throng streets.

Shah has placed Field Marshal Ahmadi in charge to restore order. Police and army patrolling city today in force.

Riots yesterday started with demonstration on front of Majlis by school children demanding bread. Accumulating crowds grew increasingly restive as it became clear police were not taking action. Afternoon mobs marched to business section breaking windows and looting food stores first and later any shops into which they could gain access. It was not until situation was desperate that police received orders to take action. Police and army went into action with few tanks and machine guns clearing main mobs although isolated acts looting, personal violence, robbery and attacks on cars continued. Responsibility for early shameful lack of police action not yet established nor is it yet established who was responsible for allowing school children led by teachers to demonstrate.

Tehran’s business section is badly damaged, numerous stores being gutted and little exposed glass left intact. House of Prime Minister was sacked. Majlis was entered and some damage done. Several persons were killed and many injured. No Americans reported to have suffered injury or damage to property. Drastic action will be necessary prevent recurrence.

It is reported British will bring into Tehran some of their forces now stationed at Qum. Political aspect will be covered in separate telegrams.

Dreyfus

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1962: Telegram

[Document 225]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 9, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received December 10—4:53 p.m.]

427. My 426. British Minister informs me a battalion of British troops now at Qum will arrive in Tehran this afternoon marching through city and taking up quarters at race track. He states this action necessary to protect British property and military installations in Tehran. It is not yet known whether Russians will also bring troops to Tehran.

The exact causes of the Tehran riots are obscure. British Legation is spreading story that it was part of a German plot and Russian Ambassador in conversation with me supported this view. I am not at all convinced that this is true. Iranians believe that riots were inspired by the British or Russians.

It seems probable to me riots grew spontaneously as uncontrolled crowds increased, crowds desperate account food shortage and made bitter by belief their woes are due to British and Russian invaders. However, in long range sense it seems to me British have much responsibility. I should not like to state categorically that British have incited disturbances or connived at deterioration of situation in order to bring troops into Tehran with ultimate objective of gaining political control. There are, however, numerous indications that this is true (see my Nos. 359, 361, 362, 365 and 375 of November 4, 6, 7, 9 and 14). I know that British have failed for some reason to bring to Tehran 3500 tons barley and 1500 tons flour earmarked for Iran and held at Basra at a time when they are desperately needed. Sheridan informs me Prime Minister told him today that when he urged British Minister to hasten arrival these cereals latter replied to effect he did not see why he should help Iranians when British are being abused and slandered in streets of Tehran. Counsellor of British Legation told me today British Minister will tell Shah today he cannot favor bringing cereals to Iran when country is so hostile to Allies.

I still urge Department to expedite shipment of 25,000 tons wheat and to arrange, if possible, for wheat loan for Iran from a nearby country.

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1959: Telegram

[Document 226]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 9, 1942—7 p.m.

363. Your 412 and 413, December 3 and 424 and 425, December 8. As we have previously indicated, Department favors maintenance of Qavam cabinet and its strengthening in any way feasible. From your reports we gather you concur in the view no gain is to be expected from a change in Prime Ministers.

Of the steps being considered by the Shah, our thought is that a reform of the Qavam cabinet would be preferable to a change of government. We should like at the same time to have your views on the possible effect of a dissolution of the Majlis upon popular feeling. Do you believe new elections could or should be held?

We have already urged British Government to arrange for loan of wheat from nearby territories. British Embassy here advises 3500 tons Iraq barley being sent. Foreign Office has also instructed Minister of State Casey to attempt shipment of 3000 tons of wheat from military stocks in Iraq or from India. British say they can do no more at present, but we are repeating our representations.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1959: Telegram

[Document 227]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 9, 1942—8 p.m.

6232. Tehran reports political situation has grown worse largely due to obstruction by Majlis. Worsening food shortage has brought on new crisis which threatens to cause fall of Qavam cabinet or dissolution of Majlis. Widespread rioting occurred in Tehran December 8.

As we have repeatedly stated, Department strongly favors continuance in power of present cabinet, even though it may be unsatisfactory in some respects, rather than a change to another group which might prove even more unsatisfactory and which would command even less popular support.

Please communicate substance of above to Foreign Office and let us have any comments British Government may care to offer in this regard.

Please also advise Foreign Office our reports indicate food situation in Iran still deteriorating and we hope British authorities will press their efforts not only with respect to shipment of wheat from North American ports but also in connection with possible advances of grain from near-by territories in Middle East.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1963: Telegram

[Document 228]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 9, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received December 11—4:05 a.m.]

428. My 426.82 Riots have plunged Iranian political situation into stage of even greater confusion. Shah asked Qavam to resign yesterday. He refused. Qavam was encouraged to take this stand by promises of British support. Shah wished to form a military government under his own domination but was prevented from doing so by British support of Qavam. British Minister talked to Shah today frankly and severely making following suggestions amounting almost to an ultimatum: (1) Military Governor and Police Chief to be removed, (2) Qavam to be asked to form a new government and given full support, (3) Prime Minister and others to be compensated for damage to their properties, (4) corrupt and pro-Axis officials to be eliminated from army, (5) inquiry to be held into causes of riots, (6) British will not look with favor on importation of wheat into Iran unless Government is favorable to Allies, (7) Government must severely enforce hoarding laws and control [apparent omission] and Marlis [Majlis?].

Shah accepted proposals in principle and promised to adjust his differences with Qavam and ask him to form a new government. The new Qavam government will probably include Saleh, Alimote Medi, Marshal Ahmadi, Mohsen Rais, Farajull Ahbahrami, and possibly Hekmat. British wished to include Tadayyon but Russians objected. Present Ministers of Health, Posts and Justice will probably leave Cabinet.

Press has [been] suspended and curfew imposed at 8:50.

Dreyfus

82 Dated December 9, 10 a.m., p. 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1938: Telegram

[Document 229]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 10, 1942—9 p.m.

6255. Department’s 5604, November 7 and 5924, November 24. Tehran reports British Army arrested and interned at Sultanabad on December 8 General Zahidi, Governor-General of Isfahan. Both Shah and Prime Minister reported greatly upset and taking line that action was unfair because Iranian Government was not consulted and arbitrary because British had no right to make arrest. Shah has sent personal representative to register protest with our Minister.

Dreyfus states arrest has aggravated already critical situation which is evidenced by widespread and serious rioting in Tehran.

Please express to Foreign Office our concern over this development. We are particularly surprised that such apparently drastic action should have been taken in the light of the Foreign Office attitude reported in your 6651, November 25, from which we had understood that British Government shared our views regarding the advisability of proceeding cautiously and of taking no action without the concurrence of the Iranian authorities.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1960: Telegram

[Document 230]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 10, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received December 10—8:22 p.m.]

6999. Substance of Department’s 6232, December 9, 8 p.m. concerning situation prevailing in Iran has been communicated to Foreign Office. Foreign Office states that it was informed of rioting in Tehran by British Minister. With reference to present Cabinet, Foreign Office says that it also feels that while this group is in some respects unsatisfactory, a change at this time would be most inopportune. Unfortunately, Foreign Office adds, the Shah himself apparently wishes to dismiss Qavam. As Foreign Office, however, feels so strongly about the advisability of retaining the present Cabinet in power, it instructed the British Minister at Tehran on December 9 to see the Shah and to emphasize how disruptive a change of Cabinet would be at this particular time.

Foreign Office also states that it fully realizes that extreme shortage of wheat, particularly in Tehran, is primary cause of unrest and disorder. According to its information, which is confirmed by the Soviet Ambassador at Tehran, some 35,000 tons of wheat are available in the northern provinces of Iran, which are under Soviet occupation. On two occasions recently the Soviet Ambassador at Tehran assured the British Minister there that the Soviet authorities would in no way impede the transportation of wheat from this area to Tehran. As the food shortage may become much more acute within the last few days, and as there is this supply of wheat in the northern provinces immediately available, Foreign Office also instructed the British Minister on December 9 to see the Soviet Ambassador and urge him to do everything he can to enlist the support of the Soviet authorities in those provinces in actually transporting this wheat to Tehran. At the same time, the British Minister at Tehran was instructed to report whether it has been possible to obtain wheat in Iraq for Iran and, if so, whether any of this has been shipped, and also to report how much, if any, barley has been shipped to Iran from Iraq.

In connection with the possibility of obtaining some wheat and barley in Iraq for immediate shipment to Iran see my Embassy’s 6518, of November 19, 7 p.m.

Winant

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 891.00/1985

[Document 231]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] December 11, 1942.

The British Ambassador83 called to see me this morning at his request.

I read to the Ambassador appropriate portions of London’s 6999, December 10, 10 p.m., and Tehran’s 426, December 9, 10 a.m., and 427, December 9, 4 p.m. I emphasized in the strongest terms the very grave concern of this Government at the way in which British authorities in Iran seem to be undertaking to pursue a policy not only at complete variance with the policy which this Government believed to be wise, but also with the policy which the British Foreign Office was informing this Government the British Government itself was pursuing. I said it seemed to me utterly incredible that at the very moment that the British Foreign Office was informing us that it was instructing its representative in Iran to move heaven and earth to get wheat and barley to Tehran and our own Minister in that capital was informing us that 3,500 tons of barley and 1,500 tons of flour were at Basra and earmarked for Tehran, the British Minister in Tehran should be telling the Iran Government that the British Government did not see any reason why cereal should be sent to Tehran so long as British subjects were abused in the streets of that city. I stressed again the importance of Iran as the one sure means of furnishing supplies to the Soviet Union, and emphasized the fact that in our judgment if the British authorities in Iran continued their present policy, the nation would be in such a state of foment as to make it altogether impossible to control the situation, even with a military strength far greater than that which the British Government had available in that area.

I concluded by saying that our considered views in this matter were being cabled to Ambassador Winant for communication to Mr. Eden.84

The Ambassador said that he fully agreed with the policy of this Government with regard to Iran. He said he thought it was criminally stupid for the British authorities in Iran to pursue the policy they were following when there was nothing to be gained by it and only trouble to be anticipated. He said he would cable Eden himself, indicating in the clearest terms our concern in the matter and expressing the belief that appropriate action should be promptly taken by the British Government.

S[umner] W[elles]

83 Viscount Halifax.

84 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1964a: Telegram

[Document 232]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, December 11, 1942—9 p.m.

6280. Please urgently transmit to Foreign Office substance of the following:

During the past year the Government of the United States has felt itself to have an increasingly direct interest in conditions in Iran. We have been led to adopt this position primarily because of the importance of Iran in the war effort of the United Nations, an importance which is of course fully recognized by the British Government. In addition to our general interest, in common with all of the United Nations, in the successful prosecution of the war in all theaters, we have felt a special responsibility in connection with Iran for the following reasons.

A. American prestige in that country places this Government, we believe, in a position to exert a powerful influence on behalf of the United Nations, and it is felt that this is an important asset which should be conserved and utilized.

B. The Iranian Government has requested a large number of American advisers to strengthen the internal administration of the country, and we feel an obligation to see that the work of these advisers is begun and carried out under conditions favorable to their success. We understand that the British Government has been heartily in favor of the dispatch of these advisory missions; on several occasions the British Government has, in fact, taken the initiative in suggesting their formation. It is, of course, obvious that such advisers can exert a most effective influence on behalf of our common cause.

C. The American Government has made heavy commitments in connection with the furnishing of supplies to the Soviet Union and is therefore directly concerned in the maintenance of the route by which a large part of these supplies must necessarily be transported. In addition, the United States military authorities have recently agreed to undertake the physical operation of the Iranian ports, railroads, and highways by which supplies for Russia are moved through Iran.

We have been given to understand on various occasions that the British Government welcomed the interest of the United States in Iranian affairs and that our active cooperation in settling the problems which arise from time to time was desired. We feel sure that the British Government understands that our policy is in no way motivated by considerations of self-interest but is directed solely toward the furtherance of the common war effort and the preparation of foundations for satisfactory and lasting peacetime conditions in Iran, as in the rest of the world.

With this in mind the Government of the United States has, as the British Government is aware, taken an active part in the exchanges of views and negotiations which have taken place since the middle of October 1942 in connection with the acute political and economic situation in Iran. It has been the consistent view of the Department of State that a satisfactory solution of the problem could only be achieved through adequate provision, in one way or another, for the minimum economic needs of the Iranian people and through the maintenance to the maximum possible extent of Iranian authority and responsibility in the internal affairs of that country. Quite apart from the obvious moral principles involved, principles to which the United Nations are pledged and to which we know the British Government subscribes without reservation, it has been the opinion of the Department that purely practical considerations would in any case dictate that the military forces and civil responsibilities of the United Nations Governments concerned should be kept to a minimum in Iran, in order to permit the employment of those military forces and of the civilian personnel in other areas where they would be of more immediate value in the prosecution of the war.

Accordingly, in its communications to the British Government and to the American Minister at Tehran in connection with the crisis which began in October, the Department has repeatedly expressed its desire that early and adequate arrangements be made for the transportation to Iran of supplies of wheat which would prevent famine in areas deficient in grain stocks. In taking this position, the Department has recognized that the Iranian Government might be in part at fault in not taking proper steps to ensure the best use of available food supplies within the country. However, we have felt that the urgency of the matter precluded prolonged discussions or reorganization of the Iranian agencies concerned and we have further felt that the use of coercion upon the Iranian authorities would not only have many undesirable repercussions but would also probably fail to achieve the objective sought. From the exchange of communications which has taken place between Washington and London, we have gathered that the Foreign Office was in substantial agreement with this point of view.

With particular reference to the question of coercion, the Foreign Office will recall that the Department has more than once expressed its feeling that a military occupation of Tehran or the establishment of a puppet government would be undesirable, and in the light of views expressed by the Foreign Office to our Embassy at London and by the British Embassy in Washington to the Department, we have believed that the British Government was in agreement.

The Department has likewise on three occasions expressed its fear that action taken by the British authorities in Iran against Iranian subjects alleged to be engaged in activities inimical to the United Nations would have serious and unfortunate repercussions unless handled with great care. In particular we urged that the Iranian authorities themselves be allowed to handle such matters. On November 25 the Foreign Office advised our Embassy that it, too, felt that caution should be exercised and that it had telegraphed the British Minister at Tehran to this effect. Foreign Office further stated that it hoped it would not be necessary to take action against the wishes of the Iranian Government.

In view of the apparent agreement, as indicated above, of the Foreign Office and the Department with respect to the principal questions involved, the Department has noted with surprise and regret that events in Iran during recent weeks do not seem to have been in accord with the policies of our two Governments. These events, as they have been reported to the Department, may be summarized as follows: A. Despite the clear recognition by all three Governments of the urgency of the matter, signature and publication of the Anglo-American-Iranian agreement for the supply of wheat to Iran was delayed for several weeks apparently in large measure because of the desire of the British authorities in Iran to impose successively more difficult conditions upon the Iranian Government before proceeding to signature. Whatever the reason, however, the agreement was concluded only on December 4, when popular dissatisfaction in Iran had become so great that it failed to have the reassuring effect anticipated.

B. Despite the assurances given to the American Embassy at London on November 25 with regard to the contemplated arrests of prominent Iranians, the British authorities in Iran on December 8 proceeded to intern the Governor General of Isfahan. We are informed that this action was taken without prior consultation with the Iranian Government and that it produced a most unfortunate effect.

C. The British Minister at Tehran informed the American Minister on December 9 that a battalion of British troops would enter the city that same afternoon.

D. The American Minister at Tehran reported on December 9 that the British authorities in Iran had for some reason failed to bring to Tehran the 3500 tons of barley and 1500 tons of flour earmarked for Iran and held at Basra. Likewise on December 9 the British Minister advised the Shah that the British Government would not look with favor on the importation of wheat into Iran unless the Iranian Government were favorable to the Allies. It is understood that the British Minister made a similar statement to the Iranian Prime Minister. It is superfluous to point out that this attitude is in direct conflict with the previous action of the Foreign Office in instructing the Minister of State at Cairo and the British Minister at Tehran to endeavor to arrange immediate shipment of barley and wheat to Iran from Iraq and from other near-by sources. It is likewise in striking contrast to the statement made by the Foreign Office on December 10 to the American Embassy at London to the effect that the Foreign Office fully realized that the extreme shortage of wheat, particularly in Tehran, is the primary cause of unrest and disorder in Iran.

In the light of the foregoing, which is submitted solely with a view to a closer coordination of British and American action, the Department ventures to express the hope that the British Government will take such steps as it deems desirable to bring about a more accurate reflection in Iran of the policies laid clown by the British Government in London.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1964: Telegram

[Document 233]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 12, 1942—noon.
[Received December 12—10:28 a.m.]

433. My 427, December 9. As result of urgent representations made by Sheridan and me to British Minister the British military have not only agreed to expedite shipment to Tehran of the 3,500 tons of barley and 1,500 tons of flour but have telegraphed instructions for the immediate advance of 253 tons flour from British Army stocks in Tehran and Kazvin. Sheridan read the British telegram, which stresses that publicity value of this so-called generous action should not be lost and that trucks of flour should be labeled “British aid to Iran”.

British now admit these 5,000 tons cereals were being held not in Basra but in Ahwaz where they could have been brought to Tehran without delay. Sheridan also reports that UKCC has procrastinated for 2 weeks in bringing to Tehran 5,000 tons of rice now in Mazanderan. After his strong representations [to] Brit[ish] Minister the UKCC now promises to bring the rice at once. It would seem to me that British have deliberately delayed bringing cereals to Tehran in order to exert pressure to require the Iranian Government to pursue a more pro-British policy. Sheridan informs me he is gradually and reluctantly becoming convinced that this is the case.

Dreyfus

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1965: Telegram

[Document 234]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 12, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received December 12—2:05 p.m.]

7035. Foreign Office, on being informed of substance of Department’s 6255, December 10, 9 p.m., concerning arrest of General Zahidi, stated that, in the view of the British military authorities and of the British Minister in Iran, Zahidi was so deeply and dangerously implicated in the plot organized by German agents that his arrest was considered urgently necessary. Careful consideration was given by these British officials and by the Foreign Office to the advisability of informing the Iranian authorities in advance of their intention to arrest Zahidi but, Foreign Office stated, it was decided that to do so would only embarrass the Iranian authorities. According to its reports, Foreign Office added, the arrest passed off quite unnoticed by the public.

Winant

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1066: Telegram

[Document 235]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 13, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received December 14—1:55 a.m.]

434. My 428, December 9. Some reliable facts and indications as to the causes of and responsibility for the Tehran riots are beginning to emerge. This much seems clear—while the ostensible cause and motivating force as far as public was concerned was food shortage the real and underlying causes were political. Political intriguers used food shortage as a sentimental issue to gain their own ends. These intriguers were of following two groups with common immediate aim of getting rid of Qavam but with distinct ultimate objectives: First, military clique headed by Shah and consisting of Yazdan Panah, Chief of Staff; Radsar, Chief of Police, and a number of young officers of the Court group; secondly, civilian group including Peikar Party, a youth organization; Azad, Rahnema and Safavi, newspaper editors; Akbar Massoudi, formerly Sarem ed-Doleh; deputies—Massoudi, Bayat, Nikpur, and Yamin Esfandiary; Ali Soheli; Tadayyon; and Hassan and Karim Akbar of Gilan. There are those who believe Qavam himself encouraged demonstration of the students in order to forestall Majlis vote of no confidence.

It seems to me probable that Shah is responsible for the demonstrations with the ultimate object of setting up a military government including his group of young officers. It seems fairly well established that this military group prevented effective police action and thus perhaps caused the riots. Timmerman85 reports that a colonel believed to be Col. Arfa addressed crowds assuring them that military had orders not to molest them. The civilian group probably also had some part in organizing the demonstrations but whether independently or in liaison with Shah’s group is not clear.

Several conflicting cross currents developed as the crowds became rebellious—manifestations developed against the British and Majlis as well as against Government. For example when Azad and Massoudi harangued the crowds against the Government Massoudi received only a severe beating for his efforts.

Qavam informs me that Shah telephoned him several times on Tuesday ordering him to resign. He refused only after receiving assurance from Allied envoys that they would give him support.

In summary, responsibility for demonstrations and for lack of effective police control would seem to lie primarily on shoulders of Shah and military clique and secondarily on the civilian groups. This onus is great since Timmerman reports “this demonstration could have been broken and beaten within a period of half an hour if proper police methods had been applied.”

I have been in full agreement with views expressed in Department’s 363, December 9 that no purpose would be served by change of Prime Minister. I feel even more strongly on this point after the events of the last few days. In my opinion Qavam should be supported and given every encouragement to master the forces of evil which are arrayed against them. It has seemed clear to me for some time that the dissolution of the Majlis is necessary if there is to be continuity of government and anything substantial accomplished. I should prefer to withhold present judgment in this regard until the situation is clarified. Qavam informs me he is meeting Majlis groups and has gone so far as to suggest Majlis might be closed temporarily “for repairs”. He is now engaged in selecting his Cabinet.

Situation in Tehran is quiet and commerce is gradually opening. However early withdrawal of tanks, cavalry and police patrolling streets in force might lead to recurrence of riots. British troops have paraded through streets but are not patrolling. Eighty arrests have been made. Press continues closed and Qavam is considering opening four Government controlled newspapers.

Dreyfus

85 L. Stephen Timmerman, American Adviser in regard to Iranian City Police.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1969: Telegram

[Document 236]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, December 15, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received December 15—6:09 p.m.]

7114. Foreign Office has been given substance of Department’s 6280, December 11, 9 p.m., concerning Iran. Foreign Office states that it will give immediate attention to the points raised by the Department and let the Embassy have its comments on them as soon as possible.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1966: Telegram

[Document 237]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 16, 1942—9 p.m.

377. Your 434, December 13, 1942. Can you give us an indication of the probable attitude toward the Allies and the United States in particular of the two groups, military and civilian, believed to have been responsible for Tehran riots? Do you think leaders had any ultimate objective other than personal aggrandizement?

Is the Colonel Arfa you mention Ibrahim Arfa or his brother?

Is the Ali Soheli mentioned the former Prime Minister Ali Soheily?

Reference your statement regarding possible necessity of a dissolution of Mejlis, Department wishes you to give most careful consideration to this matter. Although we recognize difficulties which that body creates, we feel that only the most weighty reasons should be allowed to influence a decision to suppress an institution of this sort. We are also apprehensive of the effect such action might have upon Iranian public opinion. For your confidential information, we have recently discussed this subject personally with Saleh,86 who has pointed out that with all its faults the Mejlis serves as a safety valve for the expression of opposition which might otherwise manifest itself in the form of violence. He further points out that it is easier for foreign or domestic intriguers to influence or bring pressure upon the Cabinet when it is unchecked by a large body such as the Mejlis.

Hull

86 Allah Yar Saleh, Chairman of Iranian Trade and Economic Commission.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1972: Telegram

[Document 238]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 19, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 8:01 p.m.]

450. Department’s 377, December 16. The two groups cannot be said to have had any particular attitude toward Allies or United States as distinct from opinion of general run of Iranian politicians. They were bent on personal aggrandizement and on getting into power. It must not be supposed these groups were engaged in anything resembling a formal coup d’état or open revolution. Rather they were engaged in machinations so common in Iran of discrediting the Government with having to gain in power.

Persons referred to were Ali Soheily, former Prime Minister, and Ebrahim Arfa, recently promoted to General.

Prime Minister has decided to permit Majlis to reopen. He feels his position is now stronger and he will have a comfortable majority. I agree fully with Department that dissolution of Majlis would be most undesirable in its long range effects and should be avoided if possible. While Qavam’s position is stronger as result of riots this is mainly because of Allied backing. People at large have turned against him and now consider him an Allied tool.

British again blundered in bringing troops to Tehran, their position vis-à-vis the Iranians having deteriorated if possible. Russians on other hand again gained in reputation by not bringing in troops. While Russians cannot be said to be liked by Iranians there is no doubt that their restraint and good conduct are turning many Iranians increasingly in their favor.

Dreyfus

Assistance by the United States in securing for the Iranian Government American advisers (military, financial, police, gendarmerie, etc.)Assistance by the United States in securing for the Iranian Government American advisers (military, financial, police, gendarmerie, etc.)

[239] The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] January 6, 1942.

891.105A/11

[240] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] January 10, 1942.

891.105A/11

[241] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 3, 1942—9 p.m.

891.51A/515a: Telegram

[242] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, March 5, 1942—7 p.m. [Received March 5—5:20 p.m.]

891.51A/516: Telegram

[243] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 11, 1942—midnight.

891.51A/516: Telegram

[244] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 13, 1942—4 p.m. [Received March 14—9:49 a.m.]

891.51A/518: Telegram

[245] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 13, 1942—11 p.m.

891.42/111: Telegram

[246] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, March 18, 1942—11 p.m. [Received March 18—7:20 p.m.]

891.51A/519: Telegram

[247] The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State

Washington, March 20, 1942.

891.20/134

[248] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] March 20, 1942.

891.20/134

[249] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, March 28, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 3:40 p.m.]

891.51A/520: Telegram

[250] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 4, 1942—noon. [Received May 4—11:32 a.m.]

891.51A/523: Telegram

[251] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] May 8, 1942.

891.20/144

[252] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, May 20, 1942—11 p.m. [Received May 20—8:55 p.m.]

891.00/1876: Telegram

[253] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 21, 1942—midnight.

891.20/138a: Telegram

[254] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 27, 1942—9 p.m.

891.00/1876: Telegram

[255] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 27, 1942—9 p.m.

891.00/1876: Telegram

[256] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 1, 1942—2 p.m. [Received June 1—10 a.m.]

891.00/1881: Telegram

[257] The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 3, 1942.

891.51A/524

[258] The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 3, 1942.

891.50A/2

[259] The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

Washington, June 3, 1942.

891.105A/20

[260] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 9, 1942—1 p.m. [Received June 9—12:06 p.m.]

891.01A/174: Telegram

[261] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 9, 1942—6 p.m.

891.20/143a: Telegram

[262] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 13, 1942—4 p.m.

891.00/1881: Telegram

[263] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 13, 1942—5 p.m.

891.00/1881: Telegram

[264] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 22, 1942—6 p.m. [Received June 22—1:25 p.m.]

891.00/1887: Telegram

[265] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 24, 1942—4 p.m.

891.20/138a: Telegram

[266] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 26, 1942—3 p.m. [Received June 26—11:20 a.m.]

891.01A/176: Telegram

[267] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 27, 1942—6 p.m.

891.01A/176: Telegram

[268] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)

[Washington,] August 3, 1942.

891.01A/182

[269] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 8, 1942—6 p.m.

891.24/232a: Telegram

[270] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 8, 1942—7 p.m.

891.51A/528d: Telegram

[271] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 8, 1942—8 p.m.

891.01A/181a: Telegram

[272] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 11, 1942—4 p.m. [Received August 12—11:13 p.m.]

891.24/233: Telegram

[273] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 14, 1942—3 p.m. [Received August 14—12:43 p.m.]

891.20/165: Telegram

[274] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 21, 1942—6 p.m.

891.20/165: Telegram

[275] The Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 24, 1942.

891.105A/44

[276] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 29, 1942—7 p.m.

891.00/1916a: Telegram

[277] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 2, 1942—8 p.m. [Received September 2—5:10 p.m.]

891.00/1917: Telegram

[278] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 3, 1942—1 p.m. [Received September 3—11:15 a.m.]

891.20/170: Telegram

[279] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, September 4, 1942—7 p.m.

891.50A/8a: Telegram

[280] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, September 9, 1942—3 p.m.

891.24/233: Telegram

[281] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, September 9, 1942—10 p.m.

891.105A/6f: Telegram

[282] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, September 10, 1942—10 p.m.

891.20/170: Telegram

[283] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 12, 1942.

891.20/171

[284] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 14, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 12:39 p.m.]

891.24/253: Telegram

[285] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 14, 1942—noon. [Received 12:29 p.m.]

891.20/172: Telegram

[286] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] September 15, 1942.

891.20/186⅓

[287] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, September 23, 1942.

891.20/173a

[288] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 2, 1942—11 p.m.

891.24/253: Telegram

[289] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 6, 1942—4 p.m. [Received October 6—11:25 a.m.]

891.24/259: Telegram

[290] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 12, 1942—8 p.m.

891.24/259: Telegram

[291] The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt

Washington, October 20, 1942.

891.20/175½a

[292] The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Iranian Minister (Schayesteh)

Washington, October 23, 1942.

891.20/174

[293] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 28, 1942—7 p.m.

891.20/174a: Telegram

[294] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 2, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 11:59 p.m.]

891.20/175: Telegram

[295] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 5, 1942.

891.105A/7

[296] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 12, 1942—4 p.m. [Received November 12—2:11 p.m.]

891.24/285: Telegram

[297] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 30, 1942—5 p.m. [Received November 30—3:39 p.m.]

891.20/177: Telegram

[298] Press Release Issued by the Department of State, November 30, 1942

November 30, 1942

891.51A/534

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State 891.105A/11

[Document 239]

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State

No. 2787 [Washington,] January 6, 1942.

The Minister of Iran presents his compliments to The Honorable The Secretary of State and has the honor to bring to his attention the following:

The Iranian Minister has been directed by his Government to engage in the United States a specialist to take charge of the organization of the Iranian police force. It is understood that he would have the responsibility of revising the entire police organization and of preparing the Iranians for the various duties connected with the Department throughout the country. As the position is, without doubt, very important in every respect, and the person chosen should have every appropriate qualification, capacity and knowledge, the Minister of Iran would appreciate it very much if The Honorable The Secretary of State would be kind enough to suggest a suitable man to the Minister in order that he may present his name to his Government.87

87 In reply on January 28 the Department informed the Iranian Minister that inquiries were being made to ascertain whether a specialist of the type referred to might be available.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 891.105A/11

[Document 240]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] January 10, 1942.

Mr. Berle: There is attached a communication dated January 6, 1942,88 from the Iranian Minister stating that the Minister has been instructed by the Iranian Government to secure the services of an American specialist to assume charge of the organization of the Iranian police force. The Minister requests the Department’s assistance in selecting a suitable man for this work. Reference is made also to Tehran’s telegram no. 5, January 8, 3 p.m.,89 in which Mr. Dreyfus90 states that the Iranian Minister for Foreign Affairs has approached him in regard to the matter and has requested the Department to assist the Iranian Minister.

It is considered that the appointment of a competent American specialist to direct the Iranian police system would contribute materially to the maintenance of law and order in Iran and thus facilitate the steady transportation of American supplies to Russia. The Department has received reports from various reliable sources that the Kurds and other tribesmen in Iran have secured considerable quantities of arms abandoned by Iranian troops at the time of the British-Russian occupation91 and have resumed their lawless depredations. It may be recalled that these tribes were formerly the scourge of Iran and that one of the principal achievements of former Shah Reza Pahlevi was to bring them under control. No longer under the restraints imposed by the former authoritarian régime, these rearmed tribes are becoming a serious menace to the internal peace and security of the country. It is apparent, therefore, that they should be brought under control again by the constituted authorities to insure the maintenance of law and order essential to the maximum utilization of Iranian transport facilities.

It is assumed also that an American in charge of police would prove to be a valuable source of information to our Legation at Tehran regarding conditions in Iran. Such information would undoubtedly be of great value to this Government in connection with projects undertaken by the Wheeler Mission.92

Iran, which is passing through a serious crisis as a result of the British and Russian occupation, is turning to the United States for assistance in its hour of need. Obviously, in view of the influence already exercised by the British and Russian military authorities, the Iranian Government does not desire to invite British or Russian control of its police forces by obtaining the services of a police specialist of either of those nationalities. In this connection it may be recalled that, at the time of the occupation by British and Russian forces, the President transmitted a telegram93 of reassurance to the former Shah stating that due note had been taken of British and Russian assurances to respect the political independence and territorial integrity of Iran. It is considered, therefore, that it would be entirely consistent with the views expressed by the President in his message to assist the Iranian Government in finding a competent American police specialist.

The action taken by the Department in response to a similar request made by the Turkish Government in 1938 may well serve as a precedent in the present case. At that time the Turkish Ambassador, upon instructions from his Government, requested the Department to assist him in finding several police officers to teach in Turkish police schools. Largely as a result of the exercise of the Department’s good offices, two members of the New York Police Force were selected. Although the Turkish Government later changed its plans and these men did not proceed to Turkey, the cooperation of the Department was productive of Turkish good-will.

It is considered that the direction of the Iranian police should be undertaken by a man with experience as a state trooper rather than as a member of a metropolitan police force. The work in Iran would involve the policing of the entire country, including large rural areas as well as the few urban centers. It probably would present problems in administration and organization of a type which municipal police do not encounter. As is well known, the New York State police force has had considerable experience in patrolling sparsely-populated areas in northern New York, where there are a number of people of French-Canadian origin. It might be possible, therefore, to find a New York State police officer with a knowledge of French, which would prove extremely useful in Iran, where many officials speak French but few are acquainted with English.

It is suggested that you may desire to write Governor Lehman requesting his assistance in finding a qualified State police officer, if possible one with a knowledge of French. If you prefer, I shall be glad to have such a letter drafted in this Division for your signature.

Wallace Murray

88  Supra.

89 Not printed.

90 American Minister in Iran.

91 For correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 383 ff.

92 Gen. R. A. Wheeler, head of the American Military Mission sent to Iran late in 1941 in regard to supply bases and transport. See bracketed note, ibid., pp. 477–478.

93 Dated September 2, 1941, ibid., p. 446.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.51A/515a: Telegram

[Document 241]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)94

Washington, March 3, 1942—9 p.m.

912. The British Embassy has informed the Department of the concern felt in London over the deteriorating financial and economic situation in Iran and has inquired whether this Government would be prepared to lend its assistance in securing the services of an American financial adviser who would also assume direction of the importation of badly needed supplies for the civilian population, principally bread, sugar and cotton piece goods. The suggestion was also made that it would be highly desirable if some experienced American relief organization would supervise the distribution of the above-mentioned supplies. The Embassy states that the matter has been discussed with the Iranian Government, who are anxious to see the above proposals implemented as soon as possible.

The Embassy has been advised informally that these suggestions will be given careful and sympathetic consideration. The Embassy was, at the same time, reminded, however, that an American financial adviser and relief organization could not perform their duties effectively without the full support of competent Iranian officials; that, in this connection, the Department has noted with concern the recent deterioration in the Iranian political situation resulting from the regrettable emergence from political obscurity of reactionary politicians with unsavory reputations who appear to be slated for cabinet posts and other positions of influence.

It was emphasized, furthermore, that the rise to power of such characters would tend to nullify the numerous beneficial reforms that have been instituted in Iran during the last 15 years. It was also pointed out that, as a result of a probable breakdown in internal administration arising from the corruption and incompetence of such leaders, the occupying forces might well be obliged to expend considerable time and energy in the maintenance of law and order. The maintenance of such law and order was imperative if the safe transportation of military supplies to Russia was to be assured. The point was made that it is in the interest of both Iran and the United Nations that men of integrity and ability should assume posts of leadership in Iran, in order that the country may assume the role of a willing partner resisting aggression rather than that of a passive appendage.

In view of the above considerations, the suggestion was made that both the American and British Ministers at Tehran might be instructed to collaborate in such manner as might be appropriate with a view to encouraging the assumption of high office by Iranians of tested competence and integrity.

Please seek an early opportunity to discuss this question with the Foreign Office with a view to securing its cooperation. The strategic position of Iran at this time, as a result of Japanese successes in the Far East and the threat of German action in the Near East, is so obvious as scarcely to require stressing. The Department, therefore, trusts that the competent British authorities will concur with us in believing that no time should be lost in strengthening Iran’s position as greatly as possible along the lines outlined above.

Please keep the Department fully and promptly informed of developments.

Welles

94 Repeated to the Minister in Iran as No. 55, March 4, 9 p.m.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State 891.51A/516: Telegram

[Document 242]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, March 5, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received March 5—5:20 p.m.]

1050. This morning I discussed with Sir Alexander Cadogan94a the situation in Iran in the sense of the Department’s telegram no. 912, March 3, 9 p.m. He said that he would like to look into this question somewhat before giving any definite reply; he could say, however, that the British Government desires the fullest and closest collaboration between our two Ministers at Tehran. He added that he felt perhaps that we took “too black a view of the situation there”. He felt that some of the elements in the central government of Iran at least (he mentioned specifically the Foreign Minister and the Minister for Finance) were not undesirable persons, but until a new government has taken shape it is difficult to see how the situation will evolve.

He admitted that some of the provincial authorities could be considered unsatisfactory and that their authority in certain areas did not inspire confidence. On the other hand he is not inclined to feel that the situation is such that transportation for military supplies to Russia is in any danger. He fully agreed to the importance of the maintenance of law and order in Iran and to the key position which that country now occupies.

He said that he gathered from what I had said that our Government is not inclined to lend assistance in obtaining the services of an American financial adviser under present circumstances. I replied that perhaps he was reading too much into the Department’s views and that I felt that what we are seeking is primarily a closer understanding with the British as to men and policies in Iran as a necessary preliminary to the sending of an American financial adviser.

Matthews

94a British Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.51A/516: Telegram

[Document 243]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 11, 1942—midnight.

1034. Your no. 1050, March 5, 7 p.m. You should inform Sir Alexander Cadogan that we have every desire to assist in the selection of a financial adviser for Iran. The concluding sentence of section 2 of your telegram under reference reflects accurately the Department’s view of the matter.

Welles

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.51A/518: Telegram

[Document 244]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 13, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received March 14—9:49 a.m.]

66. Following reply to Department’s 55, March 4.95

(1) Economically Iran is suffering from loss of European markets, inability to secure shipping space for exports, disruption of internal life due to invasion and difficulty in obtaining much needed goods such as wheat, sugar, cotton goods, automotive products, tires, and medicines. A memorandum setting forth Iran’s needs was handed Mr. Bullitt96 by Minister of Finance. Financially Iran’s position is fairly good for although revenues have fallen, British are bringing in almost a million pounds a month. Rial has strengthened and further increase in value is contemplated.

(2) Politically present confused and unsatisfactory situation derives from violent change from dictatorial to democratic government for which country was ill-prepared and from popular reaction to virtual occupation of country by two powers regarded as hostile. It is easy, however, to exaggerate seriousness of political situation. I do not believe it is getting out of hand, that there is danger of breakdown in administration or that internal security has deteriorated to point where our lifeline to Russia is threatened. On contrary there are some hopeful signs as indicated in my number 65, March 12.97 There are in Iran few persons of integrity and proven reliability to which Department refers. The few such as Foroughi, Ala, Mossadeq, and Pirnia either are not available or refuse Cabinet positions. The political situation in my opinion gives no immediate cause for alarm unless, of course, the threatened Axis thrust toward Middle East materializes.

(3) British position. British prestige already low when Iran was invaded has declined further. Factors which contributed to this included: Their unsuccessful war effort; interference in Iranian politics; pressure on Iran to sign an unwanted treaty; establishment through UKCC98 of virtual monopoly over Iranian trade and such acts as removing from Tehran radio station to Egypt a transmitting set badly needed here. British are now trying to prevent Iranians from altering rial value upwards. British so think in Tehran that they could hardly be trusted to support officials merely because their appointment would be good for Iran. For example, they supported reactionary Tadayyon when we were interested in seeing him out of Cabinet. British bid for American support in Iran may well be an attempt to bolster their own declining prestige.

(4) American position. American prestige in Iran is very high. Our aims should be first a short range objective of using Iran’s strategic position for prosecution of war which aim nothing should be permitted to thwart and, second, maintenance of our high prestige for constructive use in postwar period. I have in informal conversations with leading Iranian officials expressed desire of my Government to see officials of integrity and ability appointed to high positions. It is perhaps not by chance that three objectionable persons were removed from Cabinet and that not a single highly undesirable one is in present Cabinet. I have taken up with Department Iranian desire to obtain police and education advisers. I discussed with Foroughi99 and am discussing with Soheily1 obtention of finance and relief experts. Iranians can hardly be expected to cooperate fully and voluntarily with two powers regarded with suspicion and distrust and if they are to be converted from passive appendage to willing partner it will be only through American sympathy and assistance.

(5) Conclusion. I recommend we give Iran our sympathetic support in this hour of need and furnish where possible the goods and advisers requested. I advise that any action suggesting force or open interference in internal affairs be avoided unless necessary for war effort. I recommend that we avoid if possible joining British in representations for fear we thereby lower our own prestige and share to some extent the historic onus which is certain to attach to British action in Iran. We must of course continue close collaboration and friendly relations with British officials in Iran in matters connected with war effort.

Dreyfus

95 See footnote 94, p. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241].

96 William C. Bullitt, on special mission in the Near East; see footnote 14, p. 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5].

97 Not printed.

98 United Kingdom Commercial Corporation.

99 Mohammed Ali Foroughi, Iranian Prime Minister, August 28, 1941–March 7, 1942.

1 Ali Soheily, Iranian Prime Minister.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.42/111: Telegram

[Document 245]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 13, 1942—11 p.m.

67. Because of transportation difficulties, the Monroe Mission2 will be unable to proceed this spring. It plans, however, to make the trip next fall. Please inform Iranian Government, emphasizing that this is merely a postponement, that there is no intention of abandoning the undertaking, and that, as Sadiq originally indicated, the fall is really preferable for the accomplishment of the mission’s purpose.

Welles

2 Educational Mission headed by Professor Paul Monroe of Columbia University.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State 891.51A/519: Telegram

[Document 246]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, March 18, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received March 18—7:20 p.m.]

1298. I duly informed Sir Alexander Cadogan in the sense of the Department’s instruction No. 1034, March 11, midnight. He tells me that he is awaiting a report which was requested from Sir Reader Bullard3 following my earlier conversation with him, (my telegram No. 1050, March 5, 7 p.m.). He assures me, however, that the Foreign Office “unreservedly welcome the principle of Anglo-United States cooperation in Persian questions” and fully share the view that such cooperation is the best means of strengthening the position in Persia to the advantage of the cause of the Allies.

Matthews

3 British Minister in Iran.

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State 891.20/134

[Document 247]

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State

No. 3382 Washington, March 20, 1942.

The Minister of Iran presents his compliments to His Excellency the Secretary of State and has the honor to inform him that the Iranian Government intends to engage a high ranking American officer to take charge of the entire finance and army supply divisions of the Iranian War Department. This office is called “Intendant General,” which, I believe, corresponds in the United States to General Service of Supply.

The Minister would appreciate it very much if the Secretary of State would consent to give him the name of a suitable officer to be engaged by the Iranian Government.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.20/134

[Document 248]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] March 20, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Schayesteh, Minister of Iran.

Mr. Murray4

Mr. Alling

While calling on another matter today, the Iranian Minister presented the attached note5 requesting on behalf of his Government the services of a high ranking American officer to take charge of the Finance and Army Supply Divisions of the Iranian War Department. In presenting this note the Minister stated that, although he had not been so informed by his Government, he inferred from the nature of the code in which his instructions were sent him that the occupying forces in Iran were not aware that his Government proposed to engage such an American officer. He said that he desired to urge the necessity of sending such an officer to Iran at the earliest possible moment. He felt that the officer in question could have great influence in the Iranian armed forces, which he said numbered between 200,000 and 300,000 men, many of whom were well equipped. Of the officers in the Iranian Army nearly eighty percent had been educated in the best European military academies in France, Italy and Germany. With proper direction he felt that the Iranian Army could be made a formidable force. He believed that American influence in Iran, exerted through political measures such as those which he had proposed in regard to a declaration concerning the future independence of Iran,6 and influence by the proposed “Intendant General” could bring about a large measure of cooperation with the Allied cause by the Iranian Army to the benefit of all concerned. Mr. Murray stated that he would take up immediately with the appropriate authorities the question of obtaining an officer such as was desired by the Iranian Government.

4 Wallace Murray, appointed Adviser on Political Relations, March 13, 1942.

5  Supra.

6 See pp. 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299] ff.

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State 891.51A/520: Telegram

[Document 249]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, March 28, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 3:40 p.m.]

1496. My telegram number 1298, March 18, 1 [11] p.m. and previous. I have now received an informal communication from the Foreign Office with reference to Anglo-American cooperation in Iran which may be summarized as follows:

The proposal that “United States advisers and relief workers” might be employed by the Persian Government to assist them in revenue and finance work and in the distribution of imported supplies originated with the British Minister at Tehran. The latter reported on February 5 that the Persian Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs seemed to favor his suggestion. Mr. Eden7 approved Bullard’s initiative and telegraphed Lord Halifax8 to inform the Department and to add that if the Persian Government requested such advisers and relief workers the British hoped that we would accept; they expressed the view that efficient American personnel “could undoubtedly afford very valuable assistance to Persia at the present time.” The Foreign Office has not however heard that the Government of Iran has followed up the suggestion by asking for such assistance and a further telegram is being despatched to Bullard to inquire the present status of the matter.

The memorandum goes on to say that the presence of Americans in Persia and the assistance which they would render “would tend to strengthen the position of the Persian administration, and this, as the State Department rightly point out, is most desirable at the present juncture.…

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

With reference to our suggestion concerning cooperation between the American and British Ministers at Teheran, to encourage the assumption of high posts by Persians “of tested integrity and competence.” The British view is that “it will be necessary to proceed in such questions with considerable caution.” The memorandum continues: [“]The State Department will, I am sure, agree that it would not be desirable for the United States and British representatives at Teheran to incur resentment by promoting the interests of certain personalities whose appointment to important posts might be particularly acceptable to ourselves, but perhaps less acceptable to Persian opinion, or even to the Soviet authorities who have also to be taken into account, for Persian officials must be prepared to cooperate with the Soviet Government as well as with ourselves, and they must also enjoy sufficient support in the country to enable them to carry on their work without relying entirely on British or United States support. Any Persian officials known to owe their position to foreign intervention would find themselves correspondingly weakened. The position of the present government under M. Soheily is in fact considered to be the stronger for having been established without any foreign interference. Sir Reader Bullard reports that he has discussed the suggestion with his United States colleague, and that they are agreed as to the undesirability of their attempting to undertake the task of selecting Persian Ministers and high officials. They feel that it would be dangerous to attempt to force their own candidates on the Persian administration. We would therefore prefer to refrain from sending explicit instructions to them to act in the sense proposed, but to rely on them to use their influence with the Persian authorities, to the extent to which they feel that this can safely be done, with a view to encourage the best and most efficient elements in the country as a whole. In actual practice and in Eastern countries it is often much easier to discourage a bad appointment than it is to promote a good one.”

Matthews

7 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

8 British Ambassador in the United States.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.51A/523: Telegram

[Document 250]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 4, 1942—noon.
[Received May 4—11:32 a.m.]

141. Both Shah and Prime Minister have requested me to express to Department their hope that the arrival of the American advisers requested will not be long delayed. They now wish to have three additional advisers for finance and aviation and an army engineer. I suggested that they make formal request for these advisers to the Department through the Iranian Minister in Washington and the Prime Minister stated he would do so.

Dreyfus

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 891.20/144

[Document 251]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] May 8, 1942.

Participants: The Iranian Minister;

Mr. Alling;

Mr. Jernegan.

The Iranian Minister called to explain the desires of his Government with respect to assistance from the United States in the form of advisers. In addition to the quartermaster general and the two agricultural experts already requested, the Iranian Government now asks for a military aviation officer, a military engineer officer, and a civilian financial adviser. It is likewise anxious to obtain two police organizers, one for the city police of the country and one for the rural gendarmerie. The Minister explained that there appeared to have been a misunderstanding regarding the request made in January of this year for a police officer. The Department had understood that this man would reorganize the gendarmerie, whereas in fact, a man for the city police had been desired. However, as men for both types of work were now requested, it would appear that no harm had been done.

The Minister was informed of the Department’s efforts to obtain the services of Colonel H. Norman Schwarzkopf, and he was given a copy of the biographical sketch of Colonel Schwarzkopf which has been furnished by the War Department. He expressed the opinion that Colonel Schwarzkopf would seem to be well qualified for the post in charge of the gendarmerie, but he requested such further information as the Department might be able to obtain regarding his experience with the New Jersey State Police.

With respect to the request for a financial adviser, the Minister emphasized that the type of man needed is one of high qualifications both as a financier and as a practical executive in the field of government finance and taxation. He said that neither a theoretical economist nor a man with purely banking experience would be satisfactory. What is needed, according to the Minister, is a man capable not only of advising but of drawing up and executing practical programs of taxation, currency control, et cetera.

Mr. Alling mentioned, in connection with the military advisers requested, that certain technical difficulties might be encountered if the officers selected should be required to become officers in the Iranian Army, since we understood that American Army officers would be forced to resign from our Army in order to enter any foreign army. This they would be reluctant to do in view of the possible loss of retirement status, eligibility for promotion and matters of that sort. Although he said that military advisers of this kind would normally be expected to become officers in the Iranian Army and would find the work simplified by so doing, the Minister indicated that he thought it would not be unduly difficult to arrive at some arrangement in this respect if our own army regulations should prove inflexible.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1876: Telegram

[Document 252]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, May 20, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received May 20—8:55 p.m.]

2811. My 2394, May 5.9 We have received an informal communication from the Foreign Office dated May 18, 1942, which may be summarized as follows:

The Foreign Office understands that the United States is prepared to give sympathetic consideration to requests by the Persian Government for financial advisers to assist the Persian Ministry of Finance, and that the State Department has also received a request from the Persian Government to assist in obtaining a United States Army officer to assume charge of the quartermaster and finance services of the Persian Army.

The Foreign Office believes that “this is a step in the right direction, but that more is required”, and wishes to know if the State Department “would be prepared to consider favorably” a Persian request for a more complete military mission, in addition to the officer previously mentioned to help to reorganize the Persian Army. The Foreign Office would not wish to urge the Persian Government to apply for such a mission if such a request would be refused by United States.

The British Minister to Tehran has reported that a United States mission consisting of “seven officers with general military qualifications”, including the officer in charge of the quartermaster and finance section, “would be sufficient to yield [wield?] considerable influence over the Persian Army as a whole”, and that … the work of any financial advisers sent to Persia “will be seriously handicapped unless the army is properly organized”, and vice versa.

The army’s chief duty in present circumstances is said to be the maintenance of internal security, but “due to the natural lawlessness of the tribes and their general inclination to rise against a weak central government, and to refuse to pay taxation, the task of maintaining order and enforcing the central government’s authority is by no means an easy one”.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

The Foreign Office points out as has the Department in previous telegrams that the safety of the Allies’ supply route to the Soviet Union depends on the maintenance of internal security, and it is therefore necessary that the Persian Army should be able to deal with the tribes without having to ask Allied assistance. The Foreign Office believes that close and friendly cooperation with a United States military mission would be the best remedy for the inevitable ill-feeling caused by the events of last summer attending the Soviet and British occupation…

The Foreign Office realizes that it may not be easy for the United States authorities to spare “competent officers with the necessary qualifications” at the present moment but as it is in the interests of all the Allies to maintain the security of the supply routes to the Soviet Union, and as there would be “special difficulties in arranging for a Soviet or British military mission to Persia” at this time, it very much hopes that the State Department will give favorable consideration to this suggestion.

Winant

9 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.20/138a: Telegram

[Document 253]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 21, 1942—midnight.

132. War Department has designated General Greely10 to undertake work of Intendant General of Iranian Army in an advisory capacity, insofar as the proposed duties are compatible with his status as an American Army officer. Orders have been drafted directing him to report to you for instructions.

Iranian Minister here is consulting his Government regarding acceptability of this designation. Pending receipt of word in this respect, General Greely should not approach the Iranian authorities.

War Department is instructing Greely to report his views as to the task to be accomplished and the status which he should occupy to perform it to best advantage. Upon receipt of his recommendations, consideration will be given to such action as may be desirable and practicable to change his status from that of adviser to one having more direct authority. It is understood that legislative action by Congress would be necessary to enable him to accept a position under the Iranian Government.

Hull

10 Maj. Gen. John N. Greely; for some discussion regarding General Greely’s informal position and functions in Iran during the months just following, see T. H. Vail Motter, The Persian Corridor and Aid to Russia, in the series United States Army in World War II: The Middle East Theater (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1952), pp. 165–169 and 170–171.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1876: Telegram

[Document 254]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, May 27, 1942—9 p.m.

2417. Your 2811, May 20. Department agrees that an American military mission to Iran would be desirable and is consulting the War Department on this subject.

If War Department agreement is obtained, we contemplate making a voluntary offer of such a mission to the Iranian Government. It is felt that this procedure would be advantageous as showing the positive, affirmative interest of the United States in Iranian affairs. We believe that meanwhile the British Government should not approach the Iranian Government in the matter.

Department believes the Iranian Government is disposed to respond more readily at this time to suggestions which come direct from the United States than to proposals originating with or transmitted by the British Government.

An officer to take charge of the quartermaster and finance services of the Iranian Army has now been selected by the War Department and his name has been submitted to the Iranian Government. In addition, the Iranians have recently requested two American officers to serve as military aviation and engineering advisers. Department has recommended favorable action on these requests, which are under consideration by the War Department. It is assumed that these officers could be incorporated later in any mission which may be sent.

The Iranian Government has also presented formal requests for assistance in obtaining an American financial adviser, an expert in rubber cultivation, and a police officer to reorganize the urban police of Iran. (This latter officer is in addition to the police expert previously requested, who is needed for the rural gendarmerie.) Steps are being taken to locate suitable men for these positions.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1876: Telegram

[Document 255]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 27, 1942—9 p.m.

138. British Foreign Office has inquired whether the United States would be prepared to send a full military mission to Iran to reorganize the Iranian Army. Bullard has reported that seven officers would be sufficient to wield considerable influence. Foreign Office considers such a mission could play an important role by correcting abuses, increasing effectiveness of Army and thereby assist in the maintenance of internal security and protection of supply route to Russia. Also feels that work of financial adviser would be handicapped unless Army properly organized and that close friendly cooperation with an American military mission would remedy ill-feeling caused by Anglo-Russian occupation and counteract pro-Axis sentiment of Army officers. Foreign Office asks favorable consideration of proposal, which it is ready to urge upon Iranian Government.

Following is pertinent portion of telegram which Department is sending to London in reply to this suggestion:

[Here follows text of first four paragraphs of telegram No. 2417, printed supra.]

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1881: Telegram

[Document 256]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 1, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received June 1—10 a.m.]

3037. The substance of Department’s telegram No. 2417, May 27, 9 p.m., with the exception of the confidential paragraph11 was conveyed informally to the Foreign Office. Sir Maurice Peterson12 tells us that the British “will certainly do nothing” to complicate matters in the light of our proposed voluntary offer of an American military mission to the Iranian Government.

Winant

11 i.e., the third paragraph of the telegram.

12 British Ambassador temporarily in the Foreign Office.

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State 891.51A/524

[Document 257]

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State

No. 501 Washington, June 3, 1942.

The Minister of Iran presents his compliments to His Excellency the Secretary of State and has the honor to bring to his attention the following:

The Iranian Government desires to engage in this country an American financial expert in Government Finance. He should have a broad knowledge and experience in the financial field.

The Minister of Iran would appreciate it very much if the Honorable the Secretary of State would find and suggest a suitable candidate for this position.

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State 891.50A/2

[Document 258]

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Secretary of State

No. 502 Washington, June 3, 1942.

The Minister of Iran presents his compliments to His Excellency the Secretary of State and has the honor to bring to his attention the following:

The Iranian Minister has been directed by his Government to engage in the United States a high ranking man who is acquainted with the best methods of distributing supplies and food to the various parts of the country.

The Minister of Iran would appreciate it very much if the Honorable the Secretary of State would suggest a suitable man for this position.

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.105A/20

[Document 259]

The Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

No. 503 Washington, June 3, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Alling: You will recall that several letters regarding the employment of a specialist for the organization of the Iranian Police Force have been exchanged between the State Department and this Legation, the last of which was Mr. Wallace Murray’s letter of February 27, 1942.13

I would appreciate it very much if you could give me the name of a candidate recommended by the Department in order that I might arrange for his definite engagement and immediate departure for Teheran.

May I add that the Police Force Organization in Iran is for the cities while the Gendarmerie is for the rural districts. Both organizations have the entire country under their supervision. Colonel H. Norman Schwarzkopf has been taken into consideration for the Gendarmerie, and it is now necessary to find someone to take charge of the organization of the Police Force in Iran.

Thanking you for your cooperation in this matter, I am

Very sincerely yours,

M. Schayesteh

13 Not printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.01A/174: Telegram

[Document 260]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 9, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received June 9—12:06 p.m.]

191. Prime Minister told me yesterday “Government Majlis and people enthusiastic about United States advisers and are anxious to have them arrive”. He has cabled Minister in Washington asking details about engaging Schwarzkopf in order to draw up contract but has had no reply. He is particularly anxious to have a financial commission which should be headed by a man of highest caliber such as Millspaugh. He said Millspaugh who is being mentioned here might if available be considered but added his powers would be less than on previous visit14 because of present democratic form of government. Whoever is selected should use great care in selection of subordinates since there was considerable criticism of Millspaugh’s assistants. Prime Minister also wants food and commodity expert who should arrive soon if to be of any value.

Reference Department’s instruction 93, May 5,15 Shaffer16 whom I met in Kabul and consider fine young man is not at all suitable for boy scout position because of youth and inexperience. This is splendid opportunity for us to assist Iran in moulding character of its youth and to perform service of lasting benefit. Scout leader should be man of wide experience who could mould character and inspire with his leadership.

Prime Minister volunteered interesting information he would like to have industrial and mining enterprises of Iran thus far in Government’s hands to be reorganized, financed and operated by American interests. In answer to my inquiry if this might include mining and petroleum concessions he answered it would. He added that he also desires have Americans finance and construct additional railways. He explained that ex-Shah had over-expanded country’s industrial plant and that present generation has not knowledge nor the Government the money in its regular budget to operate it successfully.

Government, people and press are clamoring for American advisers and our prestige has reached a peak.

However, Prime Minister and some others express disappointment we have been so slow in responding to their call particularly in matter of Monroe Mission. I recommend since we have so frequently expressed our desire to assist Iran that we endeavor to choose men of highest caliber and expedite their departure. Otherwise there is danger Iranian enthusiasm for United States may be converted to disillusionment with consequent decline in our prestige.

Dreyfus

14 For correspondence regarding the mission headed by Arthur C. Millspaugh to assist in the administration of the finances of Persia, 1922–1927, see Foreign Relations, 1927, vol. iii, pp. 523 ff. For Dr. Millspaugh’s own account of the earlier mission and the one contemplated, see his book, Americans in Persia (Washington, 1946).

15 Not printed.

16 John Richard Shaffer, American teacher at Habibia College, Kabul, Afghanistan.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.20/143a: Telegram

[Document 261]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 9, 1942—6 p.m.

148. About 10 days ago the Iranian Minister informed us that his Government agreed to General Greely’s designation provided he would be an officer of the Iranian Government. We explained that for the present Greely could act only in an advisory capacity as an American Army officer but that legislation would be sought to enable him to work more closely with Iranian Government. The Minister again cabled his Government to explain this situation and to recommend agreement to the temporary arrangement proposed.

The Minister has received no reply to his last cable, and the War Department is anxious to have a decision with the least possible delay, as it dislikes keeping Greely inactive for so long a period. Please take any steps you may consider proper to expedite decision by the Iranian Government.

Because of the shortage of experienced officers, in the light of the great demands being made on our Army, it is our impression that General Greely is probably the only man whom the War Department would be willing to release for the Intendant General post.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1881: Telegram

[Document 262]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 13, 1942—4 p.m.

154. Department’s 138, May 22 [27]. War Department prefers not to undertake organization of mission to Iran at this time. Reasons given are: 1. Difficulty of releasing experienced officers for such duty; 2. Primary responsibility of British for Middle Eastern operations; 3. War Department doubts that foreign mission could have much effect in correction abuses in Iranian Army.

However, it is understood General Greely will be instructed to make a report upon all phases of situation, and if he recommends assignment of additional officers further consideration will be given the proposal.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1881: Telegram

[Document 263]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, June 13, 1942—5 p.m.

2728. Your 3037, June 1 and Department’s 2417, May 22 [27]. War Department prefers not to undertake organization of a mission to Iran at this time but indicates it may be willing to reconsider proposal later.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1887: Telegram

[Document 264]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, June 22, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received June 22—1:25 p.m.]

3482. The sense of the Department’s telegram no. 2728, June 13, 5 p.m., was communicated informally to the Foreign Office. We are told that while they are sorry to hear that our War Department does not feel able to undertake the organization of a military mission to Persia, they quite realize that the War Department’s “many preoccupations would make this difficult at the present moment”. They hope, however, that this decision does not modify the decision to send an officer to take charge of the Quartermaster and Finance services of the Iranian Army (Department’s telegram no. 2417, May 27, 9 p.m.) and likewise that it will not hinder our efforts to find the other advisers requested by the Iranian Government.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.20/138a: Telegram

[Document 265]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 24, 1942—4 p.m.

164. Department’s 132, May 21. Iranian Legation informed Department June 16 that General Greely’s appointment in an advisory capacity, pending legislative action to permit closer collaboration, would be acceptable to Government of Iran. Accordingly, War Department telegraphed Greely June 17 authorizing him to perform such duties as would not be incompatible with his status as an officer in the American Army and directing him to report to you for instruction.

If you have not already done so, you should put General Greely in contact with the proper Iranian officials and instruct him to enter upon such duties as they may desire, within the limitation indicated above, in the capacity of adviser on quartermaster and army finance matters. For the present he may be considered as under your supervision in so far as his work may affect our political or economic relations with Iran or third countries, but the Department does not consider it necessary that you attempt to supervise or control details of his activities, which will be, we assume, almost exclusively of a technical nature.

General Greely should transmit to you any information which may be of value in the conduct of our relations with Iran or other countries. Reciprocally, you should advise him that you will keep him informed of all developments which may affect his mission.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.01A/176: Telegram

[Document 266]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, June 26, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received June 26—11:20 a.m.]

316. Reference my telegram 191, June 9 and despatch 279, June 11.17 Prime Minister called me today to express his deep concern over failure of American Government to respond to his many requests for advisers, particularly Food Administrator and financial mission. He said he had promised the Majlis on occasion of expulsion of Japanese Legation18 and when other action favorable to Allies was taken that effective aid from United States would soon be forthcoming. He added in evident agitation that he is “getting near the end of his rope” and that his position may soon become untenable unless American help is extended.

Dreyfus

17 Latter not printed.

18 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374] ff.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.01A/176: Telegram

[Document 267]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, June 27, 1942—6 p.m.

167. Your 316, June 26. Please tell Prime Minister that delay in furnishing advisers has in no way been due to lack of interest on part of this Government. On contrary, Department has been and is continuing to make every effort to locate suitable men. We fully appreciate importance of this question and hope to achieve concrete results in near future. Prime Minister will understand that demands of our own war effort make it doubly difficult to secure services of men with high qualifications needed for such positions.

Hull

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) 891.01A/182

[Document 268]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)19

[Washington,] August 3, 1942.

It seems to me that the present political crisis in Iran which has resulted in the fall of the Soheily Cabinet is of such vital concern to us that we cannot ignore it.

The obvious fact is that we shall soon be in the position of actually “running” Iran through an impressive body of American advisers eagerly sought by the Iranian Government and urgently recommended by the British Government.

We have had in Iran, as you will recall, General Greely, acting as Quartermaster General of the Iranian Army, and the British are pressing us to send a military mission to take entire control of the training and functioning of the Army. Two first-class Army officers have already proceeded to Iran to organize and run the gendarmerie of the country which will guarantee internal security. A competent police official in this country is about to be engaged to reorganize the police forces of Iran. The Public Health Service is finding us an official to head that service in Iran. A Director of Supply and Transportation is about to be engaged and has already agreed to accept the offer of the Iranian Government. And, finally, a full-fledged Financial Mission, more ambitious even than the Millspaugh Mission of 1922–1927, is about to be assembled here and sent to Iran.

In the light of these developments it seems to me odd indeed that the British and Soviet Ambassadors in Tehran should be picking over the lot of Iranian politicians and deciding “whose man” should be put in power without prior consultation with our Legation.

I had occasion to discuss this situation briefly and informally with the Iranian Minister on Saturday, and I told him quite frankly that from my experience in the past in Iran I would not be prepared to recommend to the Department that we proceed with this impressive group of American advisers for Iran unless it was clear beyond any doubt that the various members of any Government that might be formed in the country were competent and willing to cooperate fully with our people there. I said it was simply a waste of time and services of valuable people to send them to Iran and spend most of their time overcoming the hurdles and obstacles placed in their way by intriguing Government officials who gave public lip service to the efforts being made by our people but secretly worked to nullify their accomplishments.

The Minister, who is fully aware of the almost constant intrigues against the Millspaugh Mission when it was in Iran, said he entirely agreed with me that we should not let that situation occur again, and that he wished to think the matter over and discuss with me again the ways and means to facilitate, and not obstruct, the efforts of these first-rate American advisers who are being employed in this country to help Iran in these desperate days.

Wallace Murray

19 Addressed to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) and to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle). Marginal note by Mr. Murray: “Discussed orally with Mr. Welles.”

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/232a: Telegram

[Document 269]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 8, 1942—6 p.m.

205. Your 250 and 251, August 5.20 The Iranian Minister here has reached an agreement with Joseph P. Sheridan for the latter’s appointment as Food and Supply Adviser to the Iranian Government. Minister has cabled Tehran for approval of the terms agreed upon. Because of the various inoculations required for air travel to the Near East, Sheridan will necessarily be delayed here until early September, but it is hoped he will be able to depart for Tehran immediately after September 7.

In your discretion you may inform the Prime Minister21 that the Department considers Sheridan a very able man and believes that if given full cooperation by the Iranian Government he will be of great assistance in solving the pressing supply problems confronting Iran. During his stay in Washington he will make a study of the situation in so far as information is available here and will investigate the questions involved in obtaining supplies from the United States.

Hull

20  Ante, pp. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168] and 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], respectively.

21 Ahmad Qavam.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.51A/528d: Telegram

[Document 270]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 8, 1942—7 p.m.

206. Pursuant to the request of the Iranian Government, the Department has been working for some time on the question of a suitable man to head a financial mission to Iran. It is, of course, exceedingly difficult at the present time to find qualified men who are not already engaged in important work for the Allied cause and who are willing to undertake so exacting a mission.

After careful study, we have decided that from every point of view Dr. Millspaugh is the logical choice for the post. In coming to this conclusion we have taken into consideration the great prestige which his name would lend to the mission and the fact that he has had 5 years of highly successful experience, such as no other man could have, in the very field in which the work is to be done. We note from your reports that his popularity in Iran is great, and we therefore assume that he would be acceptable to the Iranian Government. He has declared his willingness to accept the post if offered and appears to be in good health and fully capable of meeting the exacting demands of the work at this time. We believe, further, that no man could be better qualified to select a strong group of assistants designed to meet the special needs of Iran. (The Department would, of course, give him full support and advice in obtaining suitable men.)

We have expressed the views set forth above to the Iranian Minister here, who has discussed the matter with Dr. Millspaugh and is understood to be consulting Tehran by cable.

The foregoing is transmitted for your information and for such use as you may care to make of it in conversation with Iranian officials.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.01A/181a: Telegram

[Document 271]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 8, 1942—8 p.m.

207. You should take the earliest opportunity to impress upon Prime Minister and other officials the great importance of an unreservedly cooperative attitude on the part of all Iranian Government officials toward the various American advisers now in process of selection. Please make it clear that in our view it will be worse than useless to employ these men unless all concerned are prepared to further their efforts to the utmost. You may further say that this Government will hardly feel justified in continuing its efforts to provide advisers unless it can be assured that the Iranian Government shares this viewpoint. In this connection, we regard the choice of Minister of Finance and the proposed Minister of Food as particularly important, since those officials will be the determining factor in the success or failure of the Financial and Food and Supply advisers, who will form the keystone of the whole advisory set-up.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/233: Telegram

[Document 272]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 11, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received August 12—11:13 p.m.]

257. Department’s 205–6 and 7, August 8. I have discussed question of American advisers with Prime Minister along lines suggested by Department. Qavam assured me he strongly favors employment of American advisers who will be given wholehearted support by him and his Government. He said he appreciated necessity appointment of strong and cooperative Finance and Food Ministers and hence has already appointed an especially capable man to former post. (I understand Taqizadeh who is in London has not yet accepted the post). Qavam was delighted with suggested appointment of Millspaugh but stressed he would have less broad powers than on previous mission due to present democratic form of government. I personally am of opinion that Department has executed a grand coup in Millspaugh appointment which will have most favorable repercussions here. Qavam was also pleased with appointment of Sheridan.

Dreyfus

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.20/165: Telegram

[Document 273]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 14, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received August 14—12:43 p.m.]

260. Reference Department’s 195, July 28;22 and 138, May 27. I was formally approached a few days ago by two high Iranian military officers on behalf of Prime Minister with request that an American military mission come to Iran to reorganize the Army. I conferred yesterday at length with Prime and Foreign Ministers on subject. Prime Minister stated he wishes to have a complete American military mission to reorganize and train Army which is demoralized, inefficient, depleted in materials and almost disintegrated as result of invasion of country and he stated, for example, that British and Russians had taken more than 100,000 rifles and other war materials for which they had not yet made payment.

I told Qavam frankly that this brings up question of Iran’s position vis-à-vis the Allied cause to which he replied with equal frankness that it is true Iranian people and Army are anti-British and Russian because of invasion and of subsequent Allied treatment. He hastened to add that this request is not inconsistent with Iran’s position because country is strongly pro-American. I then stated my Government, in receiving his request for a military mission, would be interested in knowing whether he contemplated any kind of commitment to the United States such as adherence to Atlantic Charter,23 a military alliance, or a statement placing Iran solidly on side of United Nations. He replied that this is an important subject which he will have to consider carefully with his Cabinet.

I do not see how we can contribute to building up Iran Army unless specific and adequate guarantees are given that it will be used to support United Nations. In my opinion such guarantees would be against wishes of Iranian people and would run counter to Iran policy of refusal to fight for Allies, a policy based on terms of Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty. It is difficult to see how any Iran Government could properly commit itself to such a course of action. Even if such guarantees are given we would have to consider (1) whether such reorganization of Iranian Army could be carried out in time to be of assistance in present emergency, (2) whether Iranian guarantees can be relied on in view of pro-German temper of masses and Army and presence of Germans in Caucasia and (3) what would be reactions of British and Soviets to such a mission. Department indicated in number 138 that British had suggested an American military mission to Iran. Iran Foreign Minister stated he had tried, without success, while in Russia to ascertain view of Soviet Government on subject and asked me to endeavor to do so.

I informed Harriman,24 on occasion of his visit here, of this démarche by Iran Government and he informed Churchill who showed interest and promised to give the matter consideration.

Dreyfus

22 Not printed.

23 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

24 W. Averell Harriman, Special Representative of the President, with rank of Minister, to expedite lend-lease aid to the British Empire.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.20/165: Telegram

[Document 274]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 21, 1942—6 p.m.

220. Your 260, August 14. You may inform Prime Minister his request is being considered by Department which is consulting War Department.

Department feels that an American military mission would be most helpful in strengthening our position in Iran at the present time and in building a firm foundation for future relations. It would seem that efficient and honest administration of the Iranian Army by Americans would inevitably exert a powerful influence in our favor among the troops and should go a long way toward counteracting existing pro-Axis feeling. It would also place us in a position to observe and control any movement within the army tending towards its use as a fifth column in the event of threatened Axis invasion. We further feel that an American group in key positions in the army would be of great assistance to the various American advisers, in particular to the financial mission.

These considerations, together with the probability that the army could, within a short time, be made a more effective force for the maintenance of internal order, seem to us to provide sufficient reason for sending a mission. It does not seem necessary at present to consider whether or not Iranian Army might ultimately be brought into the war on the Allied side, although this is a possibility which might take on importance if war should last 2 or 3 years longer. We do not consider it necessary or desirable to exact commitments from the Iranian Government at this time, since, as you have reported, such commitments would have no real support in popular sentiment and might be resented by the people. We would prefer first to lay a firm foundation, aiming for the time being merely at keeping the country quiet and putting it on its feet, in the belief that ultimately the people would be brought to see that their real interests lie on the side of the United States. This, as Department understands it, is basic purpose behind our efforts to supply American advisers in all fields.

In view of the British initiative mentioned in Department’s 138, May 27, we are sure British will wholeheartedly favor an American military mission, and we have no reason to suppose that Soviet Government will object.

We are, accordingly, recommending to War Department that favorable action be taken on Iranian request.

Hull

The Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.105A/44

[Document 275]

The Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, August 24, 1942.

Dear Louis: A few days ago we sent you an official instruction25 regarding Colonel Schwarzkopf’s mission to reorganize the Iranian gendarmerie. As I recently wrote you, we believe that Schwarzkopf is exceptionally qualified for the job, both because of his personal characteristics and because of his experience, which includes fifteen years as founder and head of the New Jersey State Police. In addition to his police experience, he is a West Point graduate, served in the last war, and returned to the regular Army in 1940. We have been informed that he is very highly regarded by the War Department. We are also very favorably impressed with his two assistants, Lieutenant Colonel Boone and Captain Preston.

During the past two months, Colonel Schwarzkopf’s group has spent a considerable amount of time in the Division, where we have made available the complete file of your despatches for the past year. They have supplemented this with background reading and discussions with Allah Yar Saleh26 and the Iranian Minister, together with information furnished by the intelligence section of the War Department. Accordingly, I think you will find them well grounded in Iranian affairs.

Colonel Schwarzkopf has demonstrated a keen interest in, and thorough appreciation of, the delicate political situation in Iran. He has indicated his firm intention to cooperate closely with the Legation in every way, and I am sure that you will find him a most willing and helpful collaborator.

In this connection, I should like to explain our ideas regarding the Legation’s relations with the various advisers who are expected to go to Iran in the near future. Those who go out as officials of this Government and who commence their work in a purely advisory capacity, as is the case with Schwarzkopf, will be technically subject to the supervision of the Legation and should, of course, cooperate with it. However, we regard this arrangement as primarily an internal administrative matter, necessitated by a technical legal difficulty, and we feel that these officers should carry on their activities from the beginning as much as possible as if they were already officials of the Iranian Government. While avoiding any conflict with our general policies, they should not be so tied to the Legation as to give the appearance of receiving instructions from this Government.

Those who are from the beginning, or later become, officials of the Iranian Government will not, of course, be subject to any supervision by the Legation, and it seems to us that their chances of success will be much greater if they are able to convince the Iranians that they are working solely for the benefit of Iran. Consequently, it would appear advisable that they should not seem to have too close a connection with the Legation. This does not mean that they should not seek your advice in appropriate cases nor that they should not pass on to the Legation any information of interest which they may obtain. We do feel that they should endeavor to establish themselves on their own feet vis-à-vis the Iranians and, in so far as possible, adjust for themselves any difficulties which may arise.

Nevertheless, and I think I may properly underline the word, we are prepared to take a strong stand in support of any adviser who may find himself faced with a problem which his own efforts have proven insufficient to resolve and which seriously threatens the success of his mission. As we have advised you by telegraph, we are going ahead with the extensive program of advisers only on the understanding that they will receive full cooperation from all Iranian officials, and we shall expect this understanding to be fulfilled. In particular, we consider that Iranian cooperation should include the grant of sufficient authority in each case to enable the adviser to put his program into practical effect. The extent of that authority will, of course, vary in each instance, but if a serious difference of opinion should arise in any case, we believe you would be justified in making a thorough inquiry into the matter and giving the Department a full statement of the facts, together with your views and recommendations as to the advisability of our intervention.

Sincerely yours,

Wallace Murray

25 No. 129, August 19, not printed.

26 Chairman of Iranian Trade and Economic Commission.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1916a: Telegram

[Document 276]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 29, 1942—7 p.m.

4143. In the Iranian cabinet recently formed by Ahmad Qavam, the Iranian Minister at London, Mr. Taqizadeh, was named Minister of Finance. Department is informed that he has declined the position and it has been filled by S. Bagherr Kazemi, originally appointed Minister of Interior.

Please endeavor to find an early opportunity for an informal confidential talk with Taqizadeh and express the Department’s regret that he found himself unable to accept the post. You may say that this Government was most pleased to hear of his appointment because, knowing his experience and unequaled reputation in Iranian political and financial affairs, we felt that he could render a great service to his country in its present difficult circumstances. In particular, we had been confident that he would know how to make the most advantageous use of the American financial mission which is to be sent to Iran in the near future. We believe that he would have found this mission of great assistance in the conduct of his office and, correspondingly, we are sure he would have been especially well qualified and well disposed to facilitate the work of the mission.

If his attitude appears favorable, you may say to Mr. Taqizadeh that this Government still hopes that at some time in the near future circumstances will permit him to accept a post in the Iranian Cabinet, where, we know, he would be welcomed enthusiastically by the Iranian people.

Department leaves to your discretion the exact wording of your remarks and suggests the above only as an outline for your guidance.

For your information, it is our hope that an informal communication of this nature may induce Taqizadeh to reconsider his decision. He is one of the outstanding patriots and disinterested political leaders of Iran and we believe him to be friendly to the United States and the Allied cause. Kazemi, on the other hand, does not have a very high reputation and is not thought to be well disposed toward this country. Since we feel that the success or failure of the financial mission will depend largely upon the character of the Minister of Finance, we are most anxious to have a man in that post who would have a sympathetic attitude toward the Mission.

Welles

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1917: Telegram

[Document 277]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 2, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received September 2—5:10 p.m.]

4906. Department’s 4143, August 29, 7 p.m. The substance of the second paragraph of the Department’s telegram under reference has been conveyed to Minister Taqizadeh in an informal confidential talk. Mr. Taqizadeh appeared to be genuinely touched by the Department’s feeling toward him and estimate of him.

In the course of this talk Mr. Taqizadeh explained that the portfolio of Finance had been offered him by Ahmad Qavam in a personal message. It was declined for reasons of health by Mr. Taqizadeh in a personal message which however was delayed almost a week in transmission. Ahmad Qavam not having received an early reply assumed that Mr. Taqizadeh would accept the position and before Mr. Taqizadeh’s reply reached him made public his name as Minister of Finance.

Mr. Taqizadeh does not appear at all physically strong. He underwent an operation in December of last year from which he clearly has not recovered. He is still receiving regular treatments. He stated frankly that he could not have these treatments interrupted and moreover did not feel that he had the strength to fill a post as exacting as that of Minister of Finance. Judging from his appearance it would be some time before he recovers any measure of strength.

Mr. Taqizadeh mentioned the fact that Kazemi had been made Minister of Finance. He said he had taken an interest in Kazemi for years and that he had been responsible for Kazemi’s appointment as Under Secretary of Finance when he was Minister of Finance. He said he had a high regard for Kazemi’s ability.

He also said that he intended writing Kazemi emphasizing how important and desirable it was that he do everything possible to further the work of the American financial mission. Mr. Taqizadeh has expressed the wish to talk to the members of the American financial mission in case they should come to London on their way to Iran.

Winant

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.20/170: Telegram

[Document 278]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 3, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received September 3—11:15 a.m.]

282. Prime Minister informed me today that he is anxious to obtain the military mission as soon as possible. He asked me to inquire of Department concerning progress being made in this regard.

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.50A/8a: Telegram

[Document 279]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, September 4, 1942—7 p.m.

233. Supply Adviser Sheridan and City Police Adviser L. Stephen Timmerman will depart by air for Tehran on or about September 6. You may present them to Iranian officials but should make it clear they are not connected with Legation or this Government. Mail instruction follows.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/233: Telegram

[Document 280]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, September 9, 1942—3 p.m.

236. Department’s no. 206, August 8, 7 p.m., and your no. 257, August 11, 4 p.m. In as much as the Iranian Minister in Washington has received no reply from his Government to his cable regarding Dr. Millspaugh, please inform the Department whether objection is being raised to Dr. Millspaugh’s appointment or whether he still appears to be acceptable to the Iranian Government.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.105A/6f: Telegram

[Document 281]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, September 9, 1942—10 p.m.

238. There is pending in Congress a bill to permit American Army and Navy officers to serve under any foreign government whose defense is considered essential to that of the United States. Upon enactment of the bill it is contemplated that Colonel Schwarzkopf and his assistants, Colonel Boone and Captain Preston, will enter into the service of the Iranian Government rather than continue to act in their present advisory capacity. At that time it will be necessary to draw up a contract for their services between the American and Iranian Governments. A draft of such agreement will be transmitted to the Legation for the Legation’s and Colonel Schwarzkopf’s suggestions for alterations or additions to meet special conditions in Iran.

Please advise Colonel Schwarzkopf of this procedure because at the time of his departure he was under the impression that his contract would be made directly between him and the Iranian Government.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.20/170: Telegram

[Document 282]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, September 10, 1942—10 p.m.

239. Your no. 282, September 3, 1 p.m. The War Department states that it is unable at this time to undertake the despatch of an American Military Mission to Iran.

The War Department, however, has suggested the appointment of Major General C. S. Ridley, an engineer officer with wide experience including duty as Governor of Canal Zone and Chief of Puerto Rican Hurricane Relief Commission, to succeed General Greely, who will not return to Iran. The future commitments of the War Department will be based largely on the recommendations of General Ridley, who is expected to make a survey of the need for a military mission.

The Department is requesting the Iranian Minister here to ascertain whether the designation of General Ridley is acceptable to the Iranian Government.

Hull

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State 891.20/171

[Document 283]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 12, 1942.

The Iranian Minister called at his request and emphasized his request heretofore made in behalf of his Government for a military mission from this country to come to Iran, including a qualified expert in transportation and an outstanding businessman. He said that the work of all these types of Americans would be a fine thing for the United Nations cause, especially for closer relations between our two countries. I expressed keen interest in all phases of this suggestion and assured the Minister that I would give the matter sympathetic attention.

C[ordell] H[ull]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/253: Telegram

[Document 284]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 14, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 12:39 p.m.]

289. Department’s 236, September 9. Prime Minister informs me he has telegraphed Minister, Washington to effect that Iranian Government would prefer a financial adviser even more highly qualified than Dr. Millspaugh. He stated that Iran’s financial problems are vaster and more difficult than 20 years ago and that a man of greatest ability is needed. He alleged that Dr. Millspaugh’s assistants on his last mission here had not been of highest type. I must admit surprise at this about-face on part of Iranian Government concerning Dr. Millspaugh and am at a loss to explain it fully.

Dreyfus

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.20/172: Telegram

[Document 285]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 14, 1942—noon.
[Received 12:29 p.m.]

290. Department’s 239, September 10. Prime Minister informs me he is agreeable to appointment of General Ridley and that he will instruct Minister in Washington in this sense. When I informed him military mission would not come forward immediately, he showed keenest disappointment. He said army badly in need of reorganization and expressed hope that General Ridley will bring with him 4 or 5 officers who can proceed without delay to rebuild Iranian Army. Shah in interview with Colonel Schwarzkopf admitted for first time that Iranian Army is in bad shape and needs complete reorganization. An American military mission at present would seem advisable from all angles to satisfy Iranians, to assist in maintaining internal security and to give support to our police and gendarmerie advisers whose tasks without an efficient army will be most difficult.

Dreyfus

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.20/186⅓

[Document 286]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] September 15, 1942.

Mr. Hayter27 said that the Foreign Office had instructed the Embassy again to inform the State Department of the importance which the British Government attached to the appointment of an American military mission to Iran.

I told Mr. Hayter that the War Department had recently decided that it could not send a military mission at this time. However, the War Department did propose to send to Iran General Ridley, who would take the place of General Greely. I said that it was our understanding that General Ridley would be instructed to report on the situation and that as a result of that report I thought the War Department might give further consideration to the appointment of an American military mission.

Mr. Hayter said he hoped we could find an opportunity to let the Iranian Minister here know that the British Government had fully supported on more than one occasion the proposal for an American military mission to Iran. He said that if such information could be conveyed to the Iranian Legation it would be helpful to the British in as much as the Iranian Prime Minister apparently was under the impression that such a proposal had met with British opposition. I told Mr. Hayter I would see what could be done.

27 W. G. Hayter, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.20/173a

[Document 287]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

No. 140 Washington, September 23, 1942.

Sir: There is enclosed a copy of a letter of instructions28 issued by the War Department to Major General Clarence S. Ridley, U. S. A., in connection with his assignment as military adviser to the Iranian Government on matters pertaining to the Service of Supply of the Iranian Army. General Ridley’s personal staff will consist of an Aide-de-Camp and another regular officer of field grade.

Although General Ridley is instructed to report his arrival to the Minister, he is not to be regarded as acting under your direction. He is to be responsible only to the War Department with respect to his technical duties as military adviser in so far as the performance of those duties does not affect political relations between the United States and Iran or between the United States and other countries. It may be noted, however, that General Ridley is instructed to refrain from engaging in diplomatic or political activities.

General Ridley is authorized to use the facilities of the Legation and of consular offices in Iran outside of Tehran for the transmission of messages. Messages to be brought to the attention of the War Department should be marked “Inform War” or “For War”, and the words “From Ridley” should be used to indicate their source.

As you will note, General Ridley is instructed to submit a report to the War Department on the desirability and practicability of dispatching a full American Military Mission to organize and train the Iranian Army.

It is apparent that the success of General Ridley’s Mission depends in large measure upon personal relationships and upon the cooperation of those with whom he comes in contact in the performance of his duties. You will, therefore, lend all proper assistance to General Ridley and cooperate to the fullest appropriate extent in the mutual exchange of information.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Sumner Welles

28 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/253: Telegram

[Document 288]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 2, 1942—11 p.m.

257. Your 289, September 14. From conversations with Iranian Minister and Saleh, Department gathers that Prime Minister is now thinking in terms of an international figure, for example, someone like former Vice President Dawes, whose prestige would bolster position of Iranian Government both at home and abroad. Minister indicates this man need not be necessarily a specialist in finance.

If this is the case, and if you see no objection, please discuss matter with Prime Minister along following lines: 1) Although Department is willing to assist Iranian Government in its endeavor to find someone with the prestige desired, it will probably be difficult and may be impossible to obtain the services of a person of such standing. At best, considerable delay may be expected.

2) Such a man would probably have neither technical qualifications nor inclination to supervise himself a detailed reorganization and administration of Iranian financial structure.

3) It seems likely that in any case it would be necessary to engage a practical financial expert with staff of specialized assistants, and for this work Department knows of no one so well qualified as Dr. Millspaugh.

4) Accordingly, unless Iranian Government has some definite reason to believe that he is not suitable, Department feels best course would be to appoint Dr. Millspaugh as financial adviser, with understanding that, if desired, this Government will endeavor to find additional adviser of even higher standing to assist Iranian Government in matters of high policy.

5) Iranian Government has requested four specialists in economics, accounting, money problems, and taxation to work under the person who may be engaged as chief financial adviser. Department believes it would be unwise to engage subordinates prior to appointment of executive, since he would doubtless desire to have a voice in their selection. In our view it would be even more undesirable to send such men out before someone has been chosen to direct and coordinate their activities.

We are bringing above considerations to attention of Iranian Minister here.

Welles

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/259: Telegram

[Document 289]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 6, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received October 6—11:25 a.m.]

312. Department’s 257, October 2. After sending my No. 289, September 14, I had several conversations with Prime Minister and Cabinet members concerning Millspaugh in which is [I?] stressed advantages of employing a person not only highly qualified but also familiar with Iran. Yesterday Foreign Minister30 called on me to say that Cabinet on Saturday formally approved employment of Millspaugh on understanding that he will be supported by capable assistants. I explained that this angle has already been given consideration by Department. Foreign Minister will telegraph Iran Minister, Washington of Millspaugh’s approval.31 Foreign Minister told me in confidence Millspaugh’s appointment had been opposed by Bader32 and Kazemi.

On Sunday Finance Minister withdrew a bill earlier presented to Majlis for appointment of a Swiss bank expert for Banque Mellie. This probably was result of my remarks to Cabinet members that a Swiss banking expert seemed unnecessary in view of contemplated employment of American Financial Mission.

Dreyfus

30 Ali Soheily.

31 On October 7 the Iranian Minister informed the Department that he had been instructed to engage Dr. Millspaugh on the understanding that he would be assisted by a competent group of experts satisfactory to the Department and to the Iranian Government (891.51 A/531).

32 Probably Mahmoud Bader, former Minister of Finance.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/259: Telegram

[Document 290]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 12, 1942—8 p.m.

267. Your 312, October 6, and Department’s 257, October 2 and 207, August 8. Please advise Foreign Minister that Department believes Iranian Government has taken wise step in approving appointment of Millspaugh. You may renew previous assurances that we will cooperate closely in selection of assistants and may say that Millspaugh has expressed his desire for such cooperation. He will proceed immediately to discuss terms of contract with Iranian Minister here and you will be fully informed in this regard.

We note from your 312 that Millspaugh appointment was opposed by Minister of Finance. Please take first opportunity to reiterate to Foreign Minister views expressed in Department’s 207, August 8. We believe Iranian Government will agree this mission is most important of all those now being organized and that its success is vital to the achievement of Cabinet’s policy of reform and reconstruction with American assistance.

Welles

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt 891.20/175½a

[Document 291]

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt

Washington, October 20, 1942.

My Dear Mr. President: In your memorandum of October 1533 you ask me to speak to you with regard to Mr. Willkie’s34 suggestion that the Persian Prime Minister would be made very happy if you could send four or five high ranking officers to Iran to train their army.

Last May the Department of State informed the War Department that the type of mission suggested would be desirable and recommended favorable action. Since that time there has been a good deal of discussion of the matter with the War Department which has taken the position that it would be difficult to spare the necessary personnel. Finally, last month however, the War Department informed the Department of State that it was designating Major General Clarence S. Ridley as adviser to the Iranian Army and that General Ridley would be instructed to make a thorough survey of the situation and report to the War Department his views as to the advisability of despatching an American military mission. General Ridley is now en route to Tehran.

You may be interested to know that in addition to the mission of General Ridley, American assistance to Iran has taken the form of several non-military missions in different fields. The most important are: (a) A mission headed by Colonel Schwarzkopf, to reorganize and administer the Rural Police.

(b) An American expert to reorganize and administer the National City Police.

(c) An American Food and Supply Adviser.

(d) A financial mission, which would probably be headed by Dr. Arthur Millspaugh, who was Administrator General of Finances of Iran from 1922 to 1927.

(e) A permanent Director General of Public Health who is yet to be selected.

I believe that the work of these various missions will be of great benefit since the officers and experts we have sent to Iran will not only be able to exert considerable personal influence upon Iranian opinion in a sense favorable to the general cause of the United Nations, but they will also be able to assist in the rehabilitation of the country which would seem to be a fundamental requisite for the ultimate conversion of Iran into an active and willing partner on our side. I feel now more than ever that the United States Army mission to work with the Iranian Army could in fact play an extremely important role in this work.

I shall see that you are informed as soon as General Ridley’s recommendations are received.

Believe me [etc.]

Sumner Welles

33 Not printed.

34 Wendell Willkie, Republican candidate for President in 1940, who was making a world tour and bad gone through the Near East and Iran on his way to the Soviet Union.

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Iranian Minister (Schayesteh) 891.20/174

[Document 292]

The Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Iranian Minister (Schayesteh)

Washington, October 23, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Minister: I refer to your recent inquiry regarding the possibility of obtaining at this time two American Army officers as advisers to the Iranian Army on military aviation and engineering. The War Department has now informed the Department that it prefers to defer consideration of this matter pending receipt of a report from Major General Ridley, who has been instructed to make a thorough survey of the needs of the Iranian Army with respect to American military advisers. The Department of State and the War Department are prepared, of course, to give sympathetic attention to any recommendations which may be made by General Ridley in this regard, within the limitations imposed by the personnel needs of the combatant forces of the United Nations.

Sincerely yours,

A. A. Berle, Jr.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.20/174a: Telegram

[Document 293]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, October 28, 1942—7 p.m.

295. In connection with the drafting of an Agreement for a United States Military Mission to Iran consisting of Colonel Schwarzkopf, Lieutenant Colonel Boone and Captain Preston, the following information is urgently desired: a. What in your opinion should be the stated purpose of the Mission?

b. To what official of the Iranian Government will the Mission be responsible?

c. Approximate duration of the Mission?

Please discuss the above points with Colonel Schwarzkopf replying by telegram and furnishing any other information which in your opinion would be helpful to the Department in drafting this Agreement.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.20/175: Telegram

[Document 294]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 2, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 11:59 p.m.]

357. Following answers to lettered paragraphs of Department’s 295, October 28, are based on Schwarzkopf’s recommendation.

(a) To advise and assist in reorganization of Imperial Iranian Gendarmerie.

(b) Colonel Schwarzkopf should be appointed assistant to Minister of Interior in charge of gendarmerie affairs (he believes this only solution to problems of authority, Departmental jealousy, chain of command etc.).

(c) One year with Iranian option of renewal for one year.

Schwarzkopf makes following additional recommendations: 1. Mission should have right to cancel contract and depart from Iran in case of Axis invasion or force majeure.

2. United States Government should retain right to recall mission in its discretion (Schwarzkopf feels this will be valuable weapon in case of Iranian failure to cooperate with mission).

3. Salaries already agreed on should be paid in United States dollars (mission wishes this as protection against serious threat of inflation in Iran).

4. Transportation expenses of mission to United States on termination of mission for any reason should be guaranteed.

Iranian Government will provide suitable furnished quarters.

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.105A/7

[Document 295]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

No. 155 Washington, November 5, 1942.

The Secretary of State refers to the Department’s telegram no. 238 of September 9, 1942, regarding the expected enactment by the Congress of a bill which would permit the detail of officers of the American armed forces to assist the governments of certain foreign countries, including Iran. The bill in question was signed by the President on October 1, 1942,35 and there is enclosed, for the information of the Minister and any American officers in Iran who may be concerned, a copy of the original Act of May 19, 1926,36 together with its amendments of May 14, 193537 and October 1, 1942. It will be observed that in territories outside the Western Hemisphere, with the exception of the Philippine Islands, details under the authority of the Act are restricted to the duration of war or a declared national emergency.

As the Minister has been informed, it will be necessary to prepare an agreement, to be signed by the American and Iranian Governments, to cover the services of any American officers who may be detailed to Iran under the authority of the Act of 1926 as amended. The Department is at present engaged in drafting such an agreement for the mission of Colonel H. Norman Schwarzkopf and his assistants.

However, the War Department has advised the Department that the officers concerned need not await the conclusion of the agreement to assume such assimilated Iranian rank and to wear such Iranian uniforms and insignia as may be considered desirable. The Minister is requested to advise Colonel Schwarzkopf in this sense, explaining that the authorization is merely permissive and that he and his assistants may elect to continue to wear their American uniforms, if they consider it preferable. He should further be advised that he and his assistants should accept no compensation from the Iranian Government at this time.

35 56 Stat. 763.

36 44 Stat. (pt. 2) 565.

37 49 Stat. 218.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/285: Telegram

[Document 296]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 12, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received November 12—2:11 p.m.]

372. My number 364, November 9, 2 p.m.38 Majlis today passed law for employment of Millspaugh. Prime Minister urges that he come forward as soon as possible since important financial legislation will be suspended pending his arrival.

Dreyfus

38 Not printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.20/177: Telegram

[Document 297]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 30, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received November 30—3:39 p.m.]

410. My 357, November 2 and Department’s instruction No. 155, November 5. Schwarzkopf requests that the signing of agreement with Iran covering his mission be expedited since he feels it will be difficult to establish his organization and authority until his status is clearly defined.

Dreyfus

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, November 30, 1942 891.51A/534

[Document 298]

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, November 30, 1942

November 30, 1942

American Financial Mission to Iran

The Government of Iran is engaging in the United States an American financial mission to assist in the reorganization and administration of the Iranian national finances. Dr. Arthur C. Millspaugh has been appointed to head the mission, with the title of Administrator General of Finances, and is now engaged in selecting a group of eight assistants. He expects to depart for Iran as soon as the membership of the group has been completed.

The work of the mission will cover virtually all fields of Iranian governmental finance, and, in addition to Dr. Millspaugh, will include experts in the following lines: Taxation

Accounting, budgetary control and auditing

Customs, tariffs and trade

General economic matters

General financial matters

Dr. Millspaugh headed a similar mission to Iran during the period 1922–1927, and in 1911 an American financial mission under Mr. W. Morgan Shuster spent several months in Iran.39

[Correspondence in respect to some of the less important Iranian requests for missions and advisers is not printed. The Iranian Government formally requested two American specialists in entomology, a specialist in cultivation of rubber, a Public Health specialist for the position of Permanent General Director of the Iranian Ministry of Public Health, a specialist for the reorganization of Iranian municipalities, an adviser to the Iranian National Bank, a professor to teach the mechanics of the agricultural machines in college and to instruct in the repair and upkeep of farm implements, a specialist for drilling artesian wells, ten engineers for agricultural irrigation, and an American to lead the Boy Scout movement in Iran.]

39 For correspondence regarding this mission, see Foreign Relations, 1911, pp. 679 ff.

Reservation of American rights regarding certain provisions of Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty of Alliance; unwillingness of the United States to make declaration concerning integrity of IranReservation of American rights regarding certain provisions of Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty of Alliance; unwillingness of the United States to make declaration concerning integrity of Iran40

40 For previous correspondence relating to Iranian integrity and proposed Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty of Alliance, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 383 ff.

[299] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, January 12, 1942—4 p.m. [Received January 12—5:36 a.m.]

741.9111/24: Telegram

[300] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, January 15, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 1:53 p.m.]

741.9111/25: Telegram

[301] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 21, 1942—11 p.m. [Received January 21—7:45 p.m.]

741.9111/26: Telegram

[302] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 23, 1942—midnight. [Received January 24—3:17 a.m.]

741.9111/29: Telegram

[303] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, January 24, 1942—3 p.m.

741.9111/25: Telegram

[304] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 26, 1942—9 p.m.

741.9111/29: Telegram

[305] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1942—7 p.m. [Received January 27—1:50 p.m.]

741.9111/30: Telegram

[306] The Shahanshah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi) to President Roosevelt

Tehran, January 31, 1942.

741.9111/39: Telegram

[307] President Roosevelt to the Shahanshah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi)

Washington, February 6, 1942.

741.9111/39: Telegram

[308] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] February 6, 1942.

741.9111/41

[309] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 7, 1942—noon. [Received 3:25 p.m.]

741.9111/38: Telegram

[310] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 23, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 6:26 p.m.]

741.9111/43: Telegram

[311] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) to the Secretary of State

Kuibyshev (Moscow), March 6, 1942—noon. [Received 6:26 p.m.]

741.9111/47: Telegram

[312] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 16, 1942—4 p.m. [Received March 16—11:11 a.m.]

741.9111/53: Telegram

[313] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] March 20, 1942.

891.01/89

[314] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 23, 1942.

891.01/90

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/24: Telegram

[Document 299]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, January 12, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received January 12—5:36 a.m.]

7. I have advised the Iranian Government of the purport of Department’s 165, December 29.41 Both the Prime42 and Foreign Ministers43 seem deeply perturbed about the situation in Azerbaijan, alleging that Soviet interference and propaganda continue unabated. They express the belief that this condition might be alleviated and that the Russians might perhaps be deterred from pushing a Separatist movement were the United States to make a statement taking cognizance of the treaty44 and guaranteeing the independence and territorial integrity of Iran. The Foreign Minister states that the Shah intends when treaty is signed, which should be in a week or so, to communicate this fact to the President referring in his communication to the Atlantic Charter.45 The reply to this telegram might present a good opportunity for a statement along the lines suggested above, should the Department deem such a course to be advisable. If such a statement is made in reply to the Shah’s telegrams the Iranian Government would wish to have permission to publish it.

Dreyfus

41  ibid., p. 477.

42 Mohammed Ali Foroughi, Iranian Prime Minister, August 1941–March 1942.

43 Ali Soheily.

44 Proposed Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty of Alliance.

45 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/25: Telegram

[Document 300]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 46

Tehran, January 15, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 1:53 p.m.]

11. The Foreign Minister informs me that a Cabinet crisis has been caused by the refusal of the British Government to accede to request of Iranian Government for several small changes in the treaty. The most important of these which were to be handled by exchange of letters are (1) provision against use of Iranian forces outside the country without Iranian consent and (2) provision that Iran will not have to pay for useless or unnecessary construction or installation by Allies. He states that upon learning of this refusal Prime Minister wished to resign without delay but was persuaded to make a last endeavor through Iranian Legation in London to obtain British consent. He is certain if this fails Prime Minister will resign as he feels he cannot otherwise face Majlis which has demanded the treaty changes.

British Minister confirms the refusal and states it appears to be based on belief by British Government that it has made numerous concessions while Iranians have indulged in delaying tactics. Soviet Ambassador informs me that he is supporting British stand despite fact that he has already informed Iranian Government [his Government?] has consented to the proposed changes.

Meanwhile situation in north is deteriorating. The Kurds are reliably reported to have expelled the Governor of Rezaieh, killed a number of police, committed acts of brigandage and interfered with Government services. The Iranians allege this disorder is instigated by Soviets and profess themselves helpless to put it down because of absence of Iranian forces there and insufficient number of police permitted by Russians.

Dreyfus

46 Repeated to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom as Department’s No. 264, January 22, 7 p.m., with the following paragraph added: “We should appreciate as detailed information as possible regarding the course of the treaty negotiations with Iran, particularly in regard to provision numbered 2 of the above message.” (741.9111/25).

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/26: Telegram

[Document 301]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 21, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received January 21—7:45 p.m.]

307. I have just received the following communication dated January 20, 1942 from the Foreign Office.

“You may remember that I told you recently that the Iranians might be putting forward a suggestion that the United States should adhere to the proposed Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty of Alliance. I have now heard from our Minister at Tehran that the Iranian Minister for Foreign Affairs recently put this suggestion to your Minister who replied that the object of the treaty was to regularize the situation between Iran and the two powers whose troops were in her territory and that the United States had nothing whatever to do with this. The suggestion was, however, revived on 10th January in a local newspaper which proposed that Mr. Bullitt,47 who was then in Tehran, should submit it to the United States Government.

I imagine that the State Department will share the views of your Minister at Tehran about the Iranian proposal which we have a shrewd suspicion was put forward with the Iranian object of postponing any action so definite as the signature of a treaty.

In view of our earlier conversation I thought I would let you know what had happened; unless contrary to our expectation the Iranian Minister for Foreign Affairs’ suggestion appeals to the United States Government it would be a help to us if the idea were scotched as soon as possible.” Signed Anthony Eden.48

Winant

47 William C. Bullitt, on special mission to the Near East area.

48 British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/29: Telegram

[Document 302]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 23, 1942—midnight.
[Received January 24—3:17 a.m.]

338. Your 264, January 22, 7 p.m.49 The draft Anglo-Soviet-Iran treaty quoted in our telegram 4492, September 23,50 was redrafted with the following major changes:

In article V the period for withdrawal of Allied Forces after the war was reduced to 6 months.

A second paragraph was added to article IV providing that special agreements would be made to cover (a) financial obligations of the Allies arising out of the treaty and (b) transfers of Allied property to Persia after the war.

Two annexes were added to the treaty embodying texts of notes to be exchanged which provide for (1) Allied support for Persian independence at the Peace Conference and (2) Persia not to have diplomatic relations with enemies of the Allies.

The revised draft, which was initialled by the three Governments December 15, is being forwarded to the Department by air pouch.

The head of the Eastern Department of the Foreign Office said today that after the treaty passed the first reading in the Mejlis the Persian Prime Minister requested modifications based on criticisms in the Mejlis. Bullard51 refused but suggested to the Foreign Office that the criticisms should be met by a third annex, providing for an exchange of notes embodying the following four points: 1. With reference to article III, section 2 (a) the Allied Powers will not require of Persia participation of her armed forces in any war or military operation against any foreign power or powers.

2. The Persian Government shall not be required to bear the costs of any works which the Allied Powers carry out for their own military ends and which are not necessary to the needs of Persia.

3. (This point concerned claims which might be made by the Persian Government after the war.)

4. It is understood that annex I will remain in force even if the treaty ceases to be valid in accordance with the provisions of article IX before peace has been concluded.

The Foreign Office did not like this proposed further exchange of notes, fearing that acceptance would lead to demands for still more exchanges. Moreover, they considered points 1 and 4 unnecessary although harmless. They thought that point 2 prejudiced arrangements already provided for in the treaty. Point 3 was based on a previous exchange of letters now almost wholly outdated and they did not like at all.

The Soviet Government, however, did not object to any of these points.

After further negotiations by Bullard the Persian Prime Minister agreed to drop point 3. Point 2 has been amended by the Foreign Office to read as follows: “It is understood that there is no provision in the treaty which requires the Persian Government to bear the costs of any works which the Allied Powers carry out for their own military ends and which are not necessary to the needs of Persia”.

The Soviet Government agreed to the above changes.

Mr. Bullard has already been authorized to inform the Prime Minister of the British agreement to item 1 and 4 and to item 2 as amended and he is expected to urge the Prime Minister to give his fullest support to the treaty in return for these concessions. The Prime Minister will not now have to go before the Mejlis entirely empty handed.

With reference to the situation in the north of Iran the Foreign Office said that it is true that the Soviet Government has limited the number of Persian gendarmerie and police. The British are seriously concerned about this and they have reminded the Russians that in the British area the Persians are permitted to use their army and to have as many gendarmerie and police as they want.

Winant

49 See footnote 46, p. 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301].

50 Not printed.

51 Sir Reader W. Bullard, British Minister in Iran.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 741.9111/25: Telegram

[Document 303]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, January 24, 1942—3 p.m.

17. The Department desires to study the text of the proposed Anglo-Soviet-Iranian treaty in its final form. Please state what, if any, changes have been made in the draft submitted as an enclosure to your despatch no. 169 of December 22, 1941.52 What is the present status of the proposed changes referred to in your no. 11, January 15, 1 p.m.?

Hull

52 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 741.9111/29: Telegram

[Document 304]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, January 26, 1942—9 p.m.

303. Your 338, January 23, midnight. While the Department is of course not yet in possession of the complete text of the new Anglo-Soviet-Iranian draft treaty and consequently is not in a position at this time to state fully its views regarding any provisions of the treaty, that upon examination may be found to affect American property or interests in Iran, the Department has however noted the following provision of Article IV of the text of the draft treaty received from the American Legation at Tehran: “A special agreement shall be concluded between the Allied Governments and the Imperial Iranian Government defining the conditions of any transfers to the Imperial Iranian Government after the war of buildings and other improvements effected by the Allied Powers on Iranian territory. These agreements shall also settle the immunities to be enjoyed by the Allied forces in Iran.”

Since the above-quoted provision would appear to envisage subsequent negotiations restricted to Great Britain, Soviet Russia and Iran, involving the disposition of property which would apparently include American lend-lease material and affecting the long-range interests of the United States in Iran, I wish you to inform the British Government at an early moment that this Government makes full reservations of its rights in this matter. This Government wishes furthermore to be assured as promptly as possible by the British Government that no such negotiations as those referred to in Article IV of the Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty will be undertaken before this Government has been consulted and has given its consent to any provisions at present affecting, or which may in the future affect, American property, rights or interests in Iran.

Similar representations are being made to the Soviet and Iranian Governments.53

Hull

53 Telegrams No. 30 to the Soviet Union and No. 19 to Iran, both dated January 26.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/30: Telegram

[Document 305]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, January 27, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received January 27—1:50 p.m.]

386. Your 303, January 26, 9 p.m. The Embassy has informed the Foreign Office today both orally and by formal note of the stipulations set forth in your telegram regarding the Anglo-Soviet-Iranian treaty.

The Foreign Office received a telegram from Tehran this morning stating that the treaty passed its second reading yesterday and is to go into effect January 29.54

Winant

54 For text of Treaty of Alliance between the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and Iran, signed at Tehran, January 29, 1942, see Department of State Bulletin, March 21, 1942, p. 249.

The Shahanshah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi) to President Roosevelt 741.9111/39: Telegram

[Document 306]

The Shahanshah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi) to President Roosevelt

Tehran, January 31, 1942.

Knowing that Your Excellency follows the course of events in Iran with close attention I have pleasure in informing you that my Government taking into consideration the principles of the Atlantic Charter with which we are in complete agreement and of which we desire to benefit on a footing of equality with the other nations of the world have signed a treaty of alliance with Great Britain and the USSR. In appending our signature to this document we rely upon the goodwill and the friendship which binds the United States to Iran and feel confident that your traditional attitude towards the basic principles involved will ensure the fulfillment of the pledges given and reserving for my country and people a brighter future of peaceful development within our borders.

Mohammad Reza Pahlavi

President Roosevelt to the Shahanshah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi) 741.9111/39: Telegram

[Document 307]

President Roosevelt to the Shahanshah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi)

Washington, February 6, 1942.

I have received Your Imperial Majesty’s communication informing me that the Imperial Iranian Government has entered into a treaty of alliance with the Governments of Great Britain and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. I have taken note of this treaty and am gratified to observe among its provisions an undertaking by the Allied Powers to respect the territorial integrity, the sovereignty and the political independence of Iran, as well as certain undertakings of Your Imperial Majesty to cooperate with the Allied Powers in their struggle against cruel aggressors who seek to deny the right of free peoples to exist. In keeping with the traditional friendship which has existed for so long between our countries, it is my hope that the conclusion of this treaty will foster the peaceful development of Iran and ensure the prosperity of Your Imperial Majesty’s people.

Franklin D. Roosevelt

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 741.9111/41

[Document 308]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] February 6, 1942.

Mr. Hayter55 said that following his conversation a few days ago with Mr. Murray56 concerning the failure of the British Government to keep us informed of developments in connection with the Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty, he had taken the matter up with the Foreign Office and was now in receipt of a reply. According to this statement the Foreign Office had furnished Ambassador Winant with a first draft of the treaty in September 1941. Early in January 1942 the final draft had been handed to the Embassy, but the Embassy had apparently inadvertently failed to forward a copy to Washington. Mr. Hayter said that he merely wanted to point this out to show that the British Government had every intention of keeping us advised of developments. I said that there had been a considerable period between September and January when we had had little or no news as to developments. He said the reason for this was that there had been no developments. The Iranian Government had pursued a policy of delayed tactics, and there was therefore nothing to report. He hoped, however, that the statement which he had made would convince us that the British had no intention of withholding information.

He then went on to say that Mr. Murray had also mentioned the provision in Article 4, paragraph 2, of the treaty, by which it was agreed that a special agreement should be concluded between the participating governments defining the conditions of any transfers to the Iranian Government after the war of buildings and other improvements effected by the Allied Powers. He said that the purpose of this provision was to make it perfectly clear that the treaty itself did not cover the question of these improvements. He said the British Government fully realized that it would be necessary to consult with the United States Government before making any agreements on that point; that obviously the British, Soviet and Iranian Governments could not bind the United States and that therefore the whole subject had been left open for future negotiations. I asked him if he did not agree that some sort of tripartite or other agreement should be drawn up between the British, Iranian and American Governments covering these points. He said he agreed entirely, and he was certain that his Government shared the same view. I told him that it seemed to us that it was of some importance to settle this matter at an early date, to which he likewise agreed.

55 W. G. Hayter, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

56 Wallace Murray, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/38: Telegram

[Document 309]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 7, 1942—noon.
[Received 3:25 p.m.]

32. Department’s 26, February 5.57 Immediately upon receipt Department’s 19, January 26,58 I handed the Foreign Minister a note which conveyed the reservation of rights and requested the desired assurance. Foreign Minister promised early reply but stated matter was technical and would require study. He added that while he did not understand the points involved he was always glad to have an expression of American interest in Iran’s problems.

Before delivering note I ascertained from British Minister that he had informed Iranian Government of American participation along lines suggested in Department’s 166, December 30.59

Dreyfus

57 Not printed.

58 See footnote 53, p. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306].

59  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 485.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/43: Telegram

[Document 310]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 23, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 6:26 p.m.]

851. Department’s 303, January 26; and Embassy’s 386, January 27. See also Department’s instruction 1010, January 2160 regarding Lend Lease pipe line.

I have received a Foreign Office note dated February 22 calling to my attention that the effect of the relevant clause in article IV of the treaty “is merely to postpone the discussion of the problem of transfers of buildings and other installations until after the treaty has entered into force”. It also refers to section 2 of annex III and states “This statement was included in the treaty at the Iranian Government’s request in order to enable them to reassure their Parliament on a point raised during the debates on the treaty”.

The third and final paragraph of the note reads as follows: “I am happy to assure you that, when the time comes for the negotiations provided for by article IV (2) of the treaty, the United States will be fully consulted on all points which may affect their interests. In particular, His Majesty’s Government would of course make no arrangements for the disposal of United States Lend Lease material without first securing the consent of the United States Government.”

The original is being forwarded by air.

Winant

60 Not printed.

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/47: Telegram

[Document 311]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) to the Secretary of State

Kuibyshev (Moscow), March 6, 1942—noon.
[Received 6:26 p.m.]

193. Embassy’s 81, January 28, 4 p.m.60 The Embassy has received a note from the Commissariat for Foreign Affairs stating as follows: “The part of article IV of the Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty, to which the Government of the United States of America directed attention as a stipulation which can touch upon American interests, is interpreted by the contracting parties only as their decision not to discuss questions of the transfer of buildings and other structures, erected by the Allied States on Iranian territory, prior to the signature of the special agreement provided for by the aforesaid article. The same is true for paragraph 2 of appendix number III, which states in respect to part 2 of article IV that the treaty does not contain stipulations which would require the Iranian Government to bear the expenses for any work whatever which the Allied States perform for their own military purposes and are unnecessary for the needs of Iran. Thus, these stipulations of the contracting parties only state that the said question will be specially discussed when deemed necessary.

Together with this, the Soviet Government wishes to assure the Government of the United States of America that, if materials received by the Soviet Government from the Government of the United States of America on the basis of the Lease-Lend law should be the subject of negotiations provided for by part 2 of article IV of the Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty, the question of the sale of these materials to the Iranian Government would be decided by the Soviet Government in accordance with the letter of November 7, 1941,62 of the plenipotentiary representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to the President of the United States of America.”

Thurston

60 Not printed.

62  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 858.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/53: Telegram

[Document 312]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 16, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received March 16—11:11 a.m.]

72. Reference Department’s 42, February 23.63 There follows a paraphrase of a note just received from Prime Minister:

Iranian Government states it is unaware of the nature of transactions and Lend-Lease agreements between United States and British and Russian Governments, no mention thereof having been made in the Soviet-British-Iranian Treaty and no connection therewith anticipated. Nevertheless in view of the happy relations existing between Iran and United States the Iranian Government agrees with pleasure that if there are questions the settlement of which are necessary or useful for mutual interests they should in order to safeguard Iranian and American interests be brought up and considered between representatives of the four Governments in connection with the supplementary treaties which will soon be concluded.

Dreyfus

63 Not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.01/89

[Document 313]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] March 20, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Schayesteh, Minister of Iran

Mr. Murray64

Mr. Alling

The Iranian Minister called today and said that he had received a telegram from his Government directing him to discuss with the Secretary of State the situation in Iran along the following lines:

Mr. Schayesteh was to point out that the Tripartite Treaty which Iran had signed with Great Britain and Soviet Russia had been based on the principles of the Atlantic Charter. The Iranian Government considered the principles enunciated in that Charter of great importance to its national welfare. In view of developments during the past few months the Iranian Government was beginning to fear that under the present circumstances Great Britain might be willing or might be obliged, to concur in and approve of certain designs which the Soviet Government might have on Iranian territory. Accordingly, the Iranian Government believed that the situation could be clarified if the United States Government would make some declaration regarding Iran in accordance with the principles of the Atlantic Charter.

Mr. Schayesteh went on to say it was no secret that his countrymen had a strong dislike for the Russians and, although they did not dislike the British to the same extent, there was nevertheless a feeling of mistrust in Iran toward Great Britain. He pointed out that he was aware from visas which he had issued and from stories which he had read in the American press of the part which the United States and its armed forces were playing in Iran. He assumed that the part which the United States played would increase and become of greater importance. He felt, therefore, that it would be altogether desirable for this Government, which was fully trusted by his Government and by the Iranian people, to make some gesture which would reassure his Government and people regarding their future status. As things were, he said, the Iranians had no great incentive to resist aggression if their country was to become the subject of Soviet Russian designs. He stressed the fact that action such as he had indicated on the part of this Government would, he felt, induce the Iranians to play a more active part and to cooperate more wholeheartedly with the occupying forces. He emphasized the fact that such action as was proposed by his Government should be taken without delay, since otherwise it would be too late, as had been the case in other Asiatic countries. In this connection he pointed out that the Burmese had given no assistance to the British and had in fact helped Britain’s enemies. This was because, in his opinion, the Burmese felt that if they fought for the British there was no assurance of freedom or independence. He stated that in the case of Java the Javanese had given somewhat more assistance to the Dutch because in the past they had been given somewhat greater freedom. In the case of Australia, he said that obviously the Australians would fight to the finish because they were defending their own liberty and independence.

Mr. Murray told the Minister that he thought it was quite appropriate to explain to the Acting Secretary65 at the time of his coming interview the views which he had just presented, and that there was no impropriety in so doing. The question was raised whether the Minister envisaged a declaration regarding Iran solely by the United States or whether he contemplated a more extensive declaration, say by Soviet Russia, the United States, the United Kingdom and China. He said that he had not given this matter great thought, but he was inclined to believe that a declaration by the United States alone would make a greater impression upon his people. He was also asked whether it was envisaged that the proposed declaration apply to Iran alone or whether he contemplated that it would apply to other countries in the Near East which were seeking complete independence. Here again he said he had no definite or final thought, but he felt that Iran was of such importance to the Allied Powers that perhaps it would be best to confine the declaration to that country.

The Minister elaborated somewhat on the question of collaboration between the Iranian forces and the Allied forces in taking up the question of an American officer to control the Finance and Supply Divisions of the Iranian War Department.66 This will be covered in a separate memorandum.

64 Wallace Murray, appointed Adviser on Political Relations, March 13, 1942.

65 Sumner Welles.

66 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240] ff.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 891.01/90

[Document 314]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 23, 1942.

The Minister of Iran called to see me this morning.

The Minister made a very long exposition of the subject matter contained in full detail in Mr. Murray’s [Alling’s] memorandum of his conversation with the Minister on March 20.67

At the end of the Minister’s statement, he asked me what the opinion of this Government might be.

I replied to the Minister that I greatly appreciated the expression of friendship for the Government and people of the United States which he had made in behalf of his Government and told him that his Government and he personally might be assured that this friendship was fully reciprocated. I said it was our desire here to do everything we could to cooperate with the Government of Iran in lending assistance which might be desired, including the services of technicians and experts.

I said that with regard to the specific question he had raised, the Soviet Government had made no communication to the Government of the United States of any character whatsoever with regard to its aspirations and desires concerning new frontiers or new spheres of influence as an outgrowth of the present war.

I stated that the British Government had kept the United States Government informed of the conversations which had been held between the Soviet and British Governments concerning various matters of this character,68 but that this Government had not been informed by the British Government of any discussion between the Soviet and British Governments which affected Iran.

I stated that, for these reasons, it seemed to me that it would not only be inappropriate, but positively prejudicial, for this Government—out of a clear sky insofar as it was concerned—to make any public declarations concerning the independence and integrity of Iran.

I stated that the general position of this Government was fully set forth in the provisions of the Atlantic Charter as signed by the President of the United States and that the principles there enumerated constituted the determined policy which this Government intended to pursue.

The Minister thanked me very effusively and said that he fully agreed that in the light of the circumstances which I had mentioned there would be no appropriate occasion for the United States, at this juncture, to make any public declaration of the kind he had discussed with Mr. Murray. He emphasized the fact that this suggestion on his part had been an individual and informal suggestion and had not been made under instructions of his Government.

I stated at the conclusion of our interview that I would be very glad to keep in touch with the Minister so that if any matters affecting Iran came to my attention, I would have the opportunity of talking them over with him for the information of his Government.

S[umner] W[elles]

67  Supra.

68 For correspondence on this subject, see vol. iii, pp. 490 ff.

Negotiations respecting a trade agreement between the United States and IranNegotiations respecting a trade agreement between the United States and Iran69

69 For previous correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 366 ff.

[315] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements

[Washington,] January 23, 1942.

611.9131/162

[316] The Secretary of State to the Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission (Saleh)

Washington, January 24, 1942.

611.9131/160a

[317] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements

[Washington,] January 30, 1942.

611.9131/163

[318] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements

[Washington,] February 6, 1942.

611.9131/166

[319] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 17, 1942.

611.9131/169

[320] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. James J. Durnan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] May 1, 1942.

611.9131/164

[321] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 2, 1942—11 p.m.

611.9131/164: Telegram

[322] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 12, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 8 p.m.]

611.9131/171: Telegram

[323] The Department of State to the Iranian Legation

Washington , July 11, 1942.

611.9131/171a

[324] The Iranian Legation to the Department of State

Washington , July 16, 1942.

611.9131/172

[325] The Department of State to the Iranian Legation

Washington, December 31, 1942.

611.9131/217a

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements 611.9131/162

[Document 315]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements

[Washington,] January 23, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Allah Yar Saleh, Chief, Iranian Trade and Economic Commission

Mr. Parker, NE70

Mr. Hawkins, TA71

Mr. White, TA

Mr. Saleh said that the Iranian Government would like to conclude a trade agreement with the United States and requested the resumption of conversations to that end. Mr. Saleh said that a great many people think that Iran is no longer an independent country and do not even realize that there is still an Iranian Government. He felt that the conclusion of a trade agreement with the United States would call attention to the fact that Iran is a going concern.

Mr. Saleh indicated that since he was formerly Under Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and is now its representative, and because of his knowledge of the United States and its requirements, he thought that the proposed discussions would go more smoothly than those we had held in the past. In response to a question by Mr. Parker, Mr. Saleh also indicated that he has the power to make decisions himself.

Mr. Hawkins stated that we would be glad to discuss the matter with him and outlined the procedure followed by this Government in the negotiation of its trade agreements. In this connection, it was pointed out to Mr. Saleh that as a matter of policy we like first to agree upon the general provisions to be included in an agreement. To this end, it was understood that in the course of the next day or so we would send Mr. Saleh for his consideration an indication of what we would wish in the way of general provisions.

It was also understood that in the coming week the Department would prepare a very tentative list of the commodities with respect to which we might be willing to make concessions and which would be included in the announcement of intention to negotiate, while Mr. Saleh would try to give us a list of the items with respect to which Iran will desire concessions. Mr. Hawkins also thought we could give Mr. Saleh an indication of the commodities with respect to which the United States would wish concessions.

Mr. Hawkins emphasized the fact that the aforementioned lists would be tentative in character and could be changed at any time up to the time of public announcement. Mr. Hawkins pointed out, in this connection, that it is extremely difficult for us to add an item to the published list after public announcement is made, and for that reason, Mr. Saleh should be sure to include on his request list all the items for which the Iranian Government will wish concessions.

It was agreed to meet on January 30 for further discussions.

70 W. Leopard Parker, Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

71 Harry C. Hawkins, Chief of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements.

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission (Saleh) 611.9131/160a

[Document 316]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission (Saleh)

Washington, January 24, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Saleh: Pursuant to our conversation yesterday, I enclose a copy of the standard general provisions72 which have been developed for inclusion in trade agreements. These are substantially the same as those which have been included in many trade agreements to which the United States is a party. However, it should be noted that the enclosed provisions allowed for more flexibility in operation than those included in trade agreements entered into prior to the war. In this connection, you may wish to note particularly Articles 12, 13, and 16 (h) of the draft provisions.

These standard provisions reflect the general principles followed by the Government of the United States in its commercial policy. They have been formulated with two main objectives in view, namely (1) to ensure, for all trade between the two parties to the agreement, mutual equality of treatment with respect to all forms of trade and payments control as well as with respect to customs duties and subsidiary charges of all kinds and (2) to define and safeguard the concessions on specific commodities granted by the two countries to each other.

The provisions which relate to the first of these two objectives are contained in Articles 1 to 6 of the attached draft general provisions. These Articles are not confined in their application to the commodities enumerated in the two Schedules but contain provisions concerning the treatment by each country of its whole trade with the other country.

Articles 7 to 13 contain provisions which relate to the second objective and are confined in their application to the commodities which will be enumerated in the two Schedules forming an integral part of the agreement.

The third group of Articles, 14 to 20, provides for the application of the Agreement.

I will be glad to have any comments you may wish to make regarding the enclosed general provisions, with particular reference to your country.

May I emphasize that it is desirable that both Governments make every effort to avoid any publicity in regard to any proposals under discussion, or even to the fact that such discussions are in progress, until such time as formal announcement of intention to negotiate is agreed upon.

Sincerely yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Harry C. Hawkins
Chief, Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements

72 Not attached to file copy.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements 611.9131/163

[Document 317]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements

[Washington,] January 30, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Allah Yar Saleh, Chief, Iranian Trade and Economic Commission

Mr. Hawkins, TA

Mr. Parker, NE

Mr. Durnan, NE73

Mr. White, TA

At Mr. Saleh’s request, our procedure in negotiating trade agreements was outlined in some detail and he was given a copy each of the Trade Agreements Act,74 the statement of Mr. Fox in January 1940 before the Committee on Ways and Means,75 and the notice of intention to negotiate (and related material) with Peru.76 It was noted, among other things, (1) that the Committee on Trade Agreements together with its subcommittees represents our method of carrying out Section 4 of the Trade Agreements Act, (2) that we publish along with public notice possible Schedule II items77 but do not make public the items with respect to which the United States would request concessions, and (3) that as a matter of practice public notice is given not less than thirty days prior to the date of the hearings.

Mr. Saleh said that if there was no objection he would like for us to discuss the general provisions at the next meeting, at which time the Iranian Minister and Dr. Nasr78 would be present. In this connection, Mr. Saleh requested that the draft set of general provisions that was given to the Iranian Minister by Mr. Hawkins on April 10, 194179 be used as the basis of discussion. He said that he understood the draft was tentative in character and had not been approved by the trade-agreements organization.

Mr. Saleh said that Dr. Nasr had brought to his attention the fact that under Iranian law the Iranian Government cannot reduce customs duties below a certain fixed minimum, and indicated that he would like to have any suggestions we might have to offer in that regard. He pointed out that if in a trade agreement with the United States Iran reduced customs duties below the aforementioned minimum, other Governments, contiguous to Iran, likely would demand similar reductions, which Iran could not refuse. In reply, Mr. Hawkins indicated that we would look into the matter in order to ascertain our requirements.

It was agreed to meet for further discussions on Friday, February 6, 10 a.m.

73 James J. Durnan, Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

74 Approved June 12, 1934; 48 Stat. 943. As extended April 12, 1940; 54 Stat. 107.

75 Statement of Hon. A. Manuel Fox, member of United States Tariff Commission. See Extension of Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act: Hearings before the Committee on Ways and Means, House of Representatives, 76th Cong., 3d sess., on H.J.R. 407 (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1940), vol. i, p. 491.

76 Department of State Bulletin, January 3, 1942, p. 22.

77 List of products on which the United States would consider granting concessions to Iran.

78 T. Nasr, member of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission.

79 Not printed; see memorandum by Mr. White, April 10, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 368.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements 611.9131/166

[Document 318]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements

[Washington,] February 6, 1942.

Participants: The Iranian Minister80

Mr. Allah Yar Saleh, Chief, Iranian Trade and Economic Commission

Dr. T. Nasr

Mr. Hawkins, TA

Mr. Fowler, TA

Mr. Durnan, NE

Mr. White, TA

Mr. Saleh said that he thought that there is no difference between the Iranian position and the draft general provisions given the Minister on April 10, 1941 by Mr. Hawkins. He indicated, therefore, that in his opinion public announcement now could be made.

Mr. Hawkins called attention to the fact that the chief purpose of a trade agreement would be to better economic relations between Iran and the United States after the present war. For example, the United States might request a concession on automobiles from Iran, although at present it is not in a position to supply them. In this connection, Mr. Hawkins referred to the clause in our general provisions which allows either Government to adopt or enforce measures imposed for the protection of the country’s essential interests in time of war or other national emergency. Mr. Hawkins pointed out that it would be in the interest of both countries to have a good agreement, and that a better agreement could be had if these facts were considered.

Mr. Hawkins said that we wished to suggest some changes in the draft referred to by Mr. Saleh and gave Mr. Saleh a new draft embodying these changes.81 Mr. Hawkins stated that, although he thought no essential changes had been made, the Iranians might feel that some of them involved matters of substance.

Mr. Saleh gave Mr. Hawkins a list of items81 which he wished us to consider in connection with the list for publication along with the public notice of intention to negotiate with Iran. He said that it was an inclusive list, and he realized that probably there were several items therein which we could not include in the published list because Iran has not been a major supplier, or for other reasons. Mr. Hawkins replied that his suggestions in this regard would be very helpful.

80 Mohammed Schayesteh.

81 Not attached to file copy.

81 Not attached to file copy.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 611.9131/169

[Document 319]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 17, 1942.

As stated in the attached memorandum from TA,82 this Division feels that the conclusion of a trade agreement with Iran would be politically desirable. However, at the moment the situation is complicated by the recent refusal of the Iranian Government to supply Iranian currency to the British for their operations in Iran.83 The Department is endeavoring to work out a solution to this dispute and hopes to avoid the use of economic pressure, but it would probably be best not to make public announcement of intention to negotiate an agreement until this matter is on the road to settlement. Such an announcement, it is felt, might cause the Iranians to feel that we are disposed to follow a policy entirely independent of the British and encourage them to oppose any compromise which we may present in connection with the currency problem.

It is understood that, in any case, negotiations on the trade agreement cannot go forward until certain further assurances are received from the Iranian Government. This Division, therefore, suggests that public announcement be held up for the moment.84

Paul H. Alling

82 Not printed.

83 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341] ff.

84 In marginal notes the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) and the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson) indicated their agreement.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. James J. Durnan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 611.9131/164

[Document 320]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. James J. Durnan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] May 1, 1942.

Mr. Saleh called today in connection with the proposed trade agreement with Iran. He stated that he had studied the proposed list of products to accompany the public notice of intention to negotiate a trade agreement with Iran, in conjunction with Mr. Amerie, the Iranian Trade Representative in New York, and Dr. Nasr, a member of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission, and found it acceptable except for a few minor points which he would discuss with us at a later date.

Mr. Saleh added that he was not yet in a position to give us a definite reply to our request for assurances that the Iranian Government would be willing to consider granting reductions of duties and supplementary charges on products of interest to the United States in the proposed trade agreement. He stated that a reply to the telegram which he had addressed to his Government on the subject had simply indicated that tariff reductions on particular commodities could be included in an annex to the agreement which itself would require approval of the Iranian Parliament. Mr. Saleh did not feel that this reply was satisfactory and said that about ten days ago he had sent a further telegram to his Government in an effort to obtain clarification of the matter, but so far had received no reply.

Mr. Saleh asked whether I thought the Department would be willing to request our Legation at Tehran to take up the matter with the Iranian Ministry of Finance. I informed Mr. Saleh that I did not believe there would be any objection in the Department to this procedure as we were most anxious to get the matter cleared up.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 611.9131/164: Telegram

[Document 321]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 2, 1942—11 p.m.

111. Your 38, February 12, 4 p.m.85 The Department has been endeavoring for some time, in connection with the trade agreement conversations, to obtain assurances from Mr. Saleh that the Iranian Government would be willing to consider the granting of reduced rates on duty in the proposed trade agreement on certain specified products imported from the United States. Mr. Saleh has indicated that he is not in a position to give assurances in this regard, and apparently has been unable to obtain any definite reply to the telegrams which he has addressed to his Government requesting authority to give us the required assurances.

You are requested therefore to take up this matter with the appropriate authorities (Mr. Saleh suggests the Ministry of Finance) pointing out that in advance of public notice of intention to negotiate a trade agreement with Iran your Government would wish assurances that the Iranian Government would be prepared during the negotiations to consider reductions of duties or supplementary charges, as well as bindings of such duties or charges, on products of interest to the United States.

If the Iranian authorities indicate a willingness to give such assurances you should suggest that they instruct Mr. Saleh to this effect immediately.

Hull

85 Not printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 611.9131/171: Telegram

[Document 322]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 12, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 8 p.m.]

150. Department’s No. 111, May 2, 11 a.m. [p.m.] I am informed by the Under Secretary of Finance that Saleh has been instructed to inform Department that the Iranian Government is prepared in principle to consider reductions in duties or supplementary charges and bindings of duties on products of interest to the United States. The agreement would however be subject to ratification by Medjliss. Saleh has been instructed to submit a list of articles on which United States requests reductions or bindings.

Dreyfus

The Department of State to the Iranian Legation 611.9131/171a

[Document 323]

The Department of State to the Iranian Legation

Memorandum

The Government of the United States has given careful consideration to the proposal made by the Government of Iran for the conclusion of a trade agreement between the United States and Iran. The Government of the United States believes that the conclusion of a trade agreement between the two countries would be mutually beneficial and, on the basis of the recent informal discussions with the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission, is prepared to issue public notice, as required by law, of intention to negotiate such an agreement with Iran.

It is understood that the negotiations will be conducted on the basis of the attached draft general provisions, Enclosure 1,86 and that the concessions to be granted by each country will be worked out in the course of the actual negotiations.

In accordance with usual procedure, there would be published, in connection with the public notice, a list of products which would come under consideration for the possible granting of concessions, either reductions or bindings of duties, by the United States in the prospective trade agreement. The purpose of such a list is to give interested persons in this country an opportunity to present their views or suggestions to the trade-agreements organization as to any of such products under consideration. The items which the Government of the United States would be willing to include in the list to accompany public notice of intention to negotiate with Iran are given in Enclosure 2.86

In 1939, these items accounted for about 98 percent of the total dutiable imports into the United States from Iran and for 91 percent of the total duty-free imports. However, it is not possible for the Government of the United States to make a firm decision or commitment as to what concessions may be granted in a trade agreement in advance of announcement of intention to negotiate and of the public hearings held pursuant thereto. It should be understood therefore that the inclusion of an article in the published list referred to above does not necessarily mean that it will be the subject of a concession in the agreement as finally concluded.

The maximum reduction in United States import charges permitted by the Trade Agreements Act, under authority of which trade agreements are negotiated, is 50 percent. It may also be noted that the United States customarily grants tariff concessions only in respect of articles of which the other country concerned is the chief or an important source of imports into the United States.

In a trade agreement with Iran the Government of the United States would expect the Government of Iran to accord more favorable treatment for those products in which this country is primarily interested. This would include concessions, either in the form of reductions or bindings, of the Iranian import duties or other charges on those products of which the United States is the principal or an important supplier. This Government is not prepared at this time to present a definitive list of products with respect to which it would expect concessions in a trade agreement with Iran. However, a list of products has been tentatively formulated with respect to which it would appear that reductions or bindings in Iranian import charges would be of particular interest to the United States. It should be understood that further study, and information received at public hearings, might reveal additional items with respect to which this Government would wish to request concessions. The list, which on the basis of Iranian import statistics for 1939–40 covers about 82 percent of the total Iranian imports from the United States, is contained in Enclosure 3.88

It is understood, of course, that the conclusion of a trade agreement could not affect decisions with respect to the kinds and quantities of materials which can be exported from the United States to Iran.

Finally, it may be noted that during the course of the discussions it was pointed out that in its trade agreements the United States usually includes the following provision: “The provisions of this Agreement relating to the sale, taxation or use of imported articles within the United States of America are understood to be subject to the constitutional limitations on the authority of the Federal Government.”

The foregoing provision was designed primarily to cover explicitly the provisions of the twenty-first amendment to the Constitution of the United States under which broad powers have been granted to the several States for the regulation of trade in alcoholic beverages. However, since it would appear unlikely that any substantial trade could be developed in importing alcoholic beverages into the United States from Iran, it was mutually agreed to dispense with the provision cited as unnecessary.

Washington , July 11, 1942.

86 Not printed.

86 Not printed.

88 Not printed.

The Iranian Legation to the Department of State 611.9131/172

[Document 324]

The Iranian Legation to the Department of State

No. 746

Memorandum

The Minister of Iran has given careful consideration to the contents of a Memorandum bearing the initials of the Honorable Mr. Cordell Hull, Secretary of State of the United States, which was handed to the Minister of Iran and the Chief of the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission on July 11, 1942, and which is on the subject of a proposed trade agreement between Iran and the United States.

In the above Memorandum the Department of State expresses the belief of the Government of the United States that the conclusion of a trade agreement between the two countries would be mutually beneficial and that the Government is prepared, on the basis of the recent informal discussions with the Iranian Trade and Economic Commission, to issue public notice of intention to negotiate such an agreement with Iran.

It is pointed out that the negotiations will be conducted on the basis of a draft of general provisions attached to the Memorandum as Enclosure No. 1, and that the concessions to be granted by each country will be worked out in the course of the actual negotiations.

[Here follows summary of the Department’s memorandum printed supra.]

The Minister of Iran taking cognizance of the above statements would like to express his wholehearted accordance on the point that the conclusion of a trade agreement between the two countries would be mutually beneficial. He therefore avails himself of the opportunity to state that the Government of Iran will be willing to conduct negotiations for the conclusion of such an agreement with the United States on the basis of the draft of general provisions enclosed with the above Memorandum, as well as the contents of the Memorandum itself, it being understood that these negotiations will be carried on between the two governments with a sincere spirit of reciprocal treatment and the desire of each government to respect the interests of the other. The Minister therefore would await with pleasure information as to the date of the issuing of the public notice of intention to negotiate, as required by the laws of the United States.

Washington , July 16, 1942.

[Public notice of intention to negotiate a trade agreement was issued on July 29, 1942, Department of State Bulletin, August 1, 1942, page 665.]

The Department of State to the Iranian Legation 611.9131/217a

[Document 325]

The Department of State to the Iranian Legation

Memorandum

Reference is made to the preliminary conversations which have taken place between the representatives of the Government of the United States and the Government of Iran regarding a proposed trade agreement.

The Government of the United States now desires to submit to the Government of Iran the proposed text of such an agreement (Enclosure 190 ).

It may be noted that the general provisions contained in the proposed text are identical, with one minor exception, with the general provisions proposed as a basis for agreement by the Government of the United States in its note of July 11, 1942 and accepted in principle by the Government of Iran in its reply of July 16, 1942. For purposes of accuracy, sub-paragraph (d) of Article (12) has been changed from “relating to police or revenue laws;” to “relating to the enforcement of police or revenue laws;”. For your convenience and information there is attached an analysis of the proposed general provisions (Enclosure 290 ).

The products with respect to which the United States is offering concessions (Schedule II) accounted for about 95 percent of total United States imports from Iran in 1939. New reductions up to the maximum amount permitted by the Trade Agreements Act are offered on oriental rugs and other items which accounted for 87 percent of the total dutiable imports from Iran in that year. In addition, the 50-percent reduction on pistache nuts made in the Trade Agreement with Turkey91 is offered to Iran in its own right. Bindings of present duty status are offered with respect to 11 percent of the dutiable items and 91 percent of the duty-free items. The extent of the concessions offered by the United States are set forth in detail in Enclosure 4.90

During the course of the discussions the Iranian representatives stated that because of the comparatively low morphine content of Iranian opium, the present United States import duty of $3 per pound on opium containing more than 8.5 percent of anhydrous morphine (paragraph 59) is more burdensome on Iranian opium than on opium coming from certain other countries. (Opium containing less than 8.5 percent of anhydrous morphine is dutiable under tariff paragraph 59 at $6 per pound.) In order to alleviate any such burden, this Government is offering a concession on opium containing not less than 8.5 percent of anhydrous morphine based on the morphine content contained therein; the proposed rate is $18 per pound of anhydrous morphine content, but not less than $1.80 nor more than $3 per pound of opium. On the basis of 11 percent morphine content, this rate would amount to $1.98 per pound of opium, a reduction in duty of 34 percent. It may be noted that Iranian opium has a relatively high codeine content, which is not dutiable.

The representatives of the United States pointed out that it is the general policy of this Government to issue permits for the importation of opium only in cases in which the producing country has established a system of import permits and export authorizations at least equivalent to that described in the International Opium Convention signed at Geneva on February 19, 1925,92 and that the issuance of permits for the importation of Iranian opium into the United States in the future would depend largely upon the measures which may have been taken by the Government of Iran for controlling effectively the traffic in opium.

It is the understanding of this Government that to date the Iranian Government has not fully established and enforced such a system. Although this Government has authorized the purchase of Iranian opium during the past year, it has been made clear to the Iranian representatives that this Government has not abandoned its policy as regards the importation of opium, and they have been informed that this Government would be pleased if the Iranian Government would establish regulations equivalent to those provided for by the Geneva drug convention of 1925. To this end, there is attached a proposed exchange of notes93 in which the Iranian Government would undertake to establish such a system. The establishment of such a system would remove any question as to the eligibility of Iranian opium for consideration in connection with purchases made in conformity with the provisions of the Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act,94 as amended.

The Government of the United States is offering a concession of 50 percent on hair of the Cashmere goat on the skin. In order to preserve the relationship established by the Tariff Act of 193095 between the rates of duty on the different categories, the reductions offered on hair of the Cashmere goat in the grease or washed; scoured; and sorted, or matchings, if not scoured; respectively, vary from 43 percent to 47 percent. The rates of duty offered on hair of the Cashmere goat are identical with the rates of duty on hair of the alpaca, llama and vicuña included in the Trade Agreement with Peru.96

With respect to the proposed Schedule I, this Government is requesting concessions on products accounting for 91 percent of total Iranian imports from the United States in 1939; reductions in import duty or the abolition of the monopoly tax are requested on items accounting for about 78 percent of Iranian imports from the United States in that year; and bindings are requested on items accounting for 13 percent. An analysis of the concessions requested in Schedule I is attached as Enclosure 3.97

This Government is requesting the removal of the monopoly tax now imposed on articles imported from the United States included in Schedule I under Section VIII, Chapter 39; Section XV, Chapter 63; Section XVI, Chapter 73; and Section XVII, Chapter 75; respectively, of the Iranian Customs Tariff and Road Tax Law of 1941; removal of the import duty of 4 rials on canned asparagus (tariff no. 292) and the import duty of 3 rials on preserved fruits in cans or other sealed containers (tariff no. 293); reduction of the duty on mechanical household refrigerating and air-conditioning machinery and apparatus (tariff no. 1814); and reductions of 50 percent in the rates of duty on radio tubes (tariff no. 1910) and radio receiving sets, including radio phonographs (tariff no. 1911).

Headnote 2 to Schedule I has been included at the request of the Iranian representatives. Its purpose is to permit the Government of Iran to consolidate the various charges on importation now in effect, if it should so desire. The note would permit the Government of Iran to increase the import duty on any article included in Schedule I, provided the sum of the consolidated charges (road tax, import certificate tax, import duty and any other duties, charges, fees or exactions) would not exceed the sum of such charges which would be applicable, under the terms of the Agreement, in the absence of such consolidation.

The purpose of headnote 3 to Schedule I is to indicate that the provisions in the Schedule shall be considered as amendments to the pertinent sections, chapters and numbers given at the left of the descriptions of articles, and that, consequently, the pertinent section and chapter headings and other collateral provisions in the law will continue to be applicable to articles enumerated and described in the Schedule.

For reasons which have been explained to the Iranian representatives, this Government would appreciate an early reply to these proposals.

Washington, December 31, 1942.

[A few minor changes in the wording and phraseology in the draft agreement proposed by the United States were made and accepted by both Governments. Article 15 of the draft which read as follows: “Pending the definitive entry into force of this Agreement as provided in Article (14), the provisions thereof shall be applied provisionally on and after . . . . . . . subject to a right to terminate the provisional application of the Agreement pursuant to the provisions of Article (9), or upon six months’ written notice” was omitted because of Iranian objection that tariff concessions could be made only after Majlis approval.

The trade agreement was signed at Washington, April 8, 1943. For text of agreement and supplementary exchange of notes, see Executive Agreement Series No. 410, or 58 Stat. (pt. 2) 1322.]

90 Not printed.

90 Not printed.

91 Signed at Ankara, April 1, 1939; for text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 163, or 54 Stat. (pt. 2) 1870.

90 Not printed.

92 League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. lxxxi, p. 317.

93 Not printed.

94 Approved February 9, 1909; 35 Stat. 614.

95 46 Stat. 590.

96 Signed May 7, 1942; for text, see Executive Agreement Series No. 256, or 56 Stat. (pt. 2) 1509; for correspondence regarding the negotiation of this agreement, see vol. vi, pp. 674 ff.

97 Not printed.

Extension of Lend-Lease aid to Iran and desire of Iran to deal directly with the United States in Lend-Lease mattersExtension of Lend-Lease aid to Iran and desire of Iran to deal directly with the United States in Lend-Lease matters

[326] President Roosevelt to the Lend-Lease Administrator (Stettinius)

Washington, March 10, 1942.

891.20/133

[327] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 13, 1942—6 p.m.

891.00/1837: Telegram

[328] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 17, 1942—noon. [Received March 17—9:33 a.m.]

891.00/1840: Telegram

[329] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 3, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 8:16 p.m.]

891.00/1854: Telegram

[330] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 15, 1942.

891.24/190

[331] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)

[Washington,] April 24, 1942.

891.24/191

[332] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 27, 1942.

891.24/192

[333] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 30, 1942.

891.24/202

[334] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. George W. Renchard of the Office of the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 30, 1942.

891.24/202

[335] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 1, 1942—6 p.m.

891.24/199a: Telegram

[336] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 4, 1942—11 a.m. [Received May 4—10:51 a.m.]

891.24/186: Telegram

[337] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] July 31, 1942.

891.24/237

[338] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] October 10, 1942.

891.24/265

[339] The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, October 19, 1942.

891.24/264a

[340] The Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson) to the Lend-Lease Administrator (Stettinius)

Washington, October 30, 1942.

891.24/277a

President Roosevelt to the Lend-Lease Administrator (Stettinius) 891.20/133

[Document 326]

President Roosevelt to the Lend-Lease Administrator (Stettinius)

Washington, March 10, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Stettinius: For purposes of implementing the authority conferred upon you as Lend-Lease Administrator by Executive Order No. 8926, dated October 28, 1941, and in order to enable you to arrange for Lend-Lease aid to the Government of Iran, I hereby find that the defense of the Government of Iran is vital to the defense of the United States.

Very truly yours,

Franklin D. Roosevelt

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1837: Telegram

[Document 327]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 13, 1942—6 p.m.

66. On March 11 [10] the President found the defense of Iran vital to the defense of the United States, thereby making Iran eligible to receive Lend-Lease assistance. For the present it is considered advisable to keep this development secret, except for the Iranian officials immediately concerned, and you are requested to see that no announcement on the subject is made in Iran. Iranian Minister in Washington98 has been informed.

With reference to your 61, March 11,99 you should take the first opportunity to emphasize to the Prime Minister that this action represents definite evidence of this Government’s intention to help Iran. You may further state that arrangements are going forward with all possible speed to send wheat to Iran1 under Lend-Lease authority on a cash reimbursement basis. Action is being taken on a requisition for 20,000 tons, which it is proposed to ship at the minimum rate of 2,000 tons monthly or in greater quantities if the shipping situation permits. It should be noted that no effective action in this regard could have been taken by this Government prior to the designation of Iran as eligible for Lend-Lease, since no other Governmental machinery exists for such operations.

With respect to advisers,2 you should point out that only requests received by this Government have been for a police adviser, two plant experts and a boy scout leader. These requests are receiving every consideration and Department is actively endeavoring to locate suitable men. You may explain that this Government is anxious to send only men with the highest qualifications, and, under present conditions, such men are not always immediately available.

If question of financial-supply adviser is raised, (Department’s 55, March 43 ) you may say that this matter has merely been mentioned to the Department by British Embassy, no direct request having been made by Iranian Government, but that if such a request should be received this Government would give it earnest and sympathetic consideration.

Welles

98 Mohammed Schayesteh.

99  Post, p. 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379].

1 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 138] ff.

2 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240] ff.

3 See footnote 94, p. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241].

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1840: Telegram

[Document 328]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 17, 1942—noon.
[Received March 17—9:33 a.m.]

73. The Prime Minister4 was very much pleased when I communicated to him the contents of the Department’s 66, March 13. He said that he would like to be informed as soon as it can be made public as he wishes to give it the widest possible publicity here.

He volunteered the statement that he is keeping in mind the matter of the expulsion of Japanese Legation.5

Dreyfus

4 Ali Soheily.

5 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374] ff.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1854: Telegram

[Document 329]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 3, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 8:16 p.m.]

95. Prime Minister yesterday in conference with Ambassador Standley6 reiterated Iran’s desire to continue friendly relations with United States and expressed hope that American help in form of advances and goods would be forthcoming now and in period after war. An indication of Iran’s friendship he said was to be found in decision to return schools7 and action now being taken to expel Japanese Legation which Iranian Government had refused to do at British request several months ago. He stated that he will instruct his Ambassador to Russia to cooperate closely with Standley as he did with Steinhardt8 and that he himself will keep in close touch with me. He evinced little concern over situation in southern Iran where police and Government are functioning but believed situation in Russian occupied areas in north where police and other authorities are not permitted to operate gives definite cause for alarm. He expressed belief that tribes in north are loyal with exception of Kurds whose disaffection and susceptibility to Soviet influence might offer an eventual excuse for Soviets to take over region.9 Iranian Government he declared is concerned about status of northern Iran after war but in this regard places great confidence in Atlantic Charter.10

He ended by asking Standley to bear above points in mind in his dealings with Russia.

Dreyfus

6 Adm. William H. Standley, Ambassador to the Soviet Union.

7 For correspondence on the resumption of American mission schools in Iran, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 374 ff.

8 Laurence A. Steinhardt, Ambassador in Turkey, former Ambassador in the Soviet Union.

9 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361] ff.

10 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.24/190

[Document 330]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 15, 1942.

Mr. Davallou11 called and stated that, in the absence of the Minister from Washington, he had been instructed to bring to our notice the contents of a telegram which he had received from the Prime Minister. Mr. Davallou referred to the conversation which the Iranian Minister had had with the Acting Secretary on Saturday,12 in which the Minister pointed out the serious difficulties which the Prime Minister was encountering with the Mejliss in his efforts to bring about the expulsion of the Japanese Legation from Tehran. The Prime Minister had now instructed the Legation to state that it would assist him greatly in his dealings with the Mejliss if he could make public announcement of the fact that Iran had been found eligible for Lend-Lease by the United States. Mr. Davallou stressed again and again the importance which such an announcement would have in strengthening the position of the Prime Minister.

I assured Mr. Davallou that I fully understood the point he was making and that I would be glad to bring the matter to the attention of the interested officials in the Department.

11 H. Hadjeb-Davallou, First Secretary of the Iranian Legation.

12 See memorandum by the Acting Secretary of State, April 11, p. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385].

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) 891.24/191

[Document 331]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)13

[Washington,] April 24, 1942.

In accordance with our telephone conversation, I am returning herewith the papers regarding the question of Lend-Lease for Iran. As I explained on the telephone, I think it is altogether desirable that we support the Iranian Prime Minister and I believe, furthermore, that an announcement that Iran has been made eligible for Lend-Lease would go a long way toward giving him the support which he needs with the Iranian Parliament and the Iranian public. It would of course be desirable to make a simultaneous announcement regarding Lend-Lease for Iran and Iraq, but I assume that it would take some days before a decision could be reached in regard to Iraq. If that is the case I would favor making an immediate announcement in regard to Iran. In this connection I should mention that the Iranian Minister has been in to see Mr. Alling twice this week and has made numerous telephone calls urging a prompt and favorable decision.

Wallace Murray

13 Addressed to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) and the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson), both of whom indicated their agreement in marginal notations.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.24/192

[Document 332]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)14

[Washington,] April 27, 1942.

The Iranian Minister telephoned to me the first thing this morning to say that he had received a telegram from the Iranian Prime Minister which read approximately as follows: “The Japanese Legation has now left Tehran, and it would be most helpful and useful to me if I could announce to the Majliss and to the public that my country has been made eligible for Lend-Lease assistance. Anything you can do to expedite a decision would be greatly appreciated.”

The Minister went on to say that he was reading the text of the telegram to show what great importance the Prime Minister attached to making a public announcement regarding Lend-Lease. I told the Minister that the whole matter had been placed before the Under Secretary and I thought a decision would be made in the very near future, possibly today. The Minister said that he was leaving for Chicago tomorrow, and he would be most appreciative if we could give him some word before his departure. He said that he would telephone direct to Mr. Welles if I thought that was the proper step for him to take. I told him I did not think that would be necessary since, as I had indicated, a decision would doubtless be forthcoming in the very near future.

Paul H. Alling

14 Addressed to the Under Secretary of State (Welles), the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson), and the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray).

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.24/202

[Document 333]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)14

[Washington,] April 30, 1942.

Following a conference in Mr. Acheson’s office on Saturday regarding Lend-Lease for Iran it was agreed that, should approval be given by the Department to the proposal to make a public announcement that Iran had been found eligible for Lend-Lease, the British Embassy should be so informed. Therefore, on Monday, when such approval was given, I informed Mr. Hayter of the British Embassy. He had previously requested such information since the Embassy had expressed the view that no announcement should be made regarding Iran until a similar announcement could be made regarding Iraq.

This morning Mr. Hayter telephoned urgently to say that instructions had been received from the Foreign Office begging us to refrain from making any announcement concerning Iran until an announcement could be made regarding Iraq. Mr. Hayter added that the Ambassador16 would speak about the matter this morning to the Secretary or to Mr. Welles. I told Mr. Hayter that the matter had already gone very far forward and that the Department had proposed the issuance of a statement by the White House to be made tomorrow, May 1. I added that the Iranian Legation had been informed that we would make such an announcement and that the Iranian Minister had already informed his Government that an announcement was to be made. Therefore there remained only the question of the date of the announcement. Mr. Hayter urged that steps be taken to withhold the announcement until the Ambassador had had an opportunity today to discuss the matter with the Secretary or Mr. Welles. I told him that I would bring his request to the attention of the appropriate officers.

Paul H. Alling

14 Addressed to the Under Secretary of State (Welles), the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson), and the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray).

16 Viscount Halifax, British Ambassador in the United States.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. George W. Renchard of the Office of the Secretary of State 891.24/202

[Document 334]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. George W. Renchard of the Office of the Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 30, 1942.

Lord Halifax just phoned at 9:40 and said that he had received a telegram from the Foreign Office in substance as follows: “Please beg United States Government most earnestly to hold up announcement of lease-lend aid to Iran until similar announcement can be made concerning lease-lend aid to Iraq.”

Lord Halifax said that he realized that this aid had been promised Iran because of its cooperation with us in “kicking out the Japanese, et cetera”. It was feared that Iraq which has been “terribly helpful” would be considerably disturbed if an announcement of lease-lend aid was not forthcoming at the same time.17

G[eorge] W. R[enchard]

17 Marginal note by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs stated: “Mr. Hayter, British Embassy was informed by Mr. Alling that we have sent papers to the White House with request that Iraq be declared eligible and announcement made simultaneously for Iraq and Iran, probably on May 2.”

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.24/199a: Telegram

[Document 335]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, May 1, 1942—6 p.m.

109. Designation of Iran as eligible for Lend-Lease assistance will be announced publicly by White House May 2.18 Iranian Minister in Washington has been informed.

Hull

18 For text of announcement, which concerned lend-lease aid to both Iran and Iraq, see Department of State Bulletin, May 2, 1942, p. 383.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/186: Telegram

[Document 336]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 4, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received May 4—10:51 a.m.]

140. Prime Minister’s announcement yesterday of extension of lend-lease aid to Iran made in a speech to Majlis was extremely well received by Deputies and public. He began his speech by saying that United States long in cordial relations with Iran has once again given practical demonstration of its good intentions toward this country. American advisers, he said, have rendered brilliant services to Iran, mentioning specifically those in fields of education and health. Iranians have responded to taxes [these?] high and disinterested services with similar feelings toward United States and have tried to follow American example in order to improve internal organization of their country. He ended by saying he was sure the Deputies and all persons interested in Iran’s welfare will welcome this good news which is sure to have important repercussions in economic affairs of Iran interrupted by frequent and enthusiastic cheers from Deputies.

Extension of lease-lend aid should serve to strengthen our already cordial relations with Iran. However, actual harm may result if there is much delay in supplying Iran with much needed goods.

Dreyfus

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 891.24/237

[Document 337]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] July 31, 1942.

The Minister19 said that he had just received a telegram from his Government inquiring about the plans of the United States Government with respect to a Lend-Lease agreement with Iran. The Minister, therefore, asked me to ascertain definitely whether it is necessary to conclude a formal agreement before Lend-Lease operations can be begun, whether it is proposed to begin negotiation of an agreement in the near future, and where such negotiations would be carried on, in Washington or in Tehran.

I said that it was my understanding that Lend-Lease shipments could be made without awaiting conclusion of an agreement, but that I felt quite sure it was planned to negotiate such an agreement with Iran in due course, probably along the lines of those which had been signed with Great Britain20 and a number of other countries in recent months. I said, however, that I would confirm this understanding and inform the Minister in order that he might advise his Government.

19 The Iranian Minister.

20 Signed February 23, 1942; for text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 241, or 56 Stat. (pt. 2) 1433; for correspondence on this subject, see vol. i, pp. 525 ff.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 891.24/265

[Document 338]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] October 10, 1942.

Major Aktarzendi21 called at his request to inquire regarding our general Lend-Lease policy toward Iran, with particular reference to military supplies.

I told him that it was a little difficult to state our policy exactly, since we ourselves had not yet determined certain details. I explained, however, that there are two main types of Lend-Lease: cash reimbursable and straight Lend-Lease. It was my understanding that the Department proposed, for the time being, to furnish civilian supplies on a cash reimbursable basis, whereas military supplies would probably be furnished as straight lend-lease. As Major Aktarzendi undoubtedly knew, civilian supply requests should now be submitted first to the Central Supplies Committee, which referred them to the MESC22 at Cairo, whence they were forwarded to the United States. Requests for military supplies, however, came direct from the foreign government concerned to this Government. The Department of State normally referred such requests to the War Department and accepted its decision as to whether it would be practicable to furnish the supplies in question.

With special regard to the 150 motorcycles for the Iranian Gendarmerie, I had originally suggested that the Iranian Legation take the matter up direct with Colonel Baird of the War Department because I had been informed that such articles could be procured only through the War Department. This week, however, I had also suggested that the Legation get in touch with Mr. Norman Walker, of the Lend-Lease Administration, because Mr. Walker had informed me that his office would be best qualified to assist in making out the formal Lend-Lease requisition. Major Aktarzendi said that he had an appointment to see Mr. Walker on Monday, October 12.

Major Aktarzendi asked whether the British Government had any voice in passing upon Iranian requests for military supplies. I replied that so far as I was aware, the British authorities entered into the picture only after the American agencies concerned had given their approval and the matter was submitted to an allocations committee which included British military representatives. It was my understanding that all military lend-lease requisitions had to be passed by this committee, regardless of the country of destination, and that this procedure was in no way confined to requests from the Middle East. The Iranian Government, therefore, should not feel that there was any discrimination involved. I said that in my opinion it was only logical that such a joint committee should exist, since the British were fighting on our side and a large part of our own contribution to the joint war effort consisted in supplying munitions to our associates. It was obviously necessary that there should be consultation regarding the most effective distribution of the available supplies.

Major Aktarzendi said that his Government was very much interested in this question, as it had informed him that it desired to deal direct with the United States rather than through British intermediaries. I replied that I considered that the procedure was, in fact, direct, in so far as military supplies were concerned.

21 Iranian Military Attaché.

22 Middle East Supply Center.

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson) 891.24/264a

[Document 339]

The Secretary of State to the Secretary of War (Stimson)

Washington, October 19, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Secretary: As you are aware, the Government of Iran has presented to this Government requests for certain military supplies which it desires to obtain under the Lend-Lease procedure for the use of the Iranian Army and rural police force. I understand that these requests have been submitted to the International Division, Services of Supply, War Department, which has presented them for consideration by the appropriate allocation bodies.

In this connection, and for guidance in the future handling of similar cases, an officer of the War Department has asked that the Department of State set forth its views with regard to the procedure to be followed in the requisitioning and consignment of Lend-Lease supplies of a military character which may be allocated for the use of the Iranian forces.

Iran became eligible for Lend-Lease aid on March 11 [10], 1942, the President having declared its defense vital to that of the United States and the Iranian Government having made the formal representations required by the terms of the Act of March 11, 1941.23 There is, therefore, full legal authority to furnish Lend-Lease assistance direct to the Iranian Government. Accordingly, this Department believes that requisitions for supplies to be used by the Iranian military and rural police forces should be made out and presented by the authorized Iranian representatives in the United States and that the supplies should be consigned for overseas shipment to the Iranian Government or an agency in Iran designated by that Government.

In making this decision, the Department has been guided by the following considerations: 1) Since supplies of the type in question will be intended solely for the official use of the Iranian Government, it is not necessary for this Government to retain control of them in order to ensure that they do not reach an undesirable ultimate consumer.

2) Major General Clarence S. Ridley, Army of the United States, has been designated adviser to the Iranian Army on matters pertaining to the service of supply and will be in a position to supervise the receipt and use of articles supplied to the army.

3) Colonel H. Norman Schwarzkopf, Army of the United States, is now serving as adviser to the Iranian rural police force and will be in a position to supervise the receipt and use of articles supplied to that force.

4) The Iranian Government has repeatedly expressed its strong desire to receive Lend-Lease aid direct from the American Government, without the intermediation of any third party. It is believed that any other procedure would offend the Iranian Government and would dissipate the good effect which our assistance may be expected to produce.

The Department has, of course, no thought that the indicated procedure should be applied to the furnishing of supplies needed by the military forces of the United Nations stationed in Iran.

Sincerely yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Dean G. Acheson
Assistant Secretary

23 55 Stat. 31.

The Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson) to the Lend-Lease Administrator (Stettinius) 891.24/277a

[Document 340]

The Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson) to the Lend-Lease Administrator (Stettinius)

Washington, October 30, 1942.

Dear Ed: Mr. J. D. Jernegan of the Near Eastern Division of the State Department has received a telephonic inquiry from Mr. Norman S. Walker of the Office of Lend-Lease Administration regarding our views as to the terms of payment which should be written into the requisitions for certain military items which the Government of Iran wishes to procure under lend-lease procedure for the use of the Iranian army.

The Department is now considering the possibility of negotiating a master lend-lease agreement with Iran, along the lines of our master lend-lease agreement with the United Kingdom, together with a collateral exchange of notes setting forth the terms of payment for certain categories of items more precisely than in the master agreement. Although no final decision has been reached by the Department in this regard, we are considering an exchange of notes similar to the proposed exchange of notes with Turkey,24 copies of which have been communicated informally to Mr. Fred Ecker.

As now drafted, the proposed exchange of notes provides, among other things, that payment for foodstuffs and other supplies for the use of the civilian population “shall be furnished on a cash-payment basis, and these supplies, together with any other goods and services that, by agreement at the time of purchase, may be provided on such a basis, shall be paid for by the Government of Iran in United States dollars or Iranian rials at the option of the United States”.

Thus under the terms of the proposed agreement it could be required that the military items under reference be furnished on a cash-payment basis or on a general lend-lease basis, whichever might be considered more desirable. Moreover, payment could be required either in dollars or in rials. Payment in rials for these items would therefore be consistent with the provisions of the proposed exchange of notes.

This Government needs rials for its purchasing program and for other purposes, and, in fact, is confronted with a probable shortage of rials in the near future. Assumption by the United States Army of the direction of communications in Iran will accentuate our requirements for rials. As you know, the British already are having difficulty in securing a supply of rials sufficient for their needs. It is believed that Iran is willing to make cash payment for these supplies although it might prefer to make payment in dollars rather than in rials.

For these reasons, this Department believes that we should request the Iranian Government to pay for these items in rials and that the requisitions should be drawn accordingly.

Sincerely yours,

Dean Acheson

24 For correspondence on lend-lease aid for Turkey, see pp. 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791] ff.

Efforts of the United States to facilitate a settlement of the dispute between the United Kingdom and Iran regarding exchange ratesEfforts of the United States to facilitate a settlement of the dispute between the United Kingdom and Iran regarding exchange rates

[341] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 23, 1942—11 p.m.

891.515/75: Telegram

[342] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 28, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 10:03 a.m.]

891.51A/521: Telegram

[343] The Chief of the Financial Division (Livesey) to the Financial Counselor of the British Embassy (Stopford)

Washington, April 4, 1942.

891.515/15

[344] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, April 8, 1942—7 p.m. [Received 8:05 p.m.]

741.9111/60: Telegram

[345] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , April 11, 1942.

741.9111/63

[346] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)

[Washington,] April 20, 1942.

741.9111/68

[347] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington ], April 27, 1942.

891.24/193

[348] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Financial Division (Luthringer)

[Washington,] April 28, 1942.

891.5151/232

[349] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 29, 1942—noon. [Received 12:04 p.m.]

891.5151/227: Telegram

[350] Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Financial Division (Luthringer) to the Chief of the Financial Division (Livesey)

[Washington,] April 30, 1942.

891.5151/236

[351] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 3, 1942—noon. [Received May 3—9:49 a.m.]

891.5151/229: Telegram

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.515/75: Telegram

[Document 341]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 23, 1942—11 p.m.

75. 1. The Department has been advised by the British Embassy at Washington that certain classes of interested Iranians have been agitating for the devaluation of the pound sterling in terms of Persian currency.

2. The British Embassy alleges that such a devaluation would adversely affect the United States Government with respect to expenditures for operations in Persia such as the assembly of aircraft at Abadan.

3. The British Government has informed the Iranian Government that it would view with strong disapproval an attempt to fix exchange rates unfavorable to the pound; the British Minister25 has been empowered in his discretion to intimate that such an attempt would affect the British attitude in the matter of economic assistance.

4. The British Government suggests that in view of our common interest in the matter you should be authorized to support the British Minister in resisting the devaluation of the pound sterling.

5. Please report by telegraph: (a) whether the agitation for devaluation referred to by the British has been directed toward the dollar as well as the pound sterling; (b) your views as to the probability that the devaluation of the pound sterling would be accompanied by, or shortly followed by, agitation for devaluation of the dollar with respect to the rial; (c) your views as to the correctness of the British argument in (2) above; (d) if you agree that our interests are involved, whether you believe we should associate ourselves with the British in resisting devaluation.

Welles

25 Sir Reader W. Bullard, British Minister in Iran.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.51A/521: Telegram

[Document 342]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 28, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 10:03 a.m.]

82. Referring to the Department’s telegram no. 75, March 23, 11 p.m., the inability of Iran to dispose of foreign exchange because of lack of importation facilities (see my 66, March 13, 4 p.m. paragraph 1,26 ) and heavy sterling sales by British here estimated at million pounds monthly have created tendency to raise rial value. This tendency is being supported by a group of merchants represented in Majlis and by part of press. The “devaluation of pound” referred to by British is in fact raising of the rial value and would necessarily affect the dollar as much as sterling. The increase contemplated by those supporting revaluation is reported to be from present 140 rials per pound to as much as 100 rials per pound. United States Government operation expenditures might therefore be increased by as much as 30%.

Any effort to prevent revaluation would undoubtedly and with some reason be resented by Iranian officials as unnecessary and unjustified interference in their internal affairs in a matter not essential to our war effort and would contribute little toward transforming Iran from a “passive appendage” into a “willing partner” as suggested by the Department in its telegram no. 55, March 4, 9 p.m.27 I therefore do not recommend association with the British in this matter (see my 66, paragraphs 3 to 5).

A financial counselor has been added to the British Legation staff in order to prepare the British case. The threat to the Iranians that economic help or shipping space will be withheld in the event of revaluation is a very powerful weapon in British hands and will probably prove successful in preventing such action.

Dreyfus

26  Ante, p. 227 [Pg. 227 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244].

27 See footnote 94, p. 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241].

The Chief of the Financial Division (Livesey) to the Financial Counselor of the British Embassy (Stopford) 891.515/15

[Document 343]

The Chief of the Financial Division (Livesey) to the Financial Counselor of the British Embassy (Stopford)

Washington, April 4, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Stopford: The Department has carefully considered the suggestion in your letter of March 17, 194228 that the United States Minister in Tehran be authorized to support the British Minister in resisting an increase in the pound sterling value of the rial. It does not appear to the Department, however, that our intervention with the Iranian authorities with regard to this matter would be advisable at this time.

Sincerely yours,

Frederick Livesey

28 Not printed; for substance of letter, see telegram No. 75, March 23, 11 p.m., to the Minister in Iran, p. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State 741.9111/60: Telegram

[Document 344]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, April 8, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received 8:05 p.m.]

1697. From informal conversations of Casaday29 and Penrose30 with Keynes,31 it is clear that the British are greatly concerned over the attitude of the Iranian Government towards British transactions in Iran. It appears that the Iranians are refusing to accept sterling balances and demanding either that more goods or gold be delivered to her or that sterling shall be depreciated in terms of the local currency. Failing this, they are refusing to give local currency in exchange for sterling at present rates of exchange, thus creating serious obstacles in the way of local British transactions.

The British are prevented by shipping difficulties from sending additional goods and are opposed both to sending gold and to any depreciation of sterling in terms of the local currency, since such depreciation would set a different ratio of exchange between the dollar and sterling in Iran from that in other countries and would set an undesirable precedent for other Middle Eastern countries.

They believe that in any case concessions on these matters would be followed by further Persian demands and that a firm stand must be taken on present issues. Following experiences in the last war they suspect that one motive behind present demands is a desire to create opportunities of postwar enrichment for highly placed persons in the governing group. In view of a recent announcement of American Lease-Lend aid for Persia32 the British would appreciate Anglo-American cooperation in dealing with this matter.

We understand that a cable on this question is being sent to Lord Halifax.33

Please inform Treasury.

Matthews

29 Laurens W. Casaday, an agent for the Treasury Department in the United Kingdom.

30 E. J. Penrose, Special Assistant at the American Embassy.

31 John Maynard Keynes, member of the Consultation Committee of the Chancellor of the Exchequer.

32 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] ff.

33 British Ambassador in the United States.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 741.9111/63

[Document 345]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

The military responsibilities which His Majesty’s Government have undertaken in Iran are costing them some £1,000,000 a month in local currency. The Iranian Government are refusing to provide this local currency against sterling, and are demanding either more sterling area goods or else gold or silver. His Majesty’s Government cannot, however, increase imports of sterling area goods on account of shipping difficulties and the need for using the available port capacity largely for Russian supplies.

On the other hand to pay in gold involves the risk that this would lead to similar demands from other parts of the Middle East, involving too heavy a burden on limited reserves.

Would the State Department be willing to cause strong representations to be made in Tehran for the supply to the British authorities of local currency needed for our common purposes against sterling and indicating that failing this lend-lease arrangements must be held in abeyance?

Another method of pressure suggested by His Majesty’s Minister in Iran would be to threaten to freeze Iranian balances. This could only be done with United States cooperation, since without such cooperation such a measure would merely increase the Iranian reluctance to acquire sterling.

Alternatively would the United States endeavour to obtain local currency for His Majesty’s Government against dollars?

The matter is one of some urgency since His Majesty’s Government will have no reserves of local currency left to draw upon before a month has elapsed, and they are most reluctant to take such steps as to threaten to withhold supplies. United States cooperation would also be invaluable in helping His Majesty’s Government to obtain surplus war material from the Iranian Government, who are refusing on political and financial grounds to sell any more.

His Majesty’s Government suggest that in any case, since Iran has foreign currency in excess of her import possibilities, any lend-lease supplies furnished should be in return for the equivalent in local currency.

Washington , April 11, 1942.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) 741.9111/68

[Document 346]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)

[Washington,] April 20, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Berle34

Mr. Murray

Mr. Bewley, British Embassy35

Mr. Hayter, British Embassy.36

At Mr. Berle’s request, Mr. Bewley and Mr. Hayter of the British Embassy called to discuss the disagreement which has arisen between the British and Iranian Governments as a result of the reluctance of the Iranians to purchase sterling exchange and authorize the expansion of Iranian currency circulation to meet the needs of British operations in Iran.

Mr. Berle referred to the substance of the British Aide-Mémoire left with Mr. Alling by Mr. Hayter on April 11, 1942,37 in which inquiry was made as to whether this Government would be willing “to cause strong representations to be made in Tehran for the supply to the British authorities of local currency needed for our common purposes against sterling and indicating that failing this, Lend-Lease arrangements must be held in abeyance.” Mr. Berle also referred to the British suggestion that we bring pressure on the Iranians to meet the British demands by threatening to freeze Iranian balances in this country.

Even if measures suggested by the British were practicable on political grounds Mr. Berle felt that they would be useless as instruments of pressure upon the Iranians for the simple reason that the amount of Iranian funds in this country is very small and that a threat to withhold goods under Lend-Lease from the Iranians would hardly be an impressive argument when no such goods have thus far gone forward. Furthermore, if we decided to send goods to Iran under Lend-Lease it would be for our own specific advantage, which we would not be willing to forego for reasons now being put forth by the British.

Turning to the political considerations involved, Mr. Berle felt that a dangerous internal situation might be created if we joined with the British to use the “mailed fist” on the Iranians, which would only serve to drive them further into Axis hands. It had to be remembered that the maintenance of security in Iran for purposes of transit to Russia was of vital concern to us all and that it would serve no useful purpose to take any action that would contribute to a deterioration of the internal situation of the country and thus bring about a greater drain on British military forces to police the country and preserve order. Both Mr. Bewley and Mr. Hayter said they fully agreed with Mr. Berle in that regard.

Turning then to a practical solution which we wished to present to the British, Mr. Berle observed that the present British demands on the Iranians entail certain very distinct disadvantages for Iran and that the Iranians are not unreasonably unwilling to build up further blocked sterling balances. The Iranians are, on the other hand, apparently ready to sell rials for gold or dollars. In response to the British inquiry as to whether we would endeavor to obtain local currency for the British Government against dollars, Mr. Berle stated that the question of increasing the British supply of dollars was now being canvassed by the Treasury and he understood that negotiations were in progress with the British on that subject. He therefore wanted to put forward the proposal for British consideration as to whether they might not be prepared to pay in dollars for the Iranian currency needed in Iran. We, in turn, would endeavor to find some means of insuring the maintenance by the British Government of adequate dollar balances that would more than meet their needs in Iran.

This proposal seemed to be entirely agreeable to Mr. Bewley and Mr. Hayter, and Mr. Bewley said he would put it up at once to his Government by telegraph and give us a reply at the earliest possible moment.

Brief mention was made of the alternative of providing the British with the necessary amount of dollars under Lend-Lease, but it was generally agreed that this would be highly inadvisable and in Mr. Bewley’s opinion might create a situation like that of the World War debts which we all wanted to avoid.

Reference was then made to the question of purchasing certain Iranian military supplies, particularly army trucks. It was felt that there would be no difficulty in making these purchases under Lend-Lease for the British if the need arose. It was pointed out, however, that it would be unwise to deplete too greatly the Iranian supply of trucks since they are apparently needed at the present time for the transporting of food and troops necessary for internal security in the country.

After the conference, I communicated with Mr. Harry White38 of the Treasury and informed him of the discussion that had taken place with the two British officials and of the suggestion which Mr. Berle had made to them as a possible solution of the monetary difficulty being experienced by the British in Iran. Mr. White was very pleased to receive this information as he said he was going into conference this afternoon on the related problem of assuring adequate dollar balances for the British. He said he would appreciate being informed as soon as possible as to the reaction of the British Government to the proposal made by Mr. Berle.

34 Adolf A. Berle, Jr., Assistant Secretary of State.

35 Representative of the British Treasury.

36 W. G. Hayter, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

37  Supra.

38 Assistant to the Secretary of the Treasury.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 891.24/193

[Document 347]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington ], April 27, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Hayter, British Embassy;

Mr. Bewley, British Treasury;

Mr. Murray;

Mr. Alling;39

Mr. Jernegan.

Mr. Bewley and Mr. Hayter called to present the British reply to the proposition made to them by Mr. Berle on April 20, 1942, whereby the Department suggested that the British purchase Iranian currency with dollars rather than pounds sterling, on the understanding that the United States would endeavor to find means of insuring the maintenance of adequate dollar balances by the British Government.

Mr. Bewley said that London entirely agreed with our view that the application of economic pressure on the Iranian Government in connection with the dispute should be avoided if possible. The British Government, therefore, was disposed to give favorable consideration to our proposal. However, for reasons of prestige, London felt that it would be preferable if the actual purchase of rials could be made by the United States rather than by the British. That is, London proposed that we should obtain the rials and turn them over for British use in Iran. In theory, at least, the British would repay us for these rials by a transfer to the United States in some form or other of the equivalent in dollars.

Mr. Bewley and Mr. Hayter did not attempt to set forth the exact procedure which might be followed in carrying out this operation, and it was agreed by all present at the meeting that this would be a matter for consideration by the Treasury.

Mr. Bewley and Mr. Hayter were informed that the British proposal would be referred immediately to the appropriate officers of the Department and to the Treasury and that we would let them know our views at the earliest possible moment, it being understood that the question is urgent in view of the fact that British supplies of Iranian currency will probably be exhausted within some ten days.

With respect to the question of obtaining certain surplus Iranian military supplies, Mr. Bewley said that the British Government gladly fell in with the American offer to purchase this material with dollars and transfer it to the British forces under Lend-Lease procedure. He was told that we would take this up immediately with the proper officers of the Department and the Lend-Lease Administration. Mr. Murray pointed out, however, that it would not be desirable from the point of view of either Great Britain or the United States to purchase Iranian transport equipment such as trucks in so great an amount as to weaken seriously the country’s transportation facilities. Mr. Hayter and Mr. Bewley agreed and suggested that this could be borne in mind by our own representatives on the ground who would be charged with making the purchases.

39 Paul H. Alling, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Financial Division (Luthringer) 891.5151/232

[Document 348]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Financial Division (Luthringer)

[Washington,] April 28, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Harry White, Mr. Hicks, Treasury Department;

Mr. Livesey, Mr. Luthringer, Financial Division.

Mr. Livesey and Mr. Luthringer called on Mr. Harry White by appointment and presented him with a copy of the attached memorandum of conversation, dated April 27, 1942,40 from which the last paragraph had been omitted. Mr. White said that he saw no objection to providing the British with rials which the Treasury had purchased if they were paid for by the British in dollars under arrangements which would prevent the Treasury from incurring any exchange loss. He was emphatically against any arrangement whereby we simply “turned over” rials to the British against some general British commitment to repay in the future or against some very general arrangement such as Lend-Lease in which this particular item would simply figure among the general British obligations to the United States. He said further that he thought that it would be out of keeping with the general nature and tenor of the arrangements which we were currently working out with the British for maintaining an adequate supply of dollar exchange to specifically pair their expenditures to us for rials against any specific source of increase in British dollar assets. Mr. White said that Treasury had recently worked out a specific arrangement whereby British dollar holdings had been increased by $70,000,000. He said that in effecting this arrangement Treasury very definitely had had in mind possible drains on British dollar assets for such purposes as purchase of Iranian rials.

Mr. Livesey and Mr. Luthringer expressed concurrence with Mr. White’s view and it was agreed that the best procedure at this point would be for the Department to inform Bewley and Hayter that we had discussed the matter further with the Treasury, that the Treasury through the stabilization fund or otherwise would, we believe, find it possible to purchase rials for resale to the British for dollars and that if this was agreeable to the British we suggest that they discuss the technical details with Mr. Harry White of the Treasury Department.41

40  Supra.

41 Notation by Mr. Luthringer April 29, 1942: “I telephoned Mr. Haider [Hayter] of the British Embassy and suggested that he might now take the matter up with Mr. Harry White.”

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.5151/227: Telegram

[Document 349]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 29, 1942—noon.
[Received 12:04 p.m.]

127. Conversations between British Legation and Iranian Government on financial matters continue in more cordial atmosphere with hopes of success. British Legation would welcome settlement along following lines:

(1) Iranian Government to supply rials against sale of sterling at controlled rate of exchange to be fixed for duration of war, (2) British to convert sterling into dollars insofar as dollars are needed for imports, (3) British to convert part of sterling into gold and guarantee remaining balances against depreciation in terms of gold. British Legation believes Iranians would agree to such a settlement with right to convert from one-third to one-half of sterling balances into gold. London, however, for reasons of prestige purposes appears to favor obtaining rials through sale of dollars by American Government.

While Iranians will probably agree to some such solution they would be more pleased arrangement suggested in Department’s 102, April 25.42 The principal stumbling block will be rate of exchange. Iranians taking advantage of their growing foreign exchange balances wish to push rate up to somewhere between 80 and 120. I agree with British that settlement should be made only on basis of fixed exchange rate preferably present 140 but not lower than 120. If rate is not fixed there will be ever greater pressure to alter it upward as dollar and sterling balances accrue thus making our commitments in Iran an uncertain and always increasing quantity. It should be emphasized that Iran’s present favorable foreign exchange situation does not arise out of ordinary commercial transactions but rather from allied war work in Iran much of which will be of lasting benefit to this country. I suggest that the generous arrangement suggested by Department might be used as a bargaining point to obtain equitable treatment as to exchange rate.

Dreyfus

42 Not printed. The arrangement suggested was that contained in the last two sentences of the fifth paragraph of the memorandum of April 20, p. 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 346].

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Financial Division (Luthringer) to the Chief of the Financial Division (Livesey) 891.5151/236

[Document 350]

Memorandum by the Assistant Chief of the Financial Division (Luthringer) to the Chief of the Financial Division (Livesey)

[Washington,] April 30, 1942.

Mr. Livesey: Telegrams nos. 2269 from London43 and 127 from Tehran, both under date of April 29, indicate that the British have adopted a far more conciliatory attitude toward the Iranians than had previously been indicated in London’s 1697 of April 8, reports from the American Minister at Tehran or by the British Embassy at Washington. The American Minister at Tehran had previously reported that the situation was at an impasse. The telegram of April 8 from London specifically states that the British are opposed to sending gold to Iran and indicates a British opinion that a firm stand must be taken on the issues with Iran. The British Embassy at Washington twice requested that we join the British in putting pressure on Iran.

The last telegrams from London and Tehran indicate that, whether as a result of our conversations with the British or for other reasons is not clear, the British have modified their views as to the desirability of putting pressure on Iran and are now willing to offer concessions which, had they been put forward sooner, might have prevented the situation from getting strained. Thus, according to Waley of the British Treasury, the British are now offering to send some gold to Iran. In addition, the British Legation in Iran apparently is willing that the gold value of Iranian sterling balances be guaranteed, and even further the British offer to convert Iranian sterling into dollars to the extent that is necessary to purchase imports for Iran.

It is not clear to what extent the British Treasury and Foreign Office will go along with the British Legation in Tehran. It also is not clear to what extent the British Embassy at Washington has been kept informed of the apparently altered views of the British Treasury. I suppose there is a further possibility that the British Treasury and British Foreign Office have not been meshing on the matter. To add to this somewhat confused picture, Waley asserts that the British Treasury is discussing the question of making gold available to Iran with our Treasury, whereas, as you know, the first intimation which Mr. White had of these Iranian difficulties was London’s telegram of April 8 and the Department’s subsequent discussion of the matter with him.

I do not know, however, that the apparent confusion arising from more or less simultaneous discussions in three different capitals has caused any real harm. So far as our Department is concerned, we have: (a) secured agreement on our main political point that we think it inadvisable to coerce the Iranians on this question, and (b) have cleared the way with the Treasury for participation by that Department in some arrangement whereby rials may be secured for the British with dollars, if the British do not prefer to purchase rials with dollars directly on their own account. I should think that both this Department and the Treasury would be glad to have the British make concessions to Iran which would reduce the amount of rials which it would be necessary to purchase with dollars, or at least would have no objection to such arrangements. Since we have advised Haider [Hayter] to get directly in touch with Mr. White on the technical financial arrangements, I do not believe that at present there is any further action which we need to take in the matter. If the British still want the assistance of our Treasury Department, they will doubtless make the request directly to the Treasury.

If our Treasury is requested to purchase rials for British account, I suppose that either in the course of setting up such an arrangement with an Iranian bank, or through this Department, the Treasury will wish to make sure that there is nothing in the Iranian exchange control regulations which would prevent our sale of rials to the British.

43 Not printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.5151/229: Telegram

[Document 351]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 3, 1942—noon.
[Received May 3—9:49 a.m.]

137. Referring to my No. 127, April 29, noon. British Legation acting under instructions and Iranian Government have reached tentative and informal agreement along following lines: (1) Iranians to guarantee supply of rials to be issued against sterling holdings.

(2) British to convert sterling into gold to meet Iranian dollar imports.

(3) British to convert 35% of remaining Iranian sterling holdings to gold.

(4) Exchange rate to be fixed at 32 rials per dollar and 128 per pound.

Council of Ministers last night approved the plan but requested alteration of exchange rate to 124. British [Legation] has telegraphed foregoing to London and awaits final instructions.44

Dreyfus

44 A formal financial agreement between the United Kingdom and Iran was signed at Tehran, May 26, 1942.

Agreement with the United Kingdom for American operation of the southern section of the Trans-Iranian Railroad and conditional consent of the Iranian GovernmentAgreement with the United Kingdom for American operation of the southern section of the Trans-Iranian Railroad45 and conditional consent of the Iranian Government

45 For further information on this subject, see T. H. Vail Motter, The Persian Corridor and Aid to Russia, in the series United States Army in World War II: The Middle East Theater (Washington, Government Printing Office, 1952), pp. 177–191, passim.

[352] President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)

Washington, July 15, 1942.

[353] The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt

London, August 22, 1942.

[354] Mr. W. Averell Harriman to President Roosevelt

Cairo, August 22, 1942.

[355] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 23, 1942—6 p.m. [Received November 24—11:47 a.m.]

891.77/706: Telegram

[356] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 25, 1942—7 p.m.

891.77/706: Telegram

[357] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 13, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.]

891.77/708: Telegram

[358] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 23, 1942—4 p.m.

891.77/708: Telegram

[359] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] December 24, 1942.

891.77/714

[360] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 30, 1942.

891.77/713

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill) [Document 352]

President Roosevelt to the British Prime Minister (Churchill)46

Washington, July 15, 1942.

166. After consultation with King47 I must reluctantly agree to the position which the Admiralty has taken regarding the Russian convoy to the North48 and I think your message to Stalin49 is a good one. I assume you will send it at once.50

In the meantime we must omit nothing that will increase the traffic through Persia.

A suggestion has been made that American railway men take over the operation of the railroad. Have you any opinion about this? They are first class at this sort of thing.

Roosevelt

46 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

47 Adm. Ernest J. King, Chief of Naval Operations.

48 See telegram No. 3908, July 15, 2 p.m., from the Ambassador in the United Kingdom, vol. iii, p. 714.

49 Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin, President of the Council of People’s Commissars (Premier) of the Soviet Union.

50 For text of letter sent July 17, see Winston S. Churchill, The Second World War: The Hinge of Fate (Boston, 1950), p. 267.

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt [Document 353]

The British Prime Minister (Churchill) to President Roosevelt 46

London, August 22, 1942.51

134. Your 166 of 16th [15th] July. I have delayed my reply until I could study the Trans Persian situation on the spot. This I have now done both at Teheran and here, and have conferred with Averell,52 General Maxwell,53 General Spalding54 and their railway experts. The traffic on the Trans Persian Railway is expected to reach three thousand tons a day for all purposes by end of the year. We are all convinced that it ought to be raised to six thousand tons. Only in this way can we ensure an expanding flow of supplies to Russia while building up the military forces which we must move into Northern Persia to meet a possible German advance.

To reach the higher figure, it will be necessary to increase largely the railway personnel and to provide additional quantities of rolling stock and technical equipment. Furthermore, the target will only be attained in reasonable time if enthusiasm and energy are devoted to the task and a high priority accorded to its requirements.

I therefore welcome and accept your most helpful proposal contained in your telegram, that the railway should be taken over, developed and operated by the United States Army. With the railway should be included the ports of Khorramnshahr and Bandarshahpur. Your people would thus undertake the great task of opening up the Persian corridor, which will carry primarily your supplies to Russia. All our people here agree on the benefits which would follow your approval of this suggestion. We should be unable to find the resources without your help and our burden in the Middle East would be eased by the release for use elsewhere of the British Units now operating the railway. The railway and ports would be managed entirely by your people, though the allocation of traffic would have to be retained in the hands of the British Military Authorities for whom the railway is an essential channel of communication for operational purposes. I see no obstacle in this to harmonious working.

The changeover would have to be carefully planned to avoid any temporary reduction of effort, but I think it should start as soon as possible. Averell is cabling you detailed suggestions.

Prime

46 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

51 Prime Minister Churchill was in Cairo on August 22; file copy of this message, however, bears the dateline London.

52 W. Averell Harriman, Representative in London of the Combined Production and Resources Board (Lend-Lease Coordinator).

53 Maj. Gen. Russell L. Maxwell, Commanding General of United States Army Forces in the Middle East.

54 Brig. Gen. Sidney P. Spalding, member of the Munitions Assignments Board, United States–Great Britain; for his assignment to undertake a survey of the supply route to the Soviet Union by way of the Persian Gulf, see telegram No. 188, July 8, 4 a m., to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union, vol. iii, p. 713.

Mr. W. Averell Harriman to President Roosevelt [Document 354]

Mr. W. Averell Harriman to President Roosevelt 55

Cairo, August 22, 1942.

856. Reference the Prime Minister’s cable to you56 requesting that the responsibility for the development and operation of that part of the Persian Railroad now under British control be taken over by the United States Army and also the ports serving it.

This request has resulted from protracted discussions between us all here and expresses the considered judgment of the British Officers involved both in Iran and Cairo.

Generals Maxwell, Spalding and other United States Officers who have been studying the situation agree (a) that with proper management and personnel and with additional equipment the capacity of the railroad to Teheran can be increased to six thousand long tons a day (b) that the British have not the resources of personnel to carry out this program even if we should supply the equipment (c) that unless the United States Army undertakes the task the flow of supplies to Russia will dry up as the requirements of the British Forces in the theatre increase (d) that the importance of the development of this railroad to its maximum cannot be over-emphasized (e) that the condition in the Prime Minister’s cable of the British retaining control of traffic to be moved is reasonable, offers no practical difficulty and should be accepted.

We therefore recommend that the task be undertaken.

Although the mileage of the railroad is not great its operation presents difficult problems due to heavy grades, long tunnels and climatic conditions as well as those of a political nature in dealing with the Iranians and the Russians and the task should not be undertaken unless it is accepted as one of great importance and be given the necessary priority for both the full personnel and equipment needed.

It is therefore recommended: (a) that a top calibre railroad man with the position of operating Vice President or General Manager of a Western Railroad be drafted and commissioned in the army with rank of Brigadier General. He should be vigorous and young, not much over fifty with experience on mountain and desert operations. Ability to handle relations with different nationalities is an essential quality; (b) this man should organize a party of about twenty to twenty-five key men and proceed by air to Iran at the earliest moment possible; (c) two railroad operating and one engineer shop battalions should be despatched by sea promptly; (d) the method of gradually taking over control should be worked out on the ground with the British; (e) Colonel J. P. Johnson formerly mechanical engineer of the Sante Fe who has spent several months in the railroad and who is now with us in Cairo should be ordered to Washington at once to assist in shaping the program.

The turn around of ships in the ports referred to is deplorably slow. Three port battalions will be needed to operate efficiently all of the ports servicing the railroad. There is one port battalion now in Karachi which has not been allowed to function due to labor union restrictions. This battalion should be transferred to Khurramshahr promptly and the two others despatched from the United States when possible. The resulting saving of ships’ time will pay a good dividend.

The British are also asking for help with trucks and personnel to increase the road transports. Details of this request General Spalding is cabling to Somervell57 and Burns.58 I join in recommending favorable action. This is an important proposal but of second priority to the railroad and ports.

[ Harriman ]

[In telegram No. 148, September 14, the British Prime Minister apprised President Roosevelt of information from Mr. Harriman that the question of the operation of the Trans-Persian Railway had been settled and requested President Roosevelt to send his final plan. The President replied the next day in telegram No. 186 that “We are prepared to take over the Persian Railway and all plans now being developed.” (Copies of telegrams No. 148 and No. 186 obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.) For the development of these plans, see Motter, The Persian Corridor and Aid to Russia, pages 191–198.]

55 Copy of telegram obtained from the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, N.Y.

56  Supra.

57 Lt. Gen. Brehon Somervell, United States member of the Munitions Assignments Board, United States–Great Britain.

58 Maj. Gen. James H. Burns, Executive, Munitions Assignments Board, United States–Great Britain.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.77/706: Telegram

[Document 355]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, November 23, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received November 24—11:47 a.m.]

398. British Legation is seeking authority from Minister of State Cairo.

(1) To notify Iran Government formally that American military authorities are taking over operation southern section Trans-Iranian railway and

(2) After official notification is given to make public statement of this fact, stating also that allocation of traffic on railway will continue to be effected by British personnel.

Colonel Yount and I agree that official notification should be given Iranian Government since our military authorities will soon have to carry on certain negotiations with Iranian Government in this regard. However, we both feel that a public statement at this time would serve no purpose and might even be harmful since our personnel are now on the high seas. I should appreciate Department’s instructions and in meantime will not agree to any public statement.

Dreyfus

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.77/706: Telegram

[Document 356]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, November 25, 1942—7 p.m.

341. Your 398, November 23. Department agrees that Iran Government should be officially informed. We regard question of public statement as matter for decision by Persian Gulf Service Command. War Department concurs.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.77/708: Telegram

[Document 357]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, December 13, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 9:30 p.m.]

435. Subject of Department’s 34159 discussed with Foreign Minister60 who has given consent of Iran Government to American operation southern section Trans-Iranian Railway subject to approval British and Russian Governments as required by Tripartite Pact.61 British approval given and Soviet Ambassador has requested authority from his Government for similar approval.

After stressing pleasure of Iranians to have railroad operated by Americans, Prime Minister suggested since operation necessitated presence of American Armed Forces in Iran their presence should be regularized by signing agreement between our two Governments. Department’s instructions in this regard would be appreciated.

General Andrews62 now in Tehran urged the advisability of arranging with Iran Government that jurisdiction over infractions of law by members of United States Forces should remain with United States authorities.

Dreyfus

59  Supra.

60 All Soheily.

61 Treaty of Alliance, signed at Tehran, January 29, 1942, Department of State Bulletin, March 21, 1942, p. 249.

62 Lt. Gen. Frank M. Andrews, Commander of American Forces in the Middle Bast.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.77/708: Telegram

[Document 358]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, December 23, 1942—4 p.m.

390. Your 435, December 13. Department would prefer not to conclude any general, over-all agreement covering presence of American armed forces in Iran but rather to conclude individual ad hoc agreements to cover specific problems as they arise. This is the policy which has been followed in other foreign territories, such as Egypt, where American troops are stationed.

Consideration is being given to preparation of draft agreement to take care of question of jurisdiction over offenses which may be committed by members of American armed forces.

Hull

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.77/714

[Document 359]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] December 24, 1942.

The Minister63 called at his request and brought up the subject of the operation by the American Army of the Trans-Iranian Railroad. He said that according to his understanding, the United States Army was to operate the southern section of the railroad, that is, the part between Bandar Shahpur and Tehran, while the Russians were to continue to operate the northern part beyond Tehran. I told him that that was also my understanding. He said that this division of responsibility was bound to bring unsatisfactory results and that, in his opinion, it would be to the advantage of all concerned—Americans, Russians and Iranians—to have the American Army operate the entire line. I told him that I could appreciate his point of view, but that I had no information as to the local considerations which had brought about the decision to have the American Army operate only a portion of the line. The Minister was most insistent that his point of view be taken into consideration. I gathered the impression that he felt that the Russians would be likely to let the portion of the line that they are operating deteriorate and that after the war, the Iranians would find themselves with a sadly inferior section of railroad.

The Minister then went on to bring up another question in regard to the railroad. He said that we would recall that under the Tripartite Agreement, Iran had granted the Russians and the British the right to operate the Trans-Iranian Railroad. He was somewhat concerned that since part of the line was now about to be operated by the American Army, the Russians and British might later insist that this was not a complete fulfillment of the terms of the Tripartite Agreement. Subsequently, upon reviewing the matter, it was ascertained that the British had already informed the Iranians that they had no objection to American operation of the line. According to the same telegram from Tehran,64 the Soviet Ambassador was seeking authority from his Government to give similar assurance to the Iranians. The Minister was informed of this information, but he did not seem to be convinced that British and Russian approval had, in fact, been given. It might be desirable to check on this point with our Legation at Tehran.

63 Mohammed Schayesteh, Iranian Minister.

64 Reference is probably to telegram No. 435, December 13, 2 p.m., from the Minister in Iran, p. 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357].

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 891.77/713

[Document 360]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 30, 1942.

The Minister65 referred to the recent formal notification to the Iranian Government of the proposed transfer to the American Army of responsibility for the operation of the southern section of the Transiranian Railroad. It appeared that he had received a cable from his Government on this subject.

He said that it seemed unwise to divide operations between the Americans in the south and the Russians in the north, since there would be danger of a bottleneck developing at the point of junction (presumably Tehran). He also appeared to feel that the Russians would not devote sufficient attention to the maintenance of their section and would ultimately turn it back to Iranian control in bad condition.

The Minister suggested that the Department discuss this question with the War Department, with a view to determining whether steps should not be taken looking toward American operation of the entire railroad system. He expressed the belief that the Russian Government would not be reluctant to agree to such an arrangement. Although he did not specifically say so, it seemed probable that this suggestion was made under instructions from the Iranian Government.

I told the Minister that I did not know what factors might influence our policy in this matter. In particular, I pointed out that our Army might not feel that it could spare the personnel and equipment necessary to operate the northern section of the line. However, I said that I would bring his remarks to the attention of the appropriate persons in the Department and the War Department. The Minister said that he understood perfectly that there might be considerations which would prevent us from taking action at this time.

The Minister also mentioned the desirability, from the Iranian point of view, of having clear-cut assent by the British and Soviet Governments to our operation of the railroad. He said that this was necessary to avoid any question as to Iranian obligations under the Anglo-Russian-Iranian Treaty of Alliance. I told the Minister that we had received a cable from our Legation at Tehran, dated December 13, stating that British consent had been given and that the Soviet Ambassador was cabling his Government on the subject. He agreed that this appeared satisfactory but said that the cable he had received only a few days before his conversation with me had specifically stated that British and Russian assent had not been received.

65 The Iranian Minister.

Concern of the United States regarding Kurdish disorders in Soviet-occupied province of AzerbaijanConcern of the United States regarding Kurdish disorders in Soviet-occupied province of Azerbaijan

[361] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 1, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 8:32 p.m.]

891.00/1862: Telegram

[362] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 3, 1942—1 p.m. [Received May 3—10:16 a.m.]

891.00/1865: Telegram

[363] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 3, 1942—4 p.m. [Received May 3—9:53 a.m.]

891.00/1866: Telegram

[364] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, May 4, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 9 p.m.]

891.00/1867: Telegram

[365] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Standley)

Washington, May 6, 1942—11 p.m.

891.00/1862: Telegram

[366] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 8, 1942—1 p.m. [Received May 8—12:19 p.m.]

891.00/1869: Telegram

[367] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Standley) to the Secretary of State

Kuibyshev (Moscow), May 10, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 5:50 p.m.]

891.00/1870: Telegram

[368] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 12, 1942—noon. [Received 9:55 p.m.]

891.00/1871: Telegram

[369] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 15, 1942—1 p.m. [Received May 16—8:40 a.m.]

891.00/1874: Telegram

[370] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 16, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 8:16 p.m.]

891.00/1875: Telegram

[371] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 28, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 11:17 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24546: Telegram

[372] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 7, 1942—3 p.m. [Received October 7—12:39 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24704: Telegram

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1862: Telegram

[Document 361]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 1, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 8:32 p.m.]

134. Kuniholm66 reports deterioration of situation at Rezaieh where Kurds are attacking 800 gendarmes outside city and demand (1) a treaty (2) right to circulate armed in city and (3) abolition of gendarmes’ posts. He is of opinion that Iranian troops must be allowed to proceed to that region if conditions are to improve. He fears if Russians suffer reverses in Caucasia whole of Azerbaijan will, in absence of strong military forces, fall prey to attack and pillage by Kurds. Situation he says might improve were Soviets to let Kurds know they disapprove of their action.

Seriousness of situation in Rezaieh is confirmed by other sources and it is said several towns are surrounded by Kurds. Prime Minister67 gave me copy of note he is addressing to Soviet Ambassador in which he attributes alarming conditions at Rezaieh to Soviet refusal to permit troops to proceed there. He stated Iranian Government has right to expect to receive such permission in view of its treaty with Russia. Shah called me yesterday and talked at length along some [same] lines. He suggested bitterly than [that] Iran is treated in this shabby manner because she is small and weak and that Russians and British would not dare to treat Turkey in similar manner. Iran he said is in treaty relations with Russia as an oversize [a sovereign] state and there is no reason why Iranian troops should be denied right to maintain law and order. He expressed hope that help from United States in this regard would be forthcoming. I feel that representations to the Soviet Government along these lines would be helpful.

I discussed matter with Soviet Ambassador who expressed belief that Iranian gendarmes are sufficient in number to maintain order at Rezaieh if they really tried. I do not agree with this opinion.

Press apparently in fear of Soviet or under their domination plays down conditions in north and refers frequently to Iran’s good relations with northern neighbor.

In British zone in central Kurdistan there have been large scale clash[es] between Iranian troops and Kurds under leadership of Hamarashid with many casualties. It is reported that morale of Iranian troops there is low and that Kurds have firm grip on some sections.

Strong military action seems to be necessary if Kurdish disturbances are to be put down. However, a long range solution must be found along lines suggested by British (see end of my despatch 212, February 1968 ). Iranian Government recognize necessity of this and a committee has already been set up to examine into tribal grievances and seek broad solution.

Dreyfus

66 Bertel E. Kuniholm, Consul at Tabriz.

67 Ali Soheily.

68 Not printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1865: Telegram

[Document 362]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 3, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received May 3—10:16 a.m.]

138. Referring to my no. 134, May 1, 4 p.m. The Prime Minister handed me in confidence a copy of a telegram he sent in French on April 30 to Molotov69 with copy to Eden.70 A translation follows: “In order to prevent eventual disorders in Azerbaijan, the Iranian Government has wished on several occasions to send sufficient forces to Rezaieh. The Soviet military authorities have always opposed this in express contradiction to the terms of the Treaty of Alliance71 and contrary to the close collaboration which should be established between the two Governments after its signature. The apprehensions of the Iranian Government have unfortunately become a reality. According to information received during the last few days armed hands [bands?] and Kurdish rebels are devastating the country and besieging defenceless Rezaieh. Thousands of peasants and peaceful inhabitants, whose property has been pillaged, have had to abandon their fields and homes to take refuge in the city where famine already reigns. Regrettable incidents of pillage and massacre may recur at any moment. I consider it my duty to bring these facts directly to your knowledge, begging you to please issue immediate orders to the Soviet military authorities not to thwart the measures being taken by the Government to collaborate with the local Iranian authorities to maintain order until the arrival of Iranian troops. I beg you to please lend your good offices to obtain this favorable result.”

Dreyfus

69 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, Soviet People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs.

70 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

71 Signed at Tehran, January 29, 1942, Department of State Bulletin, March 21, 1942, p. 249.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1866: Telegram

[Document 363]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 3, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received May 3—9:53 a.m.]

139. My number 134. Kuniholm reports as follows: May 2, 2 p.m. Soviet Consul General, commanding officer Red troops, Iranian officials, and Kurds have met at Askerabad village near Rezaieh. Kurds have resented [presented] series of demands which must be discussed further at Tehran as well as by Russians. Soviet Consul General has appealed to Kurds to disband and go home. Kurdish depredations continue.

Dreyfus

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1867: Telegram

[Document 364]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, May 4, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 9 p.m.]

362. Iranian Ambassador called on me this morning and informed me as follows:

Iranian Government is seriously concerned with disturbances taking place among Kurds in Azerbaijan, principally in neighborhood of Urmia and Lake Urmia. Although large Soviet forces believed to number 20,000 troops including mechanized units are occupying Azerbaijan they have taken no steps to suppress or discourage activities of about 3,000 Kurds but are believed to be encouraging their rebellious conduct. Repeated requests by Iranian Government for permission to send its own forces into this area for purpose of dealing with Kurds have been refused by Soviet. Iranian Government continues desirous of suppressing these disorders and would be glad to send necessary forces [to] accomplish this purpose if Soviet authorities will grant necessary permission. Iranian Government is suspicious of motives of Soviet force of occupation in not taking necessary measures.

Ambassador expressed opinion that motive of Soviet Government in refusing permission to Iranian authorities to enter area where disturbances have been taking place or in alternative taking action themselves is to bring pressure to bear on Turk Government in connection with future demands by engendering fear that disorders will spread to Kurds on Turkish side of frontier.

I have learned from his son-in-law that Iranian Ambassador in Kuibyshev called on Stalin in Moscow about 2 weeks ago to discuss foregoing subject.

Repeated to Tehran and Kuibyshev.

Steinhardt

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Standley) 891.00/1862: Telegram

[Document 365]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Standley)

Washington, May 6, 1942—11 p.m.

203. The Legation at Tehran reports that activities of rebellious Kurdish tribes in Rezaieh section of Azerbaijan are creating a serious situation, which Iranian Government is unable to handle because of Soviet refusal to permit return of Iranian troops to that region. Iranian Government has protested to Soviet and requested their collaboration in accordance with letter and spirit of the Anglo-Russian-Iranian treaty of alliance. The Shah has expressed the hope that the United States would support the Iranian position.

If you perceive no objection, please endeavor to find an occasion to discuss the concern of your Government at the disorder which appears to have prevailed recently in North Kurdistan. In the course of your conversation you may advance the following as some of the reasons for your Government’s anxiety: 1: As the Soviet Government is undoubtedly aware, the Axis propaganda agencies have been making great capital out of the Kurdish uprisings, which they charge are fomented and encouraged by the Russians as part of a plan to annex the portions of Iran now occupied by Soviet forces. This propaganda, which is directed especially at Turkey and Iraq, as well as Iran, might well have very unfortunate repercussions on the position of the United Nations in that vital area.

2: American lives and property are endangered. The wife of an American correspondent has already been killed by Kurds not far from Tabriz.

3: On one occasion the Axis radio stated that forces of Rashid Ali Gailani, rebel Iraqi leader, had joined the Kurds in Iran. While this may not be true, it is felt that the Kurdish revolt nevertheless offers a potential opportunity which could be exploited by the enemy and might even create difficulties in connection with the maintenance of the supply line to Russia via Iran.

In the light of the above, this Government hopes that the Soviet Government will take such steps as may be necessary to enable the authorities responsible for the maintenance of law and order to put an end to the existing disorders.

The Iranian Government is not being informed of this communication and you should not indicate to the Soviet Government that the intervention of the United States was requested by Iran.

For your information, local Soviet and Iranian officials in Azerbaijan met with Kurdish leaders a few days ago, and it is understood that demands of the Kurds have been referred to Tehran and the appropriate Russian authorities.

Please keep Department promptly informed of developments.

Hull

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1869: Telegram

[Document 366]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 8, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received May 8—12:19 p.m.]

145. Department’s 116, May 5 [6].72 Prime Minister informed me last night he had received a satisfactory reply from his appeal to Molotov reported in my 138, May 3. The reply states that Soviet military authorities have been instructed to collaborate with Iranian authorities with a view to sending Iranian troops to disturbed areas.

Minister of War73 and several other officials have already arrived in Azerbaijan to arrange the details with Soviet authorities.

A despatch on entire situation is being airmailed.

Repeated to Kuibyshev.

Dreyfus

72 Not printed; it informed the Minister in Iran concerning Department’s instructions to the Ambassador in the Soviet Union contained in telegram No. 203, supra.

73 Gen. Amanollah Jahanbani.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Standley) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1870: Telegram

[Document 367]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Standley) to the Secretary of State

Kuibyshev (Moscow), May 10, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 5:50 p.m.]

376. Department’s 203, May 6, 11 p.m. I had intended to discuss this subject last evening with Vyshinski,74 but in view of Tehran’s 145, May 8, 2 [1] p.m., I did not do so.

Standley

74 Andrey Yanuaryevich Vyshinsky, Soviet Deputy People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1871: Telegram

[Document 368]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 12, 1942—noon.
[Received 9:55 p.m.]

151. Following from Kuniholm.

“May 11, noon. Governor General, War Minister, Iranian and Soviet army officers returned last night from Rezaieh. Kurds have now ceased pillaging. Twenty-one mixed police posts each staffed by about 20 Soviet soldiers and officers and 3 or 4 Iranian gendarmes to be established at once between Rezaieh and Khoi to protect settled localities. Soviets have agreed tentatively to dispatch of one Iranian regiment from Tehran to Rezaieh. No disposition here to grant concessions to Kurds who have no just complaints. Some of pillaged property has found its way to Iraq.[”]

Dreyfus

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1874: Telegram

[Document 369]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 15, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received May 16—8:40 a.m.]

157. Referring to the Department’s No. 116, March 5 [May 6], 10 p.m.75 Minister of War informs me Soviet authorities have given permission for 500 Iranian troops to proceed to Rezaieh area and that they will leave at once. He is endeavoring to obtain permission for additional 1,000 to be sent there.

Repeated to Tabriz.

Dreyfus

75 See footnote 72, p. 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367].

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1875: Telegram

[Document 370]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, May 16, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 8:16 p.m.]

161. Reference to my No. 157, May 15, 2 [1] p.m. Minister of War informs me Soviet authorities have now given permission for total of 1500 Iranian troops to proceed Rezaieh area. He stated that in his opinion 5,000 troops are necessary to restore and maintain order in Rezaieh and Tabriz and he is consequently requesting Soviet authorities to agree to the sending of additional troops.

Copy to Tabriz.

Dreyfus

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24546: Telegram

[Document 371]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, September 28, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 11:17 p.m.]

302. Soviet military authorities have asked Iran Government to send a brigade of troops to Tabriz to which Iranians replied they have not a brigade available. To Iranian suggestion that a brigade be recruited from former Azerbaijan troops Soviets replied that “this would take too much time.” I understand, however, that such recruiting is now taking place. Soviet request is interpreted by British here as indication Soviet forces in Azerbaijan are being or are about to be reduced.

Kuniholm reports considerable Russian troop movements in Azerbaijan in last 2 weeks. He states that while most of this is normal reshuffling of units there are in fact indications that troops are being reduced to point where they constitute no more than token force. Kuniholm also reports Soviets adopting sterner attitude regarding Kurds. This is substantiated in Tehran where it is reported Soviets have told Iranians they would not object to disarming Kurds “providing it can be done peacefully”.

Dreyfus

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24704: Telegram

[Document 372]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, October 7, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received October 7—12:39 p.m.]

313. There are numerous indications of improvement in Iranian-Soviet relations. Russian Ambassador on return from Moscow few days ago brought to Iranian Government formal expression of Soviet friendship and assurances of respect for Iranian’s independence and territorial integrity. Ambassador informed me personally that this represents the policy of his Government and that outstanding problems between Iran and Russia have been satisfactorily settled. As indicated in my No. 302, September 28, Soviets are now urging Iranians to send troops to Tabriz. Ahy, now Iranian Ambassador to Russia was as mark of courtesy received few days ago by Stalin. Foreign Minister76 2 days ago confirmed to me personally this improvement in relations with Russia and expressed his satisfaction at better attitude displayed by Soviets.

On other hand there are many indications of further deteriorations in Iranian-British relations. British have further alienated and embittered Iranians by constant interference in internal affairs, pressure in such matters as arrest of pro-Axis suspects, demands for purchase of potatoes and other crops and intransigent and disagreeable manner of negotiating. Both Prime77 and Foreign Ministers in recent conversations have complained to me in bitter terms of general British attitude toward Iran. Foreign Minister aptly summed up Iranian view in following words “The British are pillaging us.”

Dreyfus

76 Ali Soheily.

77 Ahmad Qavam.

Insistence by the United States that the Japanese Legation be expelled from IranInsistence by the United States that the Japanese Legation be expelled from Iran

[373] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, January 13, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 7:14 p.m.]

701.9491/16: Telegram

[374] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, January 19, 1942—9 p.m.

701.9491/16: Telegram

[375] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 8, 1942—noon. [Received 2:18 p.m.]

701.9491/17: Telegram

[376] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, February 25, 1942—1 p.m.

701.9491/17: Telegram

[377] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 6, 1942—11 p.m.

891.00/1830: Telegram

[378] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 11, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 9:45 p.m.]

891.00/1837: Telegram

[379] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 23, 1942.

701.9491/25

[380] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 28, 1942—8 p.m.

891.00/1837: Telegram

[381] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 29, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 8:37 p.m.]

891.00/1851: Telegram

[382] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 7, 1942—11 p.m. [Received April 8—11:55 a.m.]

891.00/1856: Telegram

[383] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 8, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 10:36 a.m.]

891.00/1857: Telegram

[384] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, April 10, 1942—2 p.m.

891.00/1857: Telegram

[385] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 11, 1942.

741.9111/66

[386] The Chargé in Iran (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 12, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 10:30 p.m.]

701.9491/20: Telegram

[387] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 13, 1942—noon. [Received April 13—9:17 a.m.]

701.9491/21: Telegram

[388] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] April 14, 1942.

891.00/1857

[389] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, April 15, 1942—7 p.m.

701.9491/21: Telegram

[390] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 22, 1942—5 p.m. [Received April 22—12:25 p.m.]

891.24/180: Telegram

[391] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 23, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 9:21 p.m.]

701.9491/23: Telegram

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 701.9491/16: Telegram

[Document 373]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, January 13, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 7:14 p.m.]

8. The British Minister,78 acting under instructions from London, has suggested to Iranian Government the desirability of effecting withdrawal of the Japanese Legation in Tehran. He expresses belief that Iranian Government might more readily be persuaded to expel the Japanese were United States to take parallel action.

I should appreciate receiving instructions should the Department wish me to take the matter up with the Iranian Government on a purely informal and friendly basis. I should add that annex 2 to the treaty79 which will probably soon be signed requires the Iranian Government to break diplomatic relations only with “any state which is in diplomatic relations with neither of the Allied Powers.”

Dreyfus

78 Sir Reader W. Bullard.

79 Anglo-Soviet-Iranian Treaty of Alliance, signed at Tehran, January 29, 1942, Department of State Bulletin, March 21, 1942, p. 249.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 701.9491/16: Telegram

[Document 374]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, January 19, 1942—9 p.m.

13. Your no. 8, January 13, 4 p.m. You may inquire informally of the Prime Minister80 as to the intentions of the Iranian Government regarding the maintenance or severance of diplomatic relations with Japan.

Hull

80 Mohammed Ali Foroughi.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 701.9491/17: Telegram

[Document 375]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, February 8, 1942—noon.
[Received 2:18 p.m.]

34. Soon after receipt of Department’s number 13, January 19, I took up the matter informally with Prime Minister who was noncommittal. The Foreign Minister81 promised me yesterday that he will have the question brought up at an early Cabinet meeting.

Dreyfus

81 All Soheily.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 701.9491/17: Telegram

[Document 376]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, February 25, 1942—1 p.m.

43. Your no. 34, February 8, noon. Please make further inquiries of the Prime Minister as to Iranian intentions respecting continued relations with Japan.

Welles

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1830: Telegram

[Document 377]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 6, 1942—11 p.m.

57. Your 51, February 28, 12 a.m. and 54, March 3, noon.82 As soon as possible after the formation of a new cabinet it is requested that you see the Prime Minister and discuss with him courteously but firmly the question of the continued presence in Iran of Japanese diplomatic and consular representatives. In that discussion you should point out that the presence of these officials is a grave danger not only to the interests of the United States and its associates in the war against aggression but also to Iran itself. In this latter connection you should stress the fact that fifth column activities of Japanese officials have played an important part in subjugating those countries in Asia which Japan has temporarily overrun. Accordingly you should express the strong conviction of this Government that the best interests of Iran require the prompt severance of relations with Japan.

Please keep me promptly informed of developments in this matter.

Welles

82 Neither printed.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1837: Telegram

[Document 378]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 11, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 9:45 p.m.]

61. Referring to Department’s No. 57, March 6, I today discussed this matter with Prime Minister82a along lines suggested by Department. Soheily received my suggestions with apparent sympathy although he refused to commit himself to a definite line of action and promised early consideration by Cabinet. The Foroughi Cabinet he revealed had discussed it but failed to take action because of confused internal political situation and due to example of Egyptian Cabinet which was understood to have failed in connection with expulsion of French Legation. He was of opinion that it would be difficult to get Majlis’ consent to expulsion of Japanese because Japanese have managed to obtain some support among the Deputies. He made it clear that he values American friendship highly, desires to cooperate with us and will therefore seek a pretext to expel Japanese. He expressed regret that American Government has yet taken no action in matters which concern Iran so vitally, i. e., furnishing of food, supplies83 and advisers.84 He stated rather pointedly that he would be in a much stronger position in matter of expulsion of Japanese if he could go to Majlis with some concrete evidence of American help.

I gained impression that Soheily wants to be helpful but is afraid his fledgling Cabinet is too weak to weather the political storm which might ensue unless he can discover a suitable pretext. It seems clear too that he thinks in terms of quid pro quo and wishes to be assured that tangible American aid will be forthcoming. After lapse of a reasonable time I will again approach him on the subject.

Dreyfus

82a Ali Soheily was Prime Minister March 7–July 28, 1942.

83 For correspondence concerning food and supplies, see pp. 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 138] ff.

84 For correspondence concerning advisers, see pp. 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240] ff.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 701.9491/25

[Document 379]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 23, 1942.

The British Ambassador85 called to see me this evening at my request.

The Ambassador brought up the question of the continued diplomatic representation of Japan in Tehran. He said that his Government had learned that Japan intended materially to increase diplomatic representation in that capital for purposes which, of course, were obvious. He requested that a further message be sent to our Minister in Tehran urging him to request again that the Iranian Government sever diplomatic relations with Japan, and that this Government use as a leverage the economic assistance which the Iranian Government was requesting of us. I said I would be glad to have a further message sent to our Minister.

S[umner] W[elles]

85 Viscount Halifax.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1837: Telegram

[Document 380]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, March 28, 1942—8 p.m.

79. Department’s 57, March 6 and your 61, March 11. British Government is informed Japanese plan material increase in diplomatic staff at Tehran. Please again approach Iranian Government and urge severance of diplomatic relations with Japan. You may state that American Government attaches great importance to this question and that our attitude toward Iranian requests for economic assistance will undoubtedly be affected by Iranian action in this respect.

Welles

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1851: Telegram

[Document 381]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, March 29, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 8:37 p.m.]

85. Reference to my 61 of March 11, 5 p.m., the Prime Minister informs me the Cabinet at last night’s meeting formally agreed to expel the Japanese Legation. Japanese Minister will be informed of this action within next few days.

Referring to Department’s 66, March 13, 6 p.m.86 and my 84,87 Prime Minister feels it would strengthen his hand in explaining this action to Majlis if he could announce some concrete indications of American economic assistance particularly if he could make public the extension of Lend-Lease aid to Iran.88

Dreyfus

86  Ante, p. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327].

87 Dated March 29, not printed.

88 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] ff.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1856: Telegram

[Document 382]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 7, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received April 8—11:55 a.m.]

98. Prime Minister informs me Majlis in secret session today refused to sanction expulsion of Japanese Legation. This action was taken in spite of solemn pledge given me by Prime Minister as reported in my number 85, March 29, and his statement to Admiral Standley quoted in my number 95, April 4 [3].89

Prime Minister states there is widespread dissatisfaction in Majlis with manner in which Russians and British are carrying out their treaty with Iran. Members complain bitterly that Russians are taking their cattle, that Poles are being dumped in Iran, that British are failing to provide food and are sending Iranian wheat to Iraq, that Russians are exploiting situation in northern Iran, that British are taking advantage of Iran in financial and other matters and that Iranians are being generally deceived and exploited. He added many feel that Japanese and Germans will soon be in Iran.

British Minister in note of April 4 to Iranian Government stated in strong terms that his Government regards expulsion of Japanese Legation as matter of utmost military necessity and that such action must be taken at once if Iran is to retain good will of British Empire and if goods are to continue to be furnished.

In view of growing pro-Axis attitude of Iranians and their refusal to cooperate with British (see my number 97, April 690 ) tendencies which are now climaxed by refusal to expel Japanese Legation, we should, I feel, take a strong line and refuse to furnish advisers or economic assistance on Lend-Lease or any other basis until Iran shows more inclination to cooperate.

Dreyfus

89  Ante, p. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329].

90  Ante, p. 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141].

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1857: Telegram

[Document 383]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 8, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 10:36 a.m.]

99. Reference my No. 98, April 7. Prime Minister called me early this morning to tell me he is not satisfied with Majlis’ decision refusing to expel Japanese and that he is calling another secret session tomorrow in a final endeavor to obtain such action. Meanwhile British Minister has telegraphed London reporting this decision and requesting instructions.

Dreyfus

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 891.00/1857: Telegram

[Document 384]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, April 10, 1942—2 p.m.

85. Your 98, April 7 and unnumbered [99] April 8, 10 a.m. Unless the refusal to expel Japanese Legation was reversed at meeting of Majlis mentioned in your April 8, 10 a.m., you are requested to convey to the Iranian Government immediately the substance of the following:

The Iranian Government is well aware of the desire of the United States to assist Iran in every way possible, both now and in the future as it has done in the past. The United States Government is at present giving its best attention to Iranian requests for advisers and has been prepared to give sympathetic consideration to further requests of this character if presented. This Government is actively working on a program of economic assistance designed to meet the urgent needs of Iran. Evidence of this is provided by, among other things, the recent action making Iran eligible for Lend-Lease aid.

However, the United States cannot be expected to continue its efforts along these lines while Iran maintains friendly relations with the enemies of this country—relations which this Government feels are quite as dangerous to Iran as to the United States. Consequently, unless immediate and positive action is taken to expel all Japanese diplomatic and consular representation, the United States will be forced to reconsider and revise its entire economic policy toward Iran.

Welles

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 741.9111/66

[Document 385]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 11, 1942.

The Minister of Iran91 called to see me today at his request. The Minister read to me textually a long telegram he had received from his Prime Minister of which he informed me he had already communicated the contents to Mr. Murray92 and to Mr. Alling.93

In brief the telegram reported upon the unwillingness of the Majlis to agree to the request of the Prime Minister to sanction the rupture of diplomatic relations with Japan upon the alleged ground that the Russian armies in Iran were operating in an uncontrolled and intolerable manner and that the policy of the Soviet Government in Iran was altogether counter to the agreements reached between the Soviet and Iranian Governments, and likewise because of the allegation that the British had complied with none of the commitments which the British Government had made covering the furnishing of matériel, et cetera, et cetera.

The Iranian Prime Minister appeared to be very much concerned by the statement made to him by the American Minister that unless the Iranian Government agreed to break relations with Japan, it would be impossible for the Government of the United States to go ahead with its program of assistance of various characters to the Iranian Government. The Minister in a very long and involved statement—which lasted over an hour—urged that this Government adopt a more sympathetic and comprehending attitude and an attitude which would offer more support to the Iranian Prime Minister in the very difficult position in which the latter found himself.

I stated to the Minister that it was the desire of the United States to maintain the most friendly and closest relations with the Iranian Government. I said that this Government had nothing to seek for itself in Iran and that the Iranian Government had nothing to seek for itself in the United States. I said, however, that because of the world situation close relations between our two countries were in the interest of both nations and that close and understanding relations with the United States must obviously be regarded by the Iranian Government as of great value to them.

I stated that the request which this Government had made of Iran for the rupture of relations with Japan was made as much in the interest of Iran itself as in the interest of the United States. I said it certainly must be clear to the Prime Minister, if not to the deputies, that it was the hope of Germany and Japan that their military and naval forces would obtain a juncture in that part of the world. I said that the ability of the nations which were allied with Iran and the ability of the United States, which desired to see the maintenance of the independence and integrity of Iran, to render assistance to the latter nation would be gravely jeopardized, should a serious crisis develop, if Japanese subversive agents had been able in the meantime to promote internal dissension and to undertake Axis sabotage, et cetera, in Iranian territory. I said it was hardly conceivable that the Iranian Government should not of its own volition have broken relations a long time ago.

With regard to the sins of the Soviet and Great Britain, I said I could not see that this question had the slightest connection with the break of relations with Japan. I said that as a friend of Iran this Government would certainly do everything it appropriately could to persuade the Russians not to pursue an unwarranted policy in Iran and that we would likewise do everything we could to facilitate the carrying out by Great Britain of the assurances that country had given Iran, but I could not accept the implication that the errors of omission or of commission on the part of the Soviet Union and of Great Britain had any relation to the continuance of Japanese subversive agents in Iran. The question I thought was really one of vital interest to Iran and, of course, likewise of vital interest to the military and naval interests of the United Nations.

The Minister then said that it would be far easier for the Prime Minister to persuade the Majlis if he could tell them that the United States were going to offer them something. I told the Minister that he was fully familiar, as was his Government, of the desire of the United States to assist Iran, and that the details of the way in which we could be helpful were matters which I would ask Mr. Murray to talk over with him. I said this Government, of course, would be glad to give all assistance it could, but that he must understand that this assistance could not be given so long as Iran was jeopardizing our own national interests by her refusal to break relations with Japan and was likewise endangering in a similar fashion her own ability to defend herself.

I said that this Government’s sympathetic comprehension of Iran’s difficulties was very real and would continue, but that in order for this Government to be able to translate that sympathetic comprehension into practical assistance, Iran must simultaneously take the steps which we considered essential in our interest and in hers.

S[umner] W[elles]

91 Mohammed Schayesteh.

92 Wallace Murray, Adviser on Political Relations.

93 Paul H. Alling, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

The Chargé in Iran (Minor) to the Secretary of State 701.9491/20: Telegram

[Document 386]

The Chargé in Iran (Minor) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 12, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 10:30 p.m.]

103. Prime Minister informs me he will notify Japanese Minister this afternoon that his entire Legation must leave Iran without delay.

Majlis in secret session April 8 approved expulsion of Japanese but with proviso that consent of Russians be obtained. This unnecessary injection of Soviets into picture was apparently another of the delaying tactics in which Iranians have been indulging in this matter. When Soviet Ambassador refused to make formal commitment in this regard British Minister made it clear to Prime Minister that he considered conditional Majlis approval unsatisfactory. Prime Minister therefore promises positive action today regardless of Soviet attitude. In view of this development I shall refrain from delivering the note suggested in Department’s No. 85, April 10, 2 p.m. unless Prime Minister fails to take the promised action.

Minor

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 701.9491/21: Telegram

[Document 387]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 13, 1942—noon.
[Received April 13—9:17 a.m.]

104. Referring to my 103, April 12, Prime Minister last evening informed Japanese Minister that his Legation must depart from Iran within a week. Question of means of exit now under discussion. Japanese wish to proceed to Turkey to which Iranians have no objection. British however do not approve dumping of further Axis diplomats in Turkey and are insisting that Legation return to Japan via Russia.

Dreyfus

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 891.00/1857

[Document 388]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] April 14, 1942.

Mr. Welles: I think that we may assume from the attached telegrams from Tehran94 that our objective in Iran was accomplished and relations with Japan were severed without the necessity of delivering our rather stiff note of April 10.95

This is, I believe, all to the good, since the Iranian Minister is already pressing us to “reward” his Government for its behavior in this matter.

Upon the Minister’s return to Washington from New York, where he expects to spend about a week, I intend to follow the suggestion contained in the memorandum of your conversation with the Minister last Saturday,96 and to discuss with him the precise measures we contemplate taking with a view to assisting Iran in her present difficult situation.

I sensed from a brief conversation I had with the Minister, following his conference with you, that he expects large Lend-Lease benefits to start to flow at an early moment as a result of his Government’s acquiescence in our demand that relations with Japan be severed. I shall, of course, have to make it clear to the Minister that Lend-Lease status for Iran does not mean that the Iranian Government will necessarily be furnished with all it may ask for; that, on the other hand, we are already rendering great assistance to Iran by facilitating the purchase in this country of sorely needed commodities; that we are endeavoring to find for them a competent officer to reorganize the police and security forces of the country and two agricultural experts to assist in fighting pests and diseases which are attacking their crops; that we are exploring with the War Department the possibility of finding an able officer to act as Quartermaster General for the Iranian Army; and that, if they so desire, we shall be prepared to assist them in finding advisers for finance and food distribution. I shall also mention the trade agreement negotiations97 which are now in progress.

This certainly is no inconsiderable list of benefits that Iran will enjoy by taking an action which not only satisfies us but which removes a really great danger to herself.98

Wallace Murray

94 Telegrams No. 103, April 12, 10 a.m., p. 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386] and No. 104, April 13, noon, supra.

95 See telegram No. 85, April 10, 2 p.m., to the Minister in Iran, p. 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385].

96 April 11.

97 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 315] ff.

98 Marginal note by Mr. Welles: “I fully agree.”

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) 701.9491/21: Telegram

[Document 389]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Iran (Dreyfus)

Washington, April 15, 1942—7 p.m.

92. Your 104, April 13. Please express to the Prime Minister our gratification at the action taken and our conviction that it will prove to be in the best interests of Iran.

For your confidential information, the Iranian Minister in Washington on April 11 communicated to Department a message received from the Prime Minister reporting discontent of the Majliss with attitude of Soviet forces of occupation and failure of British to fulfill commitments made regarding supplies et cetera. This was stated to be reason for reluctance of Majliss to authorize expulsion of Japanese. Iranian Minister further said that Prime Minister found himself in very difficult position and might be forced to resign if excessive British and American pressure should be exerted. In such a case, he personally feared conditions in Iran might become gravely disturbed.

Minister was informed this government could see no connection between British and Russian activities in Iran and question of Japanese representation. As a friend of Iran, United States would do everything it possibly could to persuade Russia not to take unwarranted action in Iran and would also do everything possible to facilitate fulfillment of British commitments to Iran, but we could not admit that this affected vital question of subversive Japanese activities.

Minister was further assured that this government was working out details of assistance to Iran.

In this latter connection we are discussing with British questions of over-all supply program for Iran to be tied in with general Middle East program.99 It would be helpful if you could report exact procedure now being followed by British in assessing Iranian economic needs and handling Iranian economic requests. Please report details of British organization and its relation to Middle East supply center Cairo and other British economic agencies. Please keep Department informed regarding arrivals in Iran of wheat and other supplies for civilian use.

Question of Anglo-Iranian exchange difficulties1 reported your 97 April 62 Section 2 is under consideration by Department following presentation formal British request for American intervention. If possible, Department wishes to avoid exerting pressure on Iranian Government in this connection, and hopes to work out some more constructive solution.

Welles

99 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.

1 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341] ff.

2  Ante, p. 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142].

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.24/180: Telegram

[Document 390]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 22, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received April 22—12:25 p.m.]

118. Prime Minister was pleased when I conveyed to him the message contained in first sentence of Department’s number 92.3 He in turn asked me to express to Department his appreciation of the heartening information given by Department to Iranian Minister in Washington. He added that he would much appreciate immediate permission to announce the extension of Lease-Lend aid to Iran. A public statement to this effect he thought would not only strengthen his political position but also would reassure certain elements in the Majlis who are beginning to ask when and how the United States intends to assist Iran. The specific questions raised in Department’s number 92 are being investigated.

Dreyfus

3 Dated April 15, 7 p.m., p. 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389].

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 701.9491/23: Telegram

[Document 391]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, April 23, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 9:21 p.m.]

120. Referring to my 104,4 the Japanese Legation left Tehran this morning en route to Japan via Russia.

Dreyfus

4 Dated April 13, noon, p. 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388].

Iranian request for American support in regard to British demands for arrest of certain suspected persons in IranIranian request for American support in regard to British demands for arrest of certain suspected persons in Iran

[392] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 9, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 3:14 p.m.]

891.00/1901: Telegram

[393] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 10, 1942—4 p.m. [Received August 10—12:15 p.m.]

891.00/1903: Telegram

[394] The Iranian Legation to the Department of State

Washington, [undated.]

891.00/1946

[395] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] August 20, 1942.

891.00/1916½

[396] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 21, 1942—2 p.m. [Received August 22—11:49 a.m.]

891.00/1910: Telegram

[397] Draft Telegram to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 25, 1942.

891.00/1910

[398] The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 31, 1942—1 p.m. [Received August 31—12:22 p.m.]

891.00/1915: Telegram

[399] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 1, 1942.

891.00/1915

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1901: Telegram

[Document 392]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 9, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 3:14 p.m.]

253. Reference last two sentences my 250, August 5.5 A rather serious divergence of opinion has arisen between British Minister6 and Prime Minister7 over arrest of persons considered by British to be engaged in pro-German activities. This may adversely affect British relations and future of Qavam government which is being presented to Majlis today. Qavam consented readily to arrest of the 40 persons listed by British but now asks that written evidence against them be presented within 24 hours in accordance with Iranian law. British expect arrested persons to be turned over to them without hearing or trial by Iranians. I have frequently called Department’s attention to danger to British-Iran relations of such arbitrary treatment. British disregard of Iranian susceptibilities is causing Iran public to become increasingly bitter against them. This additional aggravation of British-Iran relations seems unnecessary since Iranian Government will assent to arrest and internment of persons against whom proper evidence is submitted.

British Minister takes view “I can’t work with a Government like this” an attitude which may cause another political crisis at time when Qavam has succeeded in forming a relatively strong Cabinet. If Qavam Cabinet falls or resigns I see little hope for constitutional government here in the near future and only alternative would seem to be direct Allied interference internal affairs of the country.

Dreyfus

5  Ante, p. 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168].

6 Sir Reader W. Bullard.

7 Ahmad Qavam.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1903: Telegram

[Document 393]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 10, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received August 10—12:15 p.m.]

256. Reference my No. 253, August 9. British Minister yesterday handed severe note to Prime Minister complaining of the lack of cooperation on part of Iranian authorities in arresting, interrogating and holding persons whose arrests were requested by British on grounds of pro-Axis activities and expressing hope that Qavam would deal with matter in practical and statesmanlike manner. British were especially annoyed to learn that a most important German woman prisoner in Iranian custody was killed or committed suicide today in jail before she could be fully questioned.

British are to a certain extent justified in their present attitude (see last paragraph number 111, April 188 ) because of Iranian lack of cooperation. The criticism of the British contained in the second paragraph of my No. 253 was intended to apply to their unfortunate manner of dealing with the Iranians rather than the merits of this case. Soviet Ambassador informs me he has told Qavam that he supports British in this question of arrests.

Dreyfus

8 Not printed.

The Iranian Legation to the Department of State 891.00/1946

[Document 394]

The Iranian Legation to the Department of State

Washington, [undated.]

The British Legation in Teheran approximately five months ago asked that six persons—Government employees and merchants—who were believed to be Axis sympathizers, be delivered to the British. The Government in power at that time reached the conclusion that these persons should be exiled to Kerman and some other remote spot. As one of them escaped, the British asked that the others be transported to a place where a British armed force was present. So they were transferred to Kermanshah. A few days later the British arrested them. We do not know exactly how or where they are.

Over a month ago the British asked that eighteen more persons should be turned over to them. Later on they said that they understood from the words of the persons arrested and questioned that other persons had been their accomplices and a list of forty-five persons was presented. But apparently no suspicion of foreign relationships could be attributed to them.

On August 5th the British Minister took up the question with the Prime Minister. He replied that to prevent any eventual activities which might be attributed to these persons, we would arrest all of them, but we would like for you to give us the documents you possess against them to enable us to investigate the matter in your presence. Those men mentioned in the list were arrested immediately.

On August 7th the British Minister presented a written request saying that as a result of the instructions he had received he would like to have these persons turned over to the British. After the discussion the following conclusions were reached: 1. Those having Axis nationality should be delivered to the British.

2. The others should be kept in custody in Teheran where the British could verify their imprisonment.

3. The British should present to the special commission designated to investigate the matter the incriminating documents which they said they had.

The British Minister in accepting the fore-going conclusions proposed that, if possible, the above mentioned suspects should be imprisoned in a city where a British armed force was present. But in view of previous experience the Iranian Government did not accept this proposition.

After having turned over to the British the non-Iranians, the British were requested to present the above mentioned documents. The British Legation asked that the Iranians be transferred to Arak where their General Staff had its Headquarters in order that a joint inquiry could be made. They promised also to bring there the other persons who were arrested directly by the British. But in view of the aforementioned precedent, and especially as it was against public opinion and that of the Madjless, and contrary to existing law, the Government could not deliver to a foreign army a number of Iranians whose culpability had not been established.

In reply to the British Minister’s note a counter proposition was made, as follows: 1. The suspects should be given to the military governor in the actual place of their custody and they should be taken to a garrison under military arrest and surveillance.

2. The British could participate in their guard and questioning.

3. Those found to be innocent after the inquiry should be set at liberty immediately.

4. Those whose guilt is established should remain in custody under joint Irano-British supervision and to have no outside communication.

But the British are not willing to accept this proposition.

The Iranian Government in good faith and willingness to collaborate could not accept the British demand because there is no such provision in the treaty and no legal way of doing so.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 891.00/1916½

[Document 395]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] August 20, 1942.

The Minister9 handed me the attached statement10 concerning a dispute which had arisen between the British Legation in Tehran and the Iranian Government in regard to certain persons who had been arrested at the request of the British because of their alleged Axis sympathies. The Minister said that the attached statement was self-explanatory; that it was perfectly apparent that the Iranian Government had gone to great lengths in meeting British desires but that the Iranian Government felt they could not meet the present British demands to turn over the arrested persons to the British authorities. The Minister pointed out that the Iranian Government was perfectly willing to punish any persons whose activities were inimical to British interests but that, under the laws of the country, such punishment could not be meted out without evidence. The Minister went on at length to stress the fact that such unreasonable demands on the part of the British only served to create bitter feeling between them and the Iranians. He said that such demands, furthermore, weakened the Iranian Government in the eyes of the Mejlis and that that Government could not agree to such demands and continue in power. Finally the Minister said that he had been instructed by his Government to request the Department to support the Iranian position in this matter with a view to bringing about an early and satisfactory solution of the dispute.

I told the Minister that we had had some word from our Minister in Tehran concerning what appeared to be the same matter, and that we should be glad to look into the case further and see whether there is anything we could do to be mutually helpful to the Iranians and the British.

9 Mohammed Schayesteh, Iranian Minister.

10  Supra.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1910: Telegram

[Document 396]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 21, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received August 22—11:49 a.m.]

265. My Nos. 253, August 9 and 256, August 10. The dispute between British and Iranians over arrests has become more aggravated. Conversations are now taking place on subject in London between Foreign Office and Iran Minister. British Legation Tehran has explained its stand to Foreign Office and has asked for definite instructions.

Iran press and public have been so deeply stirred by these arrests that hatred of British has reached a peak. Iranians take view that Allies have no right to require Iran Government to make illegal and unconstitutional arrests, that procedure is undemocratic and not based on provisions of treaty, that wholesale arrests are as bad as treatment meted out to people by Shah Reza and they are no longer secure in their homes. They demand that arrests be made legally and that evidence of guilt be presented to Iranian tribunal.

I am of opinion after much contact with problem that British are doing more harm to Allied cause by these arrests than their values warrants. Worst feature from our viewpoint is that United States is now being linked with British in responsibility for arrests which is injurious to our prestige. Leading evening newspaper Etelaat in editorial yesterday appealed to this Legation to see that justice is done.

Dreyfus

Draft Telegram to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 891.00/1910

[Document 397]

Draft Telegram to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)11

Washington, August 25, 1942.

Iranian Minister Washington has presented request that Department intervene in dispute between Iranian Government and British Legation over recent arrests of a number of Iranian and Axis nationals suspected of pro-Axis activities in Iran. According to Iranians, British have demanded that accused be turned over to them for investigation and trial. Iranian Government asserts such procedure would be contrary to law and in any case impossible because of aroused public opinion and sentiment in Majliss.

American Minister Tehran reports dispute has become serious. Iranian press and public deeply stirred, taking view Allies have no right to require Iranian Government to make illegal arrests. They demand that arrests be made only in accordance with law and evidence of guilt presented to Iranian tribunal. Our Minister says hatred of British has reached peak. He believes harm done to United Nations cause outweighs value of arrests and says United States is being linked with British in responsibility for arrests, which is injurious to our prestige.

It is understood British Legation has referred matter to London and conversations are taking place between Foreign Office and Iranian Minister London.

Please inform Foreign Office that Department is perturbed by these developments. While we do not have full facts and cannot judge specific merits of the case, we would very much regret any action at this time, except under imperative necessity, which would further alienate Iranian people from cause of United Nations. We venture, therefore, to express the hope that the British Government will find a way to adjust this dispute to the satisfaction of both parties and with as little offense as possible to Iranian popular sensibilities.

In your discretion, you may explain that in view of the present critical situation in the Middle East we feel it would be unfortunate to create the impression that United Nations are following an arbitrary and oppressive policy with respect to any of the Moslem nations. Any such development might very well nullify anticipated effects of Mr. Willkie’s12 impending trip to the Near East and the various other steps which we are taking in an effort to influence Moslem sentiment.

11 This message was not sent.

12 Wendell Willkie, Republican candidate for President in 1940.

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1915: Telegram

[Document 398]

The Minister in Iran (Dreyfus) to the Secretary of State

Tehran, August 31, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received August 31—12:22 p.m.]

275. My 265, August 21. Iranian Government has agreed to detention of the suspects in British controlled area at Sultanabad. Prime Minister informs me he obtained consent of Majlis to this procedure in secret session Saturday by assuming full and personal responsibility. It is understood British Foreign Office supported Tehran Legation in demanding detention at Sultanabad so that Iranians had no alternative in end but to accept. This is last remaining point at issue in this dispute and it is hoped that at least a temporary solution has been reached. Whatever the merits of the case there is no doubt it has been very harmful to British-Iranian relations.

Dreyfus

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Secretary of State 891.00/1915

[Document 399]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] September 1, 1942.

Mr. Secretary: From the attached telegram from Tehran, no. 275, August 31,13 it appears that the Anglo-Iranian dispute over arrests of alleged Axis agents has been settled, however unsatisfactorily from the Iranian point of view. Accordingly, it would seem that there is now no purpose to be served by sending the draft telegram14 to London.

I do not think, however, that we should let the matter drop entirely. If you agree, I should like to suggest that you take an early occasion to let Lord Halifax15 know, informally, that we regard as unfortunate any action, by any of the United Nations, which unnecessarily offends the sensibilities of the Iranians. You may wish to mention the present case as an instance in which, we fear, the harm done to our cause in Iranian eyes may outweigh the benefits obtained through closer control of the prisoners.

Lord Halifax may be interested to know that an American expert will depart for Iran within the next few days to take charge of the Iranian urban police forces. An American mission of three officers has already arrived in Iran to take charge of the national gendarmerie, or rural police. It is hoped that these men will be able to provide greater assurance that action taken by Iranian authorities against Axis agents will be properly conducted and that persons arrested will be adequately guarded without the necessity for British or Soviet intervention.16

Wallace Murray

13  Supra.

14 Dated August 25, p. 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397].

15 British Ambassador in the United States.

16  In an attached memorandum dated September 4, Mr. Murray states: “The Secretary spoke to me this morning about the attached file regarding the Anglo-Iranian dispute over arrests of alleged Axis agents.

“In view of the improvement in the situation, and following our recommendations, the Secretary agrees that the draft telegram to London need not be sent.

“Nevertheless, the Secretary feels that the general situation in Iran resulting from friction between the British and Iranians warrants him in taking the matter up with the British Ambassador. The Secretary intends to use the substance of the attached memorandum of September 1 in his conversation with Lord Halifax.”

IraqIraq

Contents

Announcement of Iraq’s eligibility for Lend-Lease aid; procedures for effecting Lend-Lease aid to IraqAnnouncement of Iraq’s eligibility for Lend-Lease aid; procedures for effecting Lend-Lease aid to Iraq

[400] The Minister Resident in Iraq (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, January 9, 1942—4 p.m. [Received January 10—4:11 a.m.]

890G.24/22: Telegram

[401] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, May 1, 1942—5 p.m.

890G.24/25a: Telegram

[402] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, May 6, 1942—10 p.m.

800.24/311a: Telegram

[403] The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, June 16, 1942—noon. [Received June 17—9:24 p.m.]

800.24/335: Telegram

[404] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, July 23, 1942—7 p.m.

800.24/335: Telegram

The Minister Resident in Iraq (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State 890G.24/22: Telegram

[Document 400]

The Minister Resident in Iraq (Knabenshue) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, January 9, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received January 10—4:11 a.m.]

8. Lend-Lease having been extended to Turkey and Egypt1 the Prime Minister2 asks that it be extended to Iraq. He says that they want nothing for the moment but desire the privilege because of its moral effect and prestige value. He has discussed matter with the British Ambassador3 because it might involve Anglo-Iraq Treaty of Alliance.4 Ambassador is referring it to London with favorable recommendation. I likewise recommend it on same conditions as Egypt and on condition that anything ultimately supplied be in agreement with the British inasmuch as British security and war needs this area should be first consideration. Bullitt5 shares my opinion.

Knabenshue

1 For correspondence regarding lend-lease aid to Turkey and Egypt, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii. pp. 814 ff. and pp. 299 ff., respectively.

2 Nuri as-Said.

3 Sir Kinahan Cornwallis.

4 Signed at Baghdad, June 30, 1930, League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. cxxxii, p. 363.

5 William C. Bullitt, on special mission in the Near East; see footnote 14, p. 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5].

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) 890G.24/25a: Telegram

[Document 401]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, May 1, 1942—5 p.m.

87. The President will announce on May 2 that Iraq has been designated as eligible to receive Lend-Lease assistance.6 Please inform Iraqi Government.

Hull

6 For the text of announcement concerning lend-lease aid to both Iraq and Iran, see Department of State Bulletin, May 2, 1942, p. 383; for correspondence regarding lend-lease aid to Iran, see ante, pp. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327] ff.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) 800.24/311a: Telegram

[Document 402]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, May 6, 1942—10 p.m.

89. In order to eliminate confusion and duplicated effort which have occurred in the past through separate action by American and British authorities in attempting to meet civilian supply requirements of Near East countries, Department has decided upon formal participation in Middle East Supply Centre. There will be military and civilian representation. A member of the legation in Cairo will serve as interim representative for civilian supply until a representative is sent out from here.

These representatives on MESC will insure that United States Government is kept informed of all requests considered essential by local supply committees and by MESC, and whether these requests will be supplied by United Kingdom from Empire sources or by United States from United States resources.

Further to promote coordinated effort and operation in all matters of civilian supply for the Near East, Department proposes to handle requirements of individual countries as far as possible through Anglo-American control established in MESC, where integrated program for Near East area may be effectively prepared.

To this end it is believed important that there be U.S. representation on all local supply committees of the individual countries. Department therefore designates you American representative for civilian supplies on Central Supplies Committee in Baghdad and requests that you associate yourself with your British colleague with a view to early joint action on that Committee.

Department envisages a small action committee consisting of yourself, British Minister and an official of Iraqi Government. This committee should be readily accessible to all interested officials and representatives concerned with supplies and their procurement. Function of committee is to correlate Iraqi requirements in order of essentiality and urgency and to forward the resulting lists, with its recommendations, to MESC.

This reference to MESC in no way impairs your right to communicate with Department on all such matters.

Our Minister in Tehran has been instructed to participate in operations of Supplies Committee in process of organization there and our Embassy in Ankara has been instructed to participate in existing local Coordinating Committee there.

Advise when you assume your duties on Supplies Committee and raise any questions needing clarification.

Hull

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State 800.24/335: Telegram

[Document 403]

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, June 16, 1942—noon.
[Received June 17—9:24 p.m.]

120. Department’s 89, May 6, 10 p.m. Legation has participated in various informal meetings of the existing Central Supplies Committee. In view of peculiar local situation described in my despatch no. 1913 of May 13,7 … the type of committee envisaged by Department is not applicable here. British Foreign Office telegram to its Embassy Baghdad of June 4 is summarized as follows per numbered paragraphs omitting number 1: (2) Lend-lease supplies for Iraq will be sold against cash to avoid inflation; (3) civil requirements will be referred by normal procedure to Middle East Supply Center; (4) Iraqi military requirements are subject to approval by British military and referred to London; (5) port and railway supplies are under discussion but will be subject to British military approval and to application through administration’s Crown agents in London as in past; (6) it would be unfortunate if Iraq Government through its Legation in Washington should press lendlease question; (7) expresses hope that this Legation will cooperate in making clear to Iraq that latter will not be able to obtain unessential supplies.

In the absence of instructions from Department it is difficult to determine what role the Legation should play in the question of lend-lease to Iraq. The Iraqi Foreign Office by urgent note dated June 14, requests Legation to inform it how Iraq can benefit from the Lend-Lease Act.8 British Foreign Office telegram summarized in foregoing is first intimation received by Legation that Iraq must pay cash. To avoid possible embarrassment I request specific instructions for appropriate reply to Iraqi Foreign Office.

Farrell

7 Not printed.

8 March 11, 1941; 55 Stat. 31.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) 800.24/335: Telegram

[Document 404]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, July 23, 1942—7 p.m.

140. Department’s telegram no. 89, May 6, 10 p.m. and Legation’s despatch no. 1913, May 13 and telegrams nos. 120, June 16, noon, and 125, June 22, noon.9

1. With respect to civilian supply organization in Iraq, you should consult Frederick Winant, who has been appointed United States representative on the M. E. S. C. and is now proceeding to take up his duties. Winant is familiar with all aspects of our supply policy and organization and will be in a position to help you determine the manner in which United States representatives can be of assistance in connection with Iraqi supply problems.

2. In so far as they involve supplies from the United States, Department is in agreement with points made in British Foreign Office telegram as summarized in your 120. With respect to paragraph numbered (2) of British telegram, the proposal was made by the British and accepted by Department that lend-lease supplies for civilian populations in Middle Eastern countries should be sold rather than given away. This policy was adopted, primarily, in order to combat inflationary tendencies in those countries and because free issues to the civilian population would have a bad effect on the efforts of the British to bring about increased food production locally in order to conserve shipping space.

It is expected that the net proceeds after allowing for expenses of distribution will be held in a depository such as a bank or the treasury of the country in which distribution occurs, in the local currency of that country, to the credit of the United States. This Government would not expect to transfer such funds into dollars, but would use them locally for its own expenditures.

3. Department does not understand statement that the Secretary of State requested a list of lend-lease requirements from the Iraqi Minister. All Iraqi requirements are to be submitted through local committees and M. E. S. C.

4. If the M. E. S. C. desire to inform Iraqi Government of its recommendations to London and Washington regarding civilian supplies for Iraq, the Department has no objection. The appropriate authorities here will inform Iraqi Minister as soon as definite action is taken on the recommendations, if that is the desire of the Iraqi Government.

Hull

9 Despatch No. 1913, May 13, and telegram No. 125, June 22, noon, not printed.

Insistence by the United States that American war materials sent to or through Iraq be exempt from Iraqi customs and transit duesInsistence by the United States that American war materials sent to or through Iraq be exempt from Iraqi customs and transit dues

[405] The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, June 16, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 10:05 p.m.]

890G.5123/16: Telegram

[406] The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, June 22, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 6:37 p.m.]

890G.24/35: Telegram

[407] The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, June 25, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 6:08 p.m.]

811.79690/47: Telegram

[408] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, June 30, 1942—11 p.m.

890G.24/35: Telegram

[409] The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, July 2, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 3:37 p.m.]

890G.24/36: Telegram

[410] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, July 21, 1942—10 p.m.

890G.24/42½: Telegram

[411] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 11, 1942—6 p.m. [Received August 11—3:25 p.m.]

890G.24/38: Telegram

[412] The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, August 24, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 2:23 p.m.]

890G.24/46: Telegram

[413] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, September 14, 1942—8 a.m.

890G.24/46: Telegram

[414] The Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, October 8, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 8:50 p.m.]

890G.24/57: Telegram

[415] The Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, October 17, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 10:10 p.m.]

890G.24/58: Telegram

[416] The Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, December 14, 1942—5 p.m. [Received December 15—9:48 p.m.]

890G.24/65: Telegram

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State 890G.5123/16: Telegram

[Document 405]

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, June 16, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 10:05 p.m.]

119. Basra agents of Isthmian Steamship Lines insist on accounting for Iraqi income tax on earnings of vessels operated by Maritime Commission. Before I approach Iraqi Government please instruct whether vessels so operated are considered by our Government as liable to income tax here on freight and passenger earnings ex Iraq.

Isthmian Steamship Company, New York, has instructed its Basra agents to pay only under protest and Maritime Commission representative Basra desires Legation to intervene with Iraqi revenue authorities.

Foregoing repeated by air mail to Tehran as similar situation is understood to exist.

Farrell

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State 890G.24/35: Telegram

[Document 406]

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, June 22, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 6:37 p.m.]

127. At the instance of the United States military Iranian mission I have engaged in discussions with the Iraqi Ministry of Finance with a view to obtaining exemption from customs and other dues on materials imported by the mission into Iraq as well as goods in transit. Ministry suggest that note be tendered through Foreign Office requesting “That immunities and privileges in jurisdictional and fiscal matters including freedom from taxation which are now enjoyed by British forces in Iraq according to treaty be extended to the United States military mission and its agencies functioning under orders from United States Government” and listing all agencies so functioning under the mission. While Iraqi Government is apparently willing to grant the desired extention to bona fide agencies of the War Department clearly financed by the United States Government and manned by personnel subject to military jurisdiction, question is raised regarding the status with the War Department of Pan American Airways and Douglas Aircraft Corporation. Although latter does not function in Iraq but in Iran, military mission desires all agencies covered here.

Farrell

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State 811.79690/47: Telegram

[Document 407]

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, June 25, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 6:08 p.m.]

128. Department’s 95, May 19;10 and Legation’s 126 [127], July [June] 22. Basra customs authorities demanding cash payment of duty on Pan American imports for improving Basra airport despite local guarantees of payment of [as?] Pan American does not acquire customs exemption as an agency of the United States Government. Legation will appreciate indication of present status of negotiations regarding Pan American in Iraq.

Sent to Department repeated to Cairo.

Farrell

10 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) 890G.24/35: Telegram

[Document 408]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, June 30, 1942—11 p.m.

126. Your 127, June 22, 1 p.m. With further reference to your 127, June 22, 1 p.m., the War Department states that the operations of Douglas in Iran are carried out under contract with that Department. The operations of Pan American are also performed under War Department contract. It is added that General Fitzgerald11 will proceed to Cairo in order to command ferry operations in Africa and the Middle East and that the operations of Pan American in those areas will be under his supervision and direct control.

In view of the nature of the activities of the War Department and contract organizations in Iraq and neighboring areas, the Department assumes that a satisfactory arrangement with the Iraqi authorities will be obtained promptly and without difficulty.

Hull

11 Brig. Gen. S. W. Fitzgerald, Commanding General, U. S. Army Forces in Central Africa.

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State 890G.24/36: Telegram

[Document 409]

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, July 2, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 3:37 p.m.]

135. My 126 [127], June 22, 1 p.m. Military mission customs exemption question has been referred by Iraqi Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Justice. Latter on advice of its British legal adviser now informs me that Iraqi Government desires to negotiate a convention with the United States Government to serve as legal basis for legislation to authorize customs franchise. Draft is now in preparation. Meanwhile I request Department’s views and instructions.

Farrell

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) 890G.24/42½: Telegram

[Document 410]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, July 21, 1942—10 p.m.

138. Your 135, July 2, 1 p.m. A communication dated July 10 has been received from the Secretary of War,12 of which the following is a summary.

Begin Summary. Attention is called to the fact that all materials imported into Iraq by the Military Mission and the civilian agencies assisting it are subject to customs dues and that materials and supplies passing through Iraq are subject to transit dues. The matter involves shipments by the Army Quartermaster, District Engineers, General Motors, Douglas Aircraft, etc. It appears that the contract status of Pan American Airways and Douglas Aircraft is not known in Iraq. Douglas is providing assembly and maintenance services under a War Department contract. Pan American Airways-Africa Limited, a subsidiary of Pan American Airways, Incorporated, operates a transport service from the west coast of Africa to the Middle East, under War Department contract. Pan American Air Ferries, Incorporated, flight delivers Lend-Lease military aircraft over the same route. These operations are in part covered by contracts between the British Government and Pan American. The transport operations in Africa and the Middle East are under the control of the War Department and all charges for transportation are for the account of the United States. If the duties are paid by Pan American-Africa in performing actions required under the contract they fall upon the United States Government, which is consequently directly interested in the suspension of the duties and transit dues in the case of Pan American. It is desired to arrange for the admittance free of duty of materials and supplies consigned to the United States Government agencies, and the exemption from transit dues of all goods in transit for United States Government agencies on the declaration that they are imported for transshipment. End of Summary.

The Department is unable to understand the apparent desire of the Ministry of Justice, based on the advice of the British legal adviser, to negotiate a convention to serve as a legal basis for legislation to authorize customs franchise. In this connection it is noted that other countries, including Egypt, have found no difficulty under similar circumstances in reconciling a grant of customs franchise with existing legislation.

The situation respecting Pan American has been clarified by this Government’s action in taking the question of civil air rights in Africa and the Near East out of the hands of that organization and making the question the subject of diplomatic correspondence which in its present phase is being conducted with the British Government.13 That question therefore can have no bearing on the present matter.

This Government’s contributions both direct and indirect to the defense and security of the Near East, including Iraq, do not have the character of a commercial operation.

In view of all the circumstances, this Government is confident that the Iraqi authorities, on further consideration of the matter, will be prepared to grant the desired exemptions with retroactive effect.

You are requested to transmit the sense of the foregoing to the Foreign Minister.

Repeated to Embassy, London,14 which is being requested to approach the British authorities there with a view to supporting action by the British Ambassador at Baghdad.15

Hull

12 Not printed.

13 For correspondence regarding this subject, see pp. 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 13] ff.

14 As telegram No. 3381, July 21, midnight.

15 Sir Kinahan Cornwallis.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 890G.24/38: Telegram

[Document 411]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 11, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received August 11—3:25 p.m.]

4483. We took up with the Foreign Office the question set forth in the Department’s telegram No. 3381, July 21, 12 p.m.,16 and have now received from the Foreign Office an assurance that the British Ambassador at Baghdad has been instructed to consult with our Chargé d’Affaires “and to endeavor to assist him in reaching an agreed solution with the Iraqi Government”.

Repeated to Baghdad.

Winant

16 See footnote 14, above.

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State 890G.24/46: Telegram

[Document 412]

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, August 24, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 2:23 p.m.]

177. Department’s 138, July 21, 10 p.m. Despite supporting action of British Ambassador, Prime Minister17 (acting for Foreign Affairs) persists in idea of customs convention. He has orally and the Foreign Office by note proposed the following two alternatives: (1) that materials for which exemptions are requested be imported in name of British forces in Iraq which are considered legally exempt from payment of customs duties; or (2) negotiation of customs convention between Iraqi and American Governments to enable former to enact a law which would render franchise legal.

Prime Minister informs me that existing Iraqi law gives no scope for administrative exemption and considers goods in question as ordinary imports into Iraq. While Embassy last May agreed with me that extension of lease-lend to Iraq might facilitate broader interpretation of existing laws, Counselor now informs me confidentially that Ambassador has found himself up against brick wall on the several occasions he has endeavored to persuade Prime Minister to liberalize legislation.

I concur with Iran-Iraq Service Command Basra that adoption of first alternative could possibly lead to useless complications. I have also in mind the safeguarding policy outlined in memoranda enclosed with Department’s strictly confidential instruction Nos. 502 and 504 on January 21 and 31, 1942.18 I respectfully request instructions and indication whether in such cases Department would initiate draft of convention.

In reference to London Embassy’s August 12, noon to Baghdad Department can doubtless more economically transmit sense of foregoing to that Embassy for its information.

Farrell

17 Nuri as-Said.

18 Neither printed.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) 890G.24/46: Telegram

[Document 413]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Iraq (Farrell)

Washington, September 14, 1942—8 a.m.

176. Your 177, August 24, 11 a.m. For obvious reasons the Department does not desire to proceed on the basis of the first alternative proposed by the Iraqi Foreign Office.

It is requested that upon the arrival of the Minister, the Legation consider whether it would be useful to renew efforts to secure an agreement with Iraq promptly and informally on the basis of existing Iraqi legislation. If the Legation believes that such further efforts might be useful, they should be made. In that connection, the Legation will presumably desire to make its own examination of Iraqi legislation in order to determine whether some portion thereof may be applicable.

If the Legation should decide that it is useless to make any further effort to obtain an informal agreement, or if its efforts are unsuccessful, the Minister should then propose to the Iraqi Government the prompt signing of a formal agreement, which would become effective in this country as an executive agreement. The Department has under consideration a draft agreement for use if a formal agreement is necessary.

Hull

The Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) to the Secretary of State 890G.24/57: Telegram

[Document 414]

The Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, October 8, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 8:50 p.m.]

226. Reference Department’s No. 176 of September 14, 8 a.m. Continued illness of British Ambassador has made serious discussion business matters impossible. From informal talks with another in his Embassy having his confidence and discussions with my own assistants as well as a casual remark to me by Nuri, I am inclined to the opinion further effort to secure an agreement on basis existing Iraqi legislation will prove unproductive. The present Cabinet crisis (reference my 222, October 6, 5 p.m.19 ) seems to preclude for time being discussions with Nuri pending which opportunity I would welcome receiving suggested wording of draft agreement mentioned closing sentence Department’s telegram. I would also like to be informed if in referring to a “formal agreement” which would become effective as an “executive agreement” the Department seeks to avoid using the term treaty in connection with whatever agreement is finally arrived at with Iraqi Government whose ideals of their national status may view the signing of a treaty as of greater significance.

Wilson

19 Not printed.

The Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) to the Secretary of State 890G.24/58: Telegram

[Document 415]

The Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, October 17, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 10:10 p.m.]

240. Reference my No. 226, October 8, 1 p.m. Department may defer for the present sending wording of draft agreement mentioned in that message. With the approaching November opening of Parliament the situation gives promise of changing. Further discussions with British financial adviser indicate a possibility that Iraqi Government may undertake to pass legislation without further action by us. Nuri Pasha has been in Egypt for past week but returns in next few days. Will keep you advised of developments.

Wilson

The Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) to the Secretary of State 890G.24/65: Telegram

[Document 416]

The Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, December 14, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received December 15—9:48 p.m.]

291. Reference my 240, October 17, 1 p.m. Working under the assumption expressed in paragraph 2 of my 290, December 14, 4 p.m.20 I have not continued to press Iraqi Government for a settlement of questions relating to customs exemptions and demands for income tax payment on passenger and freight earnings of vessels arriving Basra nor have I officially taken up with Government question of recognition of military cards of identification army intends in any event to issue uniformed and civil personnel.

In view of prorogation of Parliament and delay in any declaration of war by Iraq it might be well for Department to let me have proposed wording of draft agreement mentioned closing sentence Department’s telegram 176, September 14, 8 a.m. (reference my 226, October 8, 1 p.m. and 240, October 17, 11 [1] p.m.).

I would also greatly appreciate a reply to this Legation’s as yet unanswered telegram 119, June 16, 10 a.m. as this last issue promises to become of greater insistence here and in Iran as well unless indeed by a declaration of war all of these questions as well as those mentioned in my 290, December 14, 4 p.m. automatically are answered to our satisfaction.

Wilson

20 Not printed; the assumption was that if Iraq declared war and signed the United Nations pact, thus becoming an ally, a separate treaty would not be necessary (740.0011 European War 1939/26512).

Unwillingness of the United States to request exemption for Americans from Iraqi residence taxUnwillingness of the United States to request exemption for Americans from Iraqi residence tax

[417] The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

Baghdad, August 28, 1942. [Received September 19.]

890G.111/44

[418] The Secretary of State to the Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson)

Washington, February 1, 1943.

890G.111/44

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State 890G.111/44

[Document 417]

The Chargé in Iraq (Farrell) to the Secretary of State

No. 1990 Baghdad, August 28, 1942.
[Received September 19.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that the Reverend Bernard Hakken, an American citizen engaged in missionary work at Baghdad, has requested the Legation’s intervention in procuring on his behalf the remission of the Iraqi annual tax on foreigners resident in the country. This tax amounts to I. D. O. 750 (equals $3.06).

At the Baghdad tax collector’s office Mr. Hakken was informed that if the Legation would officially assure the Iraqi Government that no residence tax is levied upon Iraqi citizens resident in the United States, the Iraqi Government would grant untaxed residence permits to American citizens living in Iraq.

In answer to the Legation’s inquiry, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs corroborates the tax collector’s statement to Mr. Hakken, and says that if a note in the tenor of the foregoing paragraph is sent by the Legation to the Ministry, the residence tax will be remitted for American citizens on grounds of reciprocity.

However, with regard to the small amount of the tax and because there are less than fifty Americans in Iraq subject to this tax, the Legation feels doubtful as to the wisdom of asking this favor of the Iraqi Government. The Department’s instructions in the matter are therefore requested.

Respectfully yours,

William S. Farrell

The Secretary of State to the Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson) 890G.111/44

[Document 418]

The Secretary of State to the Minister Resident in Iraq (Wilson)

No. 36 Washington, February 1, 1943.

Sir: Reference is made to the Legation’s despatch no. 1990 of August 28, 1942 concerning the request on the part of certain American citizens residing in Iraq that the Legation intervene in procuring remission of the Iraqi annual residence tax.

It is considered that the fact that this Government does not collect a residence tax from Iraqi nationals in the United States would not constitute a reasonable basis for requesting an exemption of Americans in Iraq from the tax in that country. If there is no discrimination against American citizens in the collection of the tax there would appear to be no reason why these American citizens should not pay the tax as is required of other nationals residing in Iraq. In view of the small amount of the tax in question and of the small number of American citizens involved it appears to be undesirable to request exemption, particularly since there does not appear to be any fundamental objection to the tax. It is considered furthermore that if exemption should be requested such action might be construed as an invitation to the Iraqi Government to request such exemption of Iraqi citizens residing in the United States from the payment of taxes of a character not levied in Iraq. For these reasons it is considered that you should not request the Iraqi Government to exempt American citizens residing in Iraq from payment of the tax in question.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
A. A. Berle, Jr.

Liberia:Liberia:

Contents

Defense agreement and arrangements between the United States and LiberiaDefense agreement and arrangements between the United States and Liberia1

1 For previous correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 532 ff.

[419] The Chargé in Liberia (Walton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, January 21, 1942—1 p.m. [Received January 23—12:27 p.m.]

882.7962/32½: Telegram

[420] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Walton)

Washington, January 28, 1942—9 p.m.

882.7962/22a: Telegram

[421] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard)

[Washington,] January 28, 1942.

882.7962/27

[422] Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, February 13, 1942—5 p.m. [Received February 14—10:01 a.m.]

882.7962/31: Telegram

[423] The President of Liberia (Barclay) to Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia

Monrovia, 14 February 1942.

882.20/560

[424] Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, February 17, 1942—11 a.m. [Received February 18—11:07 a.m.]

882.7962/41: Telegram

[425] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, February 25, 1942—11 a.m. [Received February 26—8:34 a.m.]

882.7962/46: Telegram

[426] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, February 26, 1942—10 p.m.

882.7962/46: Telegram

[427] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 2, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 2:54 p.m.]

882.7962/50: Telegram

[428] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 3, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 3:27 p.m.]

882.7962/51: Telegram

[429] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 3, 1942—4 p.m. [Received March 4—8:47 p.m.]

882.20/544: Telegram

[430] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 5, 1942—7 p.m.

882.7962/43: Telegram

[431] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 6, 1942—11 p.m. [Received March 6—10:57 p.m.]

882.7962/54: Telegram

[432] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 9, 1942—4 p.m. [Received March 9—3:41 p.m.]

882.7962/56: Telegram

[433] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 10, 1942—9 a.m. [Received March 10—8:31 a.m.]

882.7962/57: Telegram

[434] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 11, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 11:23 p.m.]

882.7962/60: Telegram

[435] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 11, 1942—10 p.m.

882.7962/46: Telegram

[436] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 13, 1942—4 p.m.

882.7962/61: Telegram

[437] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 13, 1942—6 p.m.

882.7962/59: Telegram

[438] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 13, 1942—9 p.m.

811.7962/112a: Telegram

[439] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 17, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 3:05 p.m.]

882.7962/64: Telegram

[440] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 17, 1942—8 p.m. [Received March 18—2:31 p.m.]

882.7962/66: Telegram

[441] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 18, 1942—10 p.m. [Received March 19—2:32 p.m.]

882.7962/67: Telegram

[442] Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay)

Monrovia, March 20, 1942.

882.20/561

[443] Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay)

Monrovia, March 21, 1942.

882.20/561

[444] Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay)

Monrovia, March 21, 1942.

882.20/561

[445] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 25, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 3:50 p.m.]

882.7962/75: Telegram

[446] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 25, 1942—9 p.m.

882.20/544: Telegram

[447] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 26, 1942—8 p.m.

882.7962/72: Telegram

[448] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 26, 1942—10 p.m.

882.20/556a: Telegram

[449] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 27, 1942—8 p.m. [Received March 28—2:33 p.m.]

882.20/552: Telegram

[450] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 29, 1942—3 p.m.

882.20/552: Telegram

[451] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 31, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 3:30 p.m.]

882.20/555: Telegram

[452] Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay)

Monrovia, March 31, 1942.

882.24/60

[453] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, April 7, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 3:10 p.m.]

882.7962/77: Telegram

[454] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, April 20, 1942—1 p.m. [Received April 20—12:39 p.m.]

882.7962/79: Telegram

[455] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, April 28, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 2:59 p.m.]

882.00/1157: Telegram

[456] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, April 30, 1942—11 p.m.

882.00/1157: Telegram

[457] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Liaison Officer (Wilson)

[Washington,] May 16, 1942.

882.20/599

[458] Memorandum by the Liaison Officer (Wilson)

[Washington,] May 23, 1942.

882.20/600

[459] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 23, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 1:20 p.m.]

882.20/569: Telegram

[460] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 11, 1942—11 p.m.

711.82/75a: Telegram

[461] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 14, 1942—2 p.m. [Received June 15—11:24 a.m.]

882.20/584: Telegram

[462] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 18, 1942—5 p.m. [Received June 19—3:12 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/22326: Telegram

[463] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 22, 1942—10 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/22326: Telegram

[464] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 25, 1942—4 p.m. [Received June 26—6:18 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/22468: Telegram

[465] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 25, 1942—5 p.m. [Received June 26—7:15 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/22469: Telegram

[466] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 27, 1942—7 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/22468: Telegram

[467] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 29, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 3:54 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/22539: Telegram

[468] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 30, 1942—8 p.m. [Received July 1—3:10 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/22594: Telegram

[469] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, July 11, 1942—10 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/22594: Telegram

[470] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 16, 1942—10 p.m. [Received July 17—3:11 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/22920: Telegram

[471] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 10, 1942—8 p.m.

882.7962/88: Telegram

[472] The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, August 28, 1942.

882.7962/38a

[473] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, September 15, 1942—11 p.m.

882.7962/117a: Telegram

[474] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 16, 1942—10 p.m. [Received September 17—4:09 p.m.]

882.7962/118: Telegram

[475] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, September 24, 1942—4 p.m.

882.7962/118: Telegram

[476] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 25, 1942—5 p.m. [Received September 26—2:09 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24511: Telegram

[477] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 1, 1942—10 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/24511: Telegram

[478] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 2, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 2:30 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24616: Telegram

[479] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 6, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 4:20 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24674: Telegram

[480] The Liberian Secretary of State (Simpson) to Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia

Monrovia, 6 October, 1942.

882.20/636

[481] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 9, 1942—7 p.m.

882.7962/129a: Telegram

[482] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 12, 1942—8 p.m. [Received October 13—10:03 a.m.]

882.7982/139: Telegram

[483] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 17, 1942—3 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/24616: Telegram

[484] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 4, 1942—noon.

882.20/628a: Telegram

[485] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, November 4, 1942—noon.

882.741/3a: Telegram

[486] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1942—5 p.m. [Received November 11—3:54 p.m.]

882.20/629: Telegram

[487] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, November 12, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 12:09 p.m.]

882.741/4: Telegram

[488] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, November 21, 1942—5 p.m.

740.0011 E. W. 1939/26011a: Telegram

[489] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, November 25, 1942—8 a.m. [Received 4:37 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/26012: Telegram

[490] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, December 4, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 4:53 p.m.]

882.24/47: Telegram

[491] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, December 10, 1942—6 p.m.

882.24/47: Telegram

[492] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, December 28, 1942—7 p.m.

882.24/47 Suppl: Telegram

The Chargé in Liberia (Walton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/32½: Telegram

[Document 419]

The Chargé in Liberia (Walton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, January 21, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received January 23—12:27 p.m.]

14. If report is true that Pan American engineers have been instructed to have Roberts Field in readiness for landing of bombers by January 26, Legation suggests that Liberian Government be approached for necessary permission.

Walton

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Walton) 882.7962/22a: Telegram

[Document 420]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Walton)

Washington, January 28, 1942—9 p.m.

11. The President has appointed Mr. Harry A. McBride as his special representative to enter into negotiations with President Barclay on the question of the use of the Pan American airport by military planes, and the related matter of the protection to be accorded to Liberia by the United States. Mr. McBride will proceed shortly by air to Liberia for this purpose, carrying with him instructions as to the scope of his mission. You may inform President Barclay in strictest confidence of his forthcoming arrival, but in view of the importance of this visit in relation to current developments, it is desired that no publicity of any nature be given to the matter at this time.

Mr. McBride is being granted a commission by the War Department and will proceed to Liberia with the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.

In view of the urgency of the problems to be discussed it is considered important that President Barclay should be prepared with full powers to negotiate with Mr. McBride and to make any arrangements which may appear necessary in matters affecting defense and protection in Liberia.

Further details will be sent to you in due course.

Hull

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard) 882.7962/27

[Document 421]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard)

[Washington,] January 28, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Juan Trippe, President, and Mr. Samuel Pryor, Pan American Airways.

Mr. Harvey S. Firestone, Jr.

Mr. Laribee, Firestone Tire and Rubber Company.

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of the President, in Liberia.

Colonel Bissell, War Department.

Mr. Murray2 Mr. Ailing3 Mr. Villard

A meeting was called to discuss the purposes of Mr. McBride’s forthcoming mission to Liberia. It was explained to the conference that Mr. McBride’s visit was to be mainly for the purpose of concluding the negotiations with President Barclay for the Pan American Airways contract and the lease of land for the airport construction at Harbel. Certain difficulties have been encountered in bringing these negotiations to a successful conclusion and it was the Department’s hope that Mr. McBride would be able to solve various problems in connection therewith and explain to President Barclay the viewpoint of the United States in regard to the use of Liberian territory for the transit of military planes to the Middle East.

Out of this general question arose the problem of the extent of protection to be accorded to Liberia by the armed forces of the United States. President Barclay had made a concise and statesmanlike request of the United States Government for the defense not only of the airport installations but of all of Liberia’s territory as well.4 The War Department had been approached on this matter and had indicated that it was not in a position to furnish protection at present, with the exception of defense material for the airport when the latter was completed.

Mr. McBride stated that in a conference on January 26 with the Secretary of War, he had learned that preparations were under way for a greater degree of protection than the War Department had so far been willing to indicate. Mr. McBride said that the arrangements which were to be made by the War Department for this purpose appeared to be entirely satisfactory.

The question of Liberia’s neutrality in the present war was then discussed. It was considered inadvisable for Liberia to make a declaration of war against Germany at this time, since no useful purpose would be served thereby and since Liberia might thus be exposed to deliberate attack by the Axis. On the other hand it was felt that the presence of German consular representatives and other agents on Liberian soil constitute a threat which should be removed as soon as possible.5 It was decided that the best interests of the Allies could be served by a severance of relations on the part of Liberia with the Axis powers. Mr. McBride stated that he would explain this point of view to President Barclay.

Among other subjects discussed were health conditions in Liberia; the turning over of road machinery to the Liberian Government after completion of the airport; the proposed loan of one million dollars to Liberia for road construction purposes; and the use of an amphibian airplane in a shuttle service between Fisherman Lake and Monrovia. With regard to the latter, Mr. Trippe said that the amphibian which had been promised in the first instance as an inducement to President Barclay to sign the Pan American contract had been diverted elsewhere to military use. He was however confident that another machine, now on its way to Africa, could be made available for Liberia. Mr. Trippe also inquired whether the shipment of a large supply of gasoline to Monrovia for refueling purposes would interfere with the negotiations to be undertaken by Mr. McBride. It was the general feeling that under present circumstances there was no reason why the gasoline should not be shipped as planned.

2 Wallace Murray, Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

3 Paul H. Ailing, Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

4 See telegram No. 131, December 22, 1941, 2 p.m., Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 544.

5 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517] ff.

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the Secretary of State 882.7962/31: Telegram

[Document 422]

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, February 13, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received February 14—10:01 a.m.]

24. Had first talk with Barclay this morning. He sends greetings to President Roosevelt and assurance of cooperation.

Hope to secure rights to control, operate and defend airport for military purposes by Monday. If this is granted we will then proceed to make more detailed agreement as soon as practicable embodying formal offer of: (1) Road equipment; (2) 800,000 or 1 million dollars for defense purposes; (3) adequate American protection of airport; (4) amphibian plane; (5) American assistance in organizing and training Liberian force of possibly 5000 men; (6) small arms and ammunition for 2500 to 3000 men. If airport rights are granted, Liberia will request that immediately a small nucleus of men to defend it be sent progressively by plane.…

Liberia’s next step will probably be, as soon as this small nucleus arrives, to break relations with Axis Powers similar to action of Latin American Republics and to deport Axis aliens.

Concerning the cash advance to Liberia, please arrange to have this ready immediately following granting of rights for deposit to credit of Republic of Liberia in a bank to be designated later.

Please cable urgently if any of above arrangements should be changed in any way. Am sending this personally as no signing officer here now, George6 having gone to Fisherman Lake with the Minister.7

McBride

6 William C. George, Vice Consul in Liberia.

7 Lester A. Walton, who was en route to the United States for consultation.

The President of Liberia (Barclay) to Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia 882.20/560

[Document 423]

The President of Liberia (Barclay) to Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia 8

Monrovia, 14 February 1942.

Sir: Owing to the critical situation of Liberia because of the war, and the fact that additional protection is necessary in order to safeguard the independence and security of the Republic, the Government of the Republic of Liberia requests that the Government of the United States, because of its traditional friendly interest in the welfare of Liberia, give such aid as may be possible in the defense of the Republic, and grants to the Government of the United States in this emergency the right to construct, control, operate and defend such military and commercial airports in the Republic as in consultation with the Government of the Republic of Liberia may mutually be considered necessary; and also to assist in the protection and defense of any part of the Republic which might be liable to attack in the present circumstances. This grant includes the right to construct access roads from Monrovia to the land plane fields and the sea plane facilities at Fisherman Lake.

These rights are granted as from this date, become effective immediately and shall remain in effect for the duration of the present war and six months thereafter. A more detailed agreement embodying said rights will be entered into as soon as practicable and shall be subject to Legislative approval.

Yours faithfully,

Edwin Barclay

8 Handed to the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard) by Mr. McBride upon his return from Liberia.

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the Secretary of State 882.7962/41: Telegram

[Document 424]

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, February 17, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received February 18—11:07 a.m.]

29. Department’s No. 20, February 15, 4 p.m.9 Appreciate message. Hope 25 or 30 officers and men can be sent progressively by air with few machine guns so that steps in regard to Axis can be taken promptly. It is dangerous to leave them here.

As to credit, War Department’s letter of January 159 conditions this on granting of rights and not on completion of airport, and I so informed Barclay. Hope this credit can be made available promptly so that small quantities of steel and cement for bridges can be ordered at once as delay in arrival will be great in any event.

Credit should be arranged so that Liberia could contract with American firm to build roads and part of money would necessarily have to be used for local labor. Would urge that Panair accept such a contract at cost or little more using small part of personnel already here after airport completed. For local important reasons this should be Panair and not Firestone. Strongly advise Trippe to do this if possible. Roads immediately involved are completion Kakata–Dobli Island Road about 20 miles and extension interior road Memeta some 30 miles northward. All simple construction with 5 or 6 small bridges.

War Department’s letter January 15, rights granted include construction access roads. Hope present contractors, as part of airport project, can be instructed to do road from point where plantation meets Du River to Mount Barclay, 12 miles; widen road Mount Barclay to White Plains to Suehn, 25 miles; and build from Suehn to Fisherman Lake, 25 to 30 miles. Much of this is cleared, construction not difficult. Four or five small bridges and simple ferries over St. Paul and Loffa. This is highly important and urgent for our own defense purposes. If this can be done, credit to Liberia may be 800,000 dollars; if not, credit should be 1 million dollars so that Liberia can pay for these access roads.

Liberian Government feels that Firestone and Panair should begin operating separately and independently as soon as practicable.

McBride

9 Not printed.

9 Not printed.

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/46: Telegram

[Document 425]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, February 25, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received February 26—8:34 a.m.]

44. From McBride. Referring again Department’s 20, February 15, 4 p.m.,9a credit to Liberia. President Barclay feels that Liberia should be allowed to use up to $150,000 of the credit to increase and equip Liberian frontier force so that they would have at least an effective border patrol of 2000 to 2500 men. Liberia has no other funds for this purpose. Under present circumstances I recommend that this request be granted in our interest as well as that of Liberia. Withdrawal and expenditure of this allotment could be under joint authorization of Liberian Secretary of Treasury and American Financial Adviser.

Remainder of credit to be used exclusively for road construction. How soon and under what arrangement can Liberia order $80,000 worth of cement and steel for bridges from this credit? [McBride.]

Wharton

9a Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.7962/46: Telegram

[Document 426]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, February 26, 1942—10 p.m.

28. Your 44, February 25, 11 a.m. For McBride. The War Department is sending to Liberia by air within a few days Colonel Leon A. Fox of the Medical Corps and Captain William N. Beard of the Engineers to make appropriate surveys. In the case of Colonel Fox’s mission, it would be helpful if you could arrange in advance for the friendly cooperation of the Liberian Government, as the War Department deems it essential that adequate sanitary and health precautions should be taken before American forces are sent to Liberia.

Details in regard to the credit plan are promised by the War Department in a day or two, and answers to your questions will be transmitted as soon as possible. Meanwhile preparations are being made for an initial force of Negro troops commanded by white officers, in addition to a detachment of white mechanics and technicians. It is understood that fighter planes will be included in defense equipment.

Welles

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/50: Telegram

[Document 427]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 2, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 2:54 p.m.]

52. From McBride.

1. First plane arrived yesterday overnighted at Harbel. Pilot enthusiastic about landing field. Some difficulty encountered because of fadeouts but radio contact Harbel to Accra for plane direction finally established.

2. Obtained permission from Liberian Government February 17 for Harbel radio station to communicate directly with Fisherman Lake and other necessary points. Such communication to be exclusively for direction of plane traffic. This permission, which is outside their contract, granted to the Firestone station only temporarily until Panair can establish its own radio facilities at air field. This latter should be given prompt attention. [McBride.]

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/51: Telegram

[Document 428]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 3, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 3:27 p.m.]

54. From McBride. Am sending today as number 5510 in five sections text of proposed agreement between Liberia and the United States covering military use of airports and defense areas in Liberia. It follows agreement with Greenland11 with modifications appropriate to Liberian situation. It was worked out in consultation with President Barclay who approves this text.

Under Liberian procedure, agreement must be submitted to Liberian Senate for approval and will therefore probably become public. Barclay informs me Senate will take prompt action.

It will be appreciated if Department will let me have any comment or suggested changes either as to form or content as soon as feasible. I should like to conclude matter before leaving Monrovia if possible.

Will it be expedient to publish this agreement in the United States? Have I necessary authorization to sign for the United States?

After agreement signed I would send confidential letter to Barclay embodying specific items of assistance. Letter would first be submitted to Department. [McBride.]

Wharton

10  Infra.

11 Signed at Washington, April 9, 1941, Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 204, or 55 Stat. (pt. 2) 1245; for negotiations, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. ii, pp. 35 ff.

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.20/544: Telegram

[Document 429]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 3, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received March 4—8:47 p.m.]

55. Whereas: The situation of Liberia is made critical by the existing war and there is danger of attack or aggression by unfriendly powers; and 2. Additional protection is necessary in order that the independence and security of the Republic may be safeguarded; and

3. The Government of Liberia has requested that the Government of the United States because of its traditional friendly interest in the welfare of Liberia, give such aid as may be possible in the circumstances in the defense of the Republic; and

4. The Government of Liberia has granted the Government of the United States in this emergency the right to construct, control, operate and defend at the sole cost and expense of the latter and without charge to the Republic of Liberia, such military and commercial airports in the Republic as in consultation with the Government of the Republic of Liberia may mutually be considered necessary; and the right also to assist in the protection and defense of any part of the Republic which might be liable to attack during the present war, said grant to include the right to construct access roads from Monrovia to the airport at Roberts Field on the Farmington River and the seaplane facilities at Fisherman Lake in the county of Grand Cape Mount; and

5. The above mentioned rights have been granted as of February 14, 1942, to become effective from that date and to remain in effect for the duration of the existing war and for a period not to exceed 6 months thereafter;

Therefore: The undersigned:

Clarence L. Simpson, Secretary of State of the Republic of Liberia, acting on behalf of the Government of Liberia; and

Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of the President of the United States of America, acting on behalf of the Government of the United States, have agreed as follows:

Article I

The grants of rights specified above shall also include the right to improve and deepen channels, to construct connecting roads, communication services, fortifications, repair and storage facilities and housing for personnel, and generally the right to do any and all things necessary to insure the efficient operation, maintenance and protection of such defense facilities as may be established.

Article II

The Republic of Liberia retains sovereignty over all airports, fortifications and other defense areas as may be established under the rights above granted. The Government of the United States during the life of this agreement shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any such airports and defense areas in Liberia and over the military and civilian personnel of the Government of the United States and their families within the airports, fortifications and other defense areas, as well as over all other persons within such areas except Liberian citizens.

It is understood, however, that the Government of the United States may turn over to the Liberian authorities for trial and punishment any person, except as above excluded, committing an offense in such defense areas. And the Liberian authorities will turn over to the United States authorities for trial and punishment any of the United States military or civilian personnel and their families who may commit offenses outside such defense areas. The Liberian authorities and the United States authorities will take adequate measures to insure the prosecution and punishment in cases of conviction of all such offenders, it being understood that the relevant evidence shall be furnished reciprocally to the two authorities.

Article III

It is agreed that the Government of the United States shall have the right to establish and maintain postal facilities and commissary stores to be used solely by the military and civilian personnel of the United States Government and their families stationed in Liberia in connection with the above agreement and with such aid in the defense of Liberia as the Government of the United States may furnish.

Article IV

All materials, supplies and equipment for the construction, use and operation of said air ports of the United States Government and for the personal needs of the military and civilian personnel and their families, shall be permitted entry into Liberia free of customs duties, excise taxes, or any other charges, and the said personnel and their families shall also be exempt from all forms of taxes, assessments and other levies by the Liberian Government and authorities, including exemption from Liberian regulations pertaining to passports, visas and residence permits.

The Government of the United States undertakes to respect all legitimate interests of Liberia and of Liberian citizens, as well as all the laws, regulations and customs relating to the native population and the internal administration of Liberia. In exercising the rights derived from this agreement, the Government of the United States undertakes to give sympathetic consideration to all representations made by the Liberian authorities with respect to the welfare of the inhabitants of Liberia.

In respect of the commercial use of such airports, passengers, mail and cargo entering or leaving Liberia by air shall have transit over such airports to and from a Liberian customs station established adjacent to said airports and under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Government of Liberia.

[Article V]

As [The] United States undertakes to extend to the Government of Liberia such aid as may be possible in the circumstances in the protection of the Republic, including necessary equipment for road construction, certain monetary aids for defense purposes, certain assistance in the organization and training of the Liberian military forces and certain other assistance of a similar nature.

Article VI

The Government of the United States undertakes that at the end of the war and the additional period contemplated in paragraph 5 of the preamble to this agreement, to withdraw immediately all military forces of the United States. It is mutually understood and agreed that the jurisdiction hereby conferred on the Government of the United States over any air ports and defense areas, and over military and civilian personnel under the provisions of article II of this agreement, shall automatically end with the termination of this agreement.

Article VII

The Government of Liberia and the Government of the United States agree that at this time the above agreement shall apply to the air facilities at Roberts Field on the Farmington River, and at Fisherman Lake in the county of Grand Cape Mount. If other defense areas of this kind are deemed necessary in the future, their location will be fixed by mutual agreement.

Article VIII

For the purpose of this agreement, a defense area shall be construed as the actual areas of said air ports and such additional areas in the immediate neighborhood upon which installations necessary for defense may be established by agreement between the United States commanding officer and the Liberian Government.

Signed, at Monrovia, Liberia, in duplicate, the texts having equal force, this . . . . . day of March, 1942.
Wharton

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.7962/43: Telegram

[Document 430]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 5, 1942—7 p.m.

35. Your 36, February 21, 11 a.m.12 For McBride. We are advised by the War Department that a military force will be despatched in the near future to construct the necessary installations for the defense garrison. Pending arrival of the defense force, protection for the Harbel airfield will be provided by the construction force.

It is proposed to send a balanced force for the defense of Harbel as soon as the essential facilities are available. Included in that force is to be a pursuit squadron which, it is contemplated, will provide defense for the seaplane landing at Fisherman Lake in addition to the Harbel airport.

The many urgent demands on air transportation preclude the immediate sending of a small defense force to Liberia by air, although the desirability thereof is recognized.

We understand from Firestone that the German trader Kirstein has not yet been removed from Robertsport area. Please advise when this is accomplished.

You may wish to mention to President Barclay that Mr. Walton has been rendering valuable assistance in consultation with the War Department and other Government agencies interested in the security of Liberia.

Welles

12 Not printed; it urged sending a defense force of 30 men as soon as possible and outlined needs as to housing and equipment for this force and for the forces to be sent later.

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/54: Telegram

[Document 431]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 6, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received March 6—10:57 p.m.]

56. From McBride. Department’s 35, March 5, 7 p.m. Plans on military force noted and am sure will be very satisfactory.

Realize fully demands on our transportation but urgently request that [at] least 2 officers and 16 armed men be sent at once by air, even if only 1 or 2 persons on each incoming plane. Colonel Phillip Kemp of Ferrying Command was here yesterday from Accra and strongly concurs in this request as does Wharton and Liberian Government. This defense nucleus could at least prevent field from being taken and held by a handful of enemy forces.

Our planes are arriving and there are actually no men to guard planes or field to prevent a hostile plane from landing.

Furthermore, on basis Department’s 25, February 24, 9 p.m.,13 Barclay was informed small nucleus would be sent and he is awaiting it anxiously. Upon arrival he desires to take action on German subjects here who are a growing danger.

Referring to larger force, it is hoped that the squadron of planes may be sent with the construction force. In this respect Colonel Kemp feels detachment of light bombers, if available, could serve admirably for defense purposes and also for anti-submarine activity. [McBride.]

Wharton

13 Not printed.

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/56: Telegram

[Document 432]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 9, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received March 9—3:41 p.m.]

63. From McBride. Legation’s 56, March 6, 11 p.m. Pending arrival of nucleus force, it is believed urgent that some protection be provided for Harbel Field immediately. Colonel Fox, Captain Beard, Wharton, Firestone manager and I suggest that Captain Beard be authorized to organize and instruct about 20 carefully selected Pan American construction men now on field in use of 2 machine guns which Colonel Kemp has made available from Accra. Weapons and ammunition to remain in custody of two commissioned officers who are now here at all times. This will not interfere with or delay Beard’s mission. [McBride.]

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/57: Telegram

[Document 433]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 10, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received March 10—8:31 a.m.]

64. From McBride. Colonel Fox, Captain Beard and I called on President Barclay yesterday. He assured Fox of fullest cooperation in his investigation of health conditions. Surveys of Fox and Beard in progress.

Hope details of credit plan can be sent promptly as I must soon inform Barclay thereof. [McBride.]

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/60: Telegram

[Document 434]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 11, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 11:23 p.m.]

68. From McBride. Legation’s 54, March 3, 9 a.m. last paragraph. Following is draft of confidential letter to President Barclay which I would suggest be handed to him upon signing of agreement.

“Referring to article V of the agreement between the Governments of Liberia and the United States regarding the use of airports and defense areas in Liberia, I have the honor to inform Your Excellency that the specific defense aids which the Government of the United States undertakes to extend to the Government of Liberia are as follows: 1. The road building machinery and equipment which has been used in the construction of the airport at Roberts Field and access roads as soon as this work has been completed;

2. Adequate protection by American forces of the airports and such other defense areas as may be established under the agreement;

3. Assistance through the United States War Department in organizing and training a Liberian military force of two to three thousand men by supplying, at American expense, qualified personnel for such purposes;

4. A supply of small arms and ammunition to be given by the United States for a Liberian force of two to three thousand men;

5. The extension of a credit in the sum of $1,000,000 from Lend-Lease or other United States funds for the purpose of assisting in the road construction and defense program of Liberia.

In this connection it is understood that the military use of the airports at Roberts Field and Fisherman Lake during the life of the agreement, shall not affect the rights already granted to Pan American Airways Company in the concession and lease extended to that company, for the operation of its commercial air services.”

It will be appreciated if Department’s comment on the agreement and the above draft will be sent as soon as possible. [McBride.]

Wharton

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.7962/46: Telegram

[Document 435]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 11, 1942—10 p.m.

48. Your 44, February 25, 11 a.m. For McBride. Details of the credit plan are being worked out and should be available shortly. It is proposed to make Liberia eligible for Lend-Lease aid,14 which would doubtless cover the needs of the frontier force as described by you. War Department is planning to undertake preliminary road construction to the extent of about $200,000, under the credit, thus relieving Liberia of any immediate responsibility in ordering materials.

Welles

14 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 493] ff.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.7962/61: Telegram

[Document 436]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 13, 1942—4 p.m.

52. Your 71, March 12, 3 p.m.15 For McBride from Villard. Text of agreement is satisfactory as far as we are concerned but War Department has not yet given its approval. Except for possible minor modifications we do not believe that any change will be necessary. Official reply will be sent as soon as possible.

Please repeat last paragraph of Legation’s 68, March 11, 9 a.m., which appears incomplete. Our telegram regarding Lend-Lease aid should more than answer credit question.

Congratulations on excellent work so far. [Villard.]

Welles

15 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.7962/59: Telegram

[Document 437]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 13, 1942—6 p.m.

53. Your 64, March 10, 9 a.m. For McBride. In order to insure that the fullest protection against disease will be accorded to the United States armed forces and with the view to improving the health of the native population, the War Department explains that there should be a degree of cooperation between Liberian health officials and the United States forces similar to that now existing in the United States betweeen local, state and federal health agencies and army authorities. It is felt by the War Department that the United States forces should have under their control all strictly military areas, as well as any contiguous areas which would present a health hazard to American troops by reason of existing conditions.

Welles

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 811.7962/112a: Telegram

[Document 438]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 13, 1942—9 p.m.

54. For McBride. Please telegraph what measures can in your opinion be taken to exercise censorship in Liberia regarding present and future plans and operations of American forces, including particularly activities at the airport. War Department understands that Associated Press maintains a correspondent in Monrovia, believed to be the wife of a Firestone employee.

You may in your discretion discuss this subject with President Barclay.

Welles

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/64: Telegram

[Document 439]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 17, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 3:05 p.m.]

83. From McBride. Department’s 53, March 13, 6 p.m. President Barclay assured me today that fullest cooperation will be extended by Liberian health authorities. United States forces will be given full control in defense areas and any contiguous areas they may deem desirable. [McBride.]

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/66: Telegram

[Document 440]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 17, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received March 18—2:31 p.m.]

84. From McBride. Department’s 54, March 13, 9 p.m. As soon as defense force arrives President Barclay intends to start general censorship in Liberia as strict as possible under the circumstances.

Associated Press correspondent is Mrs. Donna Elizabeth Jamieson, wife of Firestone employee, address W. L. Jamieson, Fredonia, Pennsylvania. She is presumably leaving shortly by air for the United States with other American women.

All mail from Liberia and radiograms, including Harbel–Akron,15a should be censored in United States, also only private mail being carried by plane, passengers or crew.

On arrival of nucleus force strict patrol should be instituted to prevent any unauthorized person from approaching Roberts Field Airport. When larger forces arrive patrols should be increased and thrown around all camp sites. Censorship will also have to be instituted in Post Offices of United States forces.

Is there anything further that could be done here? [McBride.]

Wharton

15a Akron, Ohio, home office of the Firestone Company.

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/67: Telegram

[Document 441]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 18, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received March 19—2:32 p.m.]

88. From McBride. Department’s 52, March 13, 4 p.m. Am deeply concerned at delay in approval of agreement. Our position is weakening daily here due to increased submarine activity, two ships having been sunk off Liberian coast within a week, one of them within sight of Cape Palmas, and to Department’s instruction to evacuate American nationals.16 Liberian Government now so anxious about situation that I am afraid difficulty may be met in proceeding with agreement here unless it is forthcoming immediately. Strongly recommend it be approved in present form. Any changes that may be desired could be incorporated in a subsequent amendment. [McBride.]

Wharton

16 See circular telegram dated February 20, 10 p.m., vol. i, p. 271.

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay) 882.20/561

[Document 442]

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay)17

Monrovia, March 20, 1942.

Dear Mr. President: With reference to the credit in the amount of $1,000,000, which is to be established for Liberia by the United States Government it is my understanding that the Liberian Government will make use of the credit for defense purposes in the following manner: 1. Approximately $150,000 for the payment locally of an increased Frontier Force;

2. Approximately $200,000 to be expended by the United States War Department in the construction of an access road between the Roberts Field Airport and Fisherman Lake;

3. Approximately $600,000 for the construction of permanent roads, such construction to be performed under a contract which would be granted to an American firm considered competent for the purpose by the United States War Department, employing the machinery which has been used in the construction of Roberts Field Airport and which will be turned over for the construction of Liberian roads;

4. The remainder to be used for further equipment of the Frontier Force for such items as, uniforms, housing, sustenance et cetera, and for improving Liberian radio communications.

It will be gratefully appreciated if you will be good enough to confirm this understanding if it is in accord with your wishes.18

Sincerely,

H. A. McBride

17 Copies of this letter and the two letters infra were handed to the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard) by Mr. McBride upon his return from Liberia.

18 Mr. McBride subsequently indicated that there was no reply from President Barclay.

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay) 882.20/561

[Document 443]

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay)

Monrovia, March 21, 1942.

My Dear Mr. President: In our recent conversation I had the honor of informing you that in order to safeguard the health of United States troops, the United States War Department requested the cooperation of the Liberian health officials in a manner similar to that existing in the United States between the Army authorities and the local Federal and State agencies.

The War Department requested that American Army medical authorities be given health and sanitary control in all strictly defense areas which may be set-up under our agreement, as well as in any contiguous areas which such medical authorities might deem to present a health hazard to the United States troops. It was my understanding that you are willing to grant these facilities in the plans now being made for the defense and protection of the Republic.

Faithfully yours,

Harry A. McBride

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay) 882.20/561

[Document 444]

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay)

Monrovia, March 21, 1942.

My Dear Mr. President: When I last had the honor of conferring with you, I informed you that among the urgent defense measures which the United States War Department felt were necessary at this time, was the immediate construction of a road connecting the Roberts Field Airport with a point on the Du River opposite the Town of Marshall, and also the allocation of land on the north bank of the Du River to be used for the construction of docks and landing facilities, as well as land for an emergency landing strip for airplanes just west of the Town of Marshall between the Du River and ocean.

The War Department desires to proceed with the utmost possible expedition in this construction so that it may be finished within a very short space of time.

It is my understanding that, in urgent measures to be taken for the defense and protection of the Republic, the construction of the above facilities may be proceeded with immediately, and it would be greatly appreciated if you would be good enough to confirm this understanding.

Faithfully yours,

H. A. McBride

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/75: Telegram

[Document 445]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 25, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 3:50 p.m.]

100. From McBride for Villard. If agreement is not yet approved please phone John Martyn, assistant to Secretary of War and ask him to give the Secretary following personal message from me: I would be grateful if War Department could approve agreement with Liberia which I have negotiated and inform Department of State. Delay is weakening our position here. Many thanks.

[McBride]
Wharton

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.20/544: Telegram

[Document 446]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 25, 1942—9 p.m.

68. Your 55, March 3, 4 p.m. For McBride. War Department comments as follows on draft agreement:

In Article II the vesting in the United States of exclusive jurisdiction over all persons except Liberian citizens is viewed as somewhat greater than the United States can legally maintain through military courts. According to military law, the classes of civilians amenable to such jurisdiction are strictly limited to “persons accompanying or serving with” the United States Army in the field, no other civilians being amenable to military jurisdiction of the type here contemplated. In order to take care of this, therefore, it is suggested that in the second paragraph of this article the words “except as above excluded” should be omitted, making the first sentence of paragraph 2, Article II read in this manner: “It is understood, however, that the Government of the United States may turn over to the Liberian authorities for trial and punishment any person committing an offense in such defense area.”

In Article VI the following recommendations are made: (a) Since the additional period is actually provided in the agreement, the expression “additional period contemplated” should read “additional period provided”.

(b) Since the word “immediately” if taken literally and in its legal sense might make execution of the covenant of withdrawal impossible, the expression “as soon as practicable” should be substituted for the word “immediately”.

(c) The second sentence of this paragraph should provide that the jurisdiction of the United States shall continue until all matters calling for judicial determination, but undisposed of at the termination of the agreement, shall have been disposed of by the United States authorities, or, alternatively, until withdrawal of the United States forces shall be complete. As the draft now stands, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the United States is terminated simultaneously with the term of the agreement, no provision being made for the disposal of cases that may then be in various stages of progress.

The Department assumes furthermore that the proposed agreement will in no way prejudice the post-war commercial rights of Pan American Airways and that upon termination of the military uses to which the airports may be put the Pan American contract as negotiated in June 1941 will remain in effect for commercial purposes.

Subject to the above corrections and understanding the War Department informally approves the draft agreement. As soon as the signature of the Secretary of War has been obtained you will be promptly notified.

Welles

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.7962/72: Telegram

[Document 447]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 26, 1942—8 p.m.

70. Your 96, March 22, 2 p.m.19 For McBride: Secretary of War has now signed letter approving agreement, subject to modifications described in Department’s 68, March 25, 9 p.m. You may therefore proceed immediately to final action.

The War Department also concurs in your proposed confidential letter to President Barclay20 with the exception of items 4 and 5. It suggests the replacement of these items by the following: “4. The extension of a credit in the sum of $800,000 from Lend-Lease or other United States funds for the purpose of assisting in the road construction and defense program of Liberia.

5. A supply of small arms and ammunition for a force of two to three thousand men to be made available to the Liberian Government by the United States as a part of supplies to be furnished under the credit above mentioned.

6. The construction by the United States of access roads to areas required by the American defense forces in Liberia.”

At the risk of repetition, it should once again be emphasized that in addition to the $800,000 mentioned in item 4, the Ferrying Command is spending $200,000 for the construction of the most important access roads. The total constitutes the so-called million dollar program of assistance to Liberia. You are authorized to amend the letter so as to make this clear if you consider it advisable.

Welles

19 Not printed.

20 See telegram No. 68, March 11, 9 a.m., from the Chargé in Liberia, p. 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.20/556a: Telegram

[Document 448]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 26, 1942—10 p.m.

71. For McBride. The War Department in a letter dated March 17 has agreed to turn over its road construction equipment to the Government of Liberia when no longer required by the United States forces in Liberia.

Further statement is made that the Liberian Government should be responsible for organizing and equipping Liberian native troops, although War Department will assist in their organization and training.

With reference to the $800,000 to be made available under the million dollar program, the War Department states that this amount will cover the cost of (a) constructing roads, and (b) organizing, equipping and supporting a native military force for the purpose of assisting in the defense of Liberia.

Welles

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.20/552: Telegram

[Document 449]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 27, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received March 28—2:33 p.m.]

104. From McBride. Department’s 68, March 25, 9 p.m. All changes in agreement suggested by State and War Departments approved by President Barclay except as follows:

Article VIb. He agrees to eliminate word “immediately” provided we will also agree to eliminate words “as soon as practicable”. He is insistent on this point.

Article VI thus reads.

“The Government of the United States undertakes, at the end of the war and the additional period provided in paragraph 5 of the preamble to this agreement, to withdraw all military forces of the United States. It is mutually understood and agreed that the jurisdiction hereby conferred on the Government of the United States over any airports and defense areas, and over military and civilian personnel under the provisions of article II of this agreement, shall continue until all matters calling for judicial determination, but undisposed of after the termination of this agreement, shall have been disposed of by the United States authorities, or, alternately, until the withdrawal of the United States forces shall be complete.”

That agreement will in no way prejudice commercial rights of Panair is covered in confidential letter to President Barclay.

Department’s 70, March 26, 8 p.m.

Proposed confidential letter to President Barclay will be changed to conform with War Department’s wishes and I will emphasize matter of million dollar program of assistance to Liberia.

Agreement will be signed morning of March 31 and confidential letter handed to Barclay, unless I am instructed to the contrary. I will prepare to leave a day or two thereafter. Please inform family.

I am deeply grateful for Department’s splendid assistance. [McBride.]

Wharton

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.20/552: Telegram

[Document 450]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 29, 1942—3 p.m.

74. Your 104, March 27, 8 p.m. For McBride. Changes in Article VI approved.

Department congratulates you on extremely able manner in which you have handled negotiations and on successful outcome thereof.

Welles

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.20/555: Telegram

[Document 451]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 31, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 3:30 p.m.]

113. From McBride. Agreement signed today.21 Am departing tonight on TWA stratoliner for Washington.

Department’s 75, March 29, 4 p.m.22 President Barclay consents to RAF refueling at Fisherman Lake on following conditions:

That planes refuel only and take off as soon as possible, crews to wear civilian clothes, consent granted temporarily until airports in Liberia can be defended by American forces. Colonel Kemp at Accra informed. [McBride.]

Wharton

21 For text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 275, or 56 Stat. (pt. 2) 1621.

22 Not printed.

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay) 882.24/60

[Document 452]

Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia, to the President of Liberia (Barclay)23

Monrovia, March 31, 1942.

Excellency: Referring to Article 5 of the Agreement between the Governments of Liberia and the United States, covering the use of airports and defense areas in Liberia, and signed on this date, I have the honor to inform Your Excellency, in confidence, that the specific defense aids which the Government of the United States undertakes to extend to the Government of Liberia are as follows: 1. The road building machinery and equipment which has been used in the construction of the airport at Roberts Field and access roads as soon as this work has been completed;

2. Adequate protection by American forces of the airports and such other defense areas as may be established under the Agreement;

3. Assistance through the United States War Department in organizing and training a Liberian military force of two to three thousand men by supplying, at American expense, qualified personnel for such purposes;

4. The extension of a credit in the sum of eight hundred thousand dollars from Lend-Lease or other United States funds for the purpose of assisting in the road construction and defense program of Liberia;

5. A supply of small arms and ammunition for a force of two to three thousand men to be made available to the Liberian Government by the United States as a part of supplies to be furnished under the credit above mentioned;

6. The construction by the United States of access roads to areas required by the American defense forces in Liberia.

In the construction of these access roads the United States will spend two hundred thousand dollars, which is in addition to the eight hundred thousand dollars mentioned in item 4. The most important of these roads will connect Roberts Field with Fisherman Lake. The total constitutes what we may call the Million Dollar Program of Assistance to Liberia.

In this connection it is further understood that the military use of the airports at Roberts Field and Fisherman Lake during the life of the Agreement, shall in no way prejudice the rights already granted to Pan American Airways in the concession and lease extended to that company, for the operation of the commercial air services.

Accept [etc.]

Harry A. McBride

A letter, of which this is a true copy, was handed to President Barclay today, March 31, 1942, by me in the presence of Clifton R. Wharton, Esquire, American Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

H. A. McBride

23 Copy transmitted to the Department by the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) in his despatch No. 23, February 2, 1943; received February 23.

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/77: Telegram

[Document 453]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, April 7, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 3:10 p.m.]

120. Roberts Field lease agreement and contract for Grumman service concluded and signed today by Liberian Government and Panair. Lease for Fisherman Lake will probably be signed April 9.

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/79: Telegram

[Document 454]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, April 20, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received April 20—12:39 p.m.]

132. Referring to my 120, April 7, 2 p.m. Fisherman Lake agreement signed today.

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.00/1157: Telegram

[Document 455]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, April 28, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 2:59 p.m.]

136. Secretary of State Simpson states that President Barclay is anxious to adjourn Liberian Legislature which has been in continuous session since last October, longest in history, in view of his understanding that defense forces would be in Liberia by end of April, he would like to know when conditions will permit him to submit agreement to Legislature for approval.

Legislature, to my knowledge, is being held for express purpose of submission of agreement which to avoid publicity, it was agreed to withhold until adequate defense forces reached Liberia.

Wharton

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.00/1157: Telegram

[Document 456]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, April 30, 1942—11 p.m.

105. Your 136, April 28, 2 p.m. There has been a slight delay in carrying out the defense plans, which however is now being overcome. It is believed that it will be possible to submit the agreement to the legislature toward the latter part of May, when an adequate force will have arrived in Liberia.

Hull

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Liaison Officer (Wilson) 882.20/599

[Document 457]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Liaison Officer (Wilson)

[Washington,] May 16, 1942.

Mr. Wilson: In a conversation the other day with Mr. Frederick P. Hibbard, our Chargé d’Affaires at Monrovia,24 Mr. Welles requested that a memorandum be prepared for discussion at the next liaison meeting on the subject of our military plans in Liberia.

It will be recalled that Mr. Harry A. McBride negotiated an agreement with President Barclay for certain military rights to be enjoyed by the United States in Liberia during the course of the present war; and this agreement is still to be submitted to the Liberian legislature for ratification. President Barclay is holding the legislature in session for an unprecedentedly long period to receive the agreement, which of course will become a matter of public knowledge as soon as it has been acted upon. For reasons of military secrecy, it is not desired that the agreement should become known until the arrival in Liberia of an adequate defense force, at which time announcement will be made not only of the existence of the agreement but of Lend-Lease aid to Liberia.

So far less than 100 men have been assembled in Liberia to guard the airport at Harbel and the Pan American clipper installations at Fisherman Lake. I understand that the War Department is having difficulty in obtaining adequate escort for the vessels which will carry American troops to Liberia. The sinkings have been numerous off the Liberian coast and it is obvious that the country is exposed to attack both from the sea and from the air.

President Barclay is still awaiting word from us as to when it may be possible to submit the agreement to the legislature. Meanwhile, he and the Liberian people are extremely nervous over the long delay in providing protection by American troops. The question of a suitable air defense for the airport and for patrolling the nearby waters also remains unanswered.

As we shall undoubtedly be pressed by President Barclay for some indication of our intentions, it is believed that the urgency of the matter should be stressed at the liaison committee meeting and an attempt made to obtain from the War Department some idea of the progress being made in sending into Liberia adequate protective forces.

Paul H. Alling

24 Mr. Hibbard was in Washington for consultation before assuming his duties in Monrovia.

Memorandum by the Liaison Officer (Wilson) 882.20/600

[Document 458]

Memorandum by the Liaison Officer (Wilson)25

[Washington,] May 23, 1942.

At the meeting of the Liaison Committee on May 20, the necessity of sending additional American troops to Liberia was discussed. The representatives of the War Department stated that a construction force of over 1000 men is scheduled to sail the latter part of this month. This force is armed with anti-tank and anti-aircraft artillery, machine guns, rifles, and pistols. Consequently, although these troops are primarily a construction force, they are also combat engineers.

The Under Secretary expressed the opinion that it would be helpful if President Barclay could be discreetly informed of the expected arrival of this force.

25 Addressed to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Ailing), the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard), and the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray).

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.20/569: Telegram

[Document 459]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 23, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 1:20 p.m.]

161. In view of Liberian Government’s invitation to Germans to leave country as reported in my 159, May 22,26 increased submarine activity along Liberian coast is anticipated. To combat such activity, as well as for other defense purposes, I urgently request that initial flight of three light bombers be stationed here as soon as practicable. In this connection I refer to last paragraph of Colonel McBride’s telegram 56, March 6. Such a detachment would also go far at this time to reassure Liberian Government.

Wharton

26  Post, p. 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523].

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 711.82/75a: Telegram

[Document 460]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 11, 1942—11 p.m.

179. I should appreciate it if President Barclay would set aside sufficient time in these critical days to discuss with you personally whatever important matters may be pending in the relations between our two countries. I feel that in order successfully to carry out the mutual tasks which lie before us, it is essential to maintain the closest possible contact and to advise and consult on all phases of developments now taking place.

I should also be glad to receive frequent and detailed telegraphic reports from your office as to the progress of our operations in Liberia.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/584: Telegram

[Document 461]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 14, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received June 15—11:24 a.m.]

190. After a conference with Colonel John E. Wood, commanding officer of the American forces in Liberia, who reached Roberts Field yesterday by air from Freetown I saw President Barclay and informed him that the first vessel carrying troops and equipment would reach Marshall in the early morning of June 15. I asked him for the protection of all concerned to prohibit the sending of any messages in clear over the Liberian radio regarding troop movements and if possible to delay any code messages emanating from the German and French Legations which he agreed to do. Colonel Wood is requesting Panair and Firestone radios to use the same precaution. He will also censor the dispatches of the five American correspondents arriving with the troops.

I again urged the President to request the German Consul to leave the country. He was somewhat reluctant but after some discussion agreed to submit the question to the Cabinet on Wednesday. I believe with a little more pressure this can be satisfactorily arranged.

I also told him that in view of the arrival of an adequate protective force I felt he could submit the agreement to the Legislature for ratification. He said a session would be called this week and that he was sure ratification would be voted at once. Although with submission to the Legislature the agreement will become public he has agreed to exercise as much precaution as possible to keep the details secret.

I am arranging for surf boats to proceed from Monrovia to Marshall to assist in the unloading of the vessel but I doubt that she can be completely disCharged in less than 2 weeks.

Hibbard

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/22326: Telegram

[Document 462]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 18, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received June 19—3:12 p.m.]

198. The Secretary of State called on me this morning and gave me the following statement which had been left with him by the German Consul yesterday morning at 9:30. The Consul stated it was a translation of a telegram received from his Government on June 16.

“The German Government has obtained (information) that the Liberian Government has consented to the taking over of the air bases in Liberia by American Armed Forces and further has submitted to the presence of American troop units in Liberia.

The German Government is disappointed that the Liberian Government acquiesces in this American pretentiousness and permits a violation of the Liberian neutrality.

The German Government protest against such violation of neutrality with the reservation to hold responsible the Liberian Government for each and every disadvantage and damage which possibly result from such breach of neutrality with regard to German nationals, their property, their rights and their interests.”

The Secretary further informed me that the President had sent to the Legislature at 10 o’clock this morning his message to which was appended the agreement for ratification. The agreement was referred to a joint committee which will probably not report before next Wednesday and ratification will be voted by the end of next week. The President stated in his message that while he did not wish to limit debate he hoped there would be no undue delay. Adjournment has been set for June 30.

I asked the Secretary what action had been taken at yesterday’s Cabinet meeting regarding the departure of the German Consul.27 He said the entire time had been taken up with the revision of the President’s message but when I expressed my disappointment in view of the President’s statement to me that the matter would be discussed he assured me that I might consider it a fait accompli (his term) since he was seeing the President again tomorrow and would thereafter call in the Consul to request him to leave.

I asked him what reply he had made to the German statement quoted above. He said he told the Consul that the Liberian Government would take note of the message and that an appropriate reply would be made at a later date.

He then requested me to inform you, that in the opinion of the Liberian Government it would be advisable to station a protective force of light bombers temporarily at Roberts Field for the following reasons: (1) The agreement has now been made public.

(2) The German Consul is being asked to leave the country.

(3) In case Germany desired to take forceful reprisal for these two acts the collaborationist attitude of the neighboring Vichy French Colonies would make it possible for her to do so before the American force was adequately installed.

The Mormacsun arrived at Marshall on June 16 and due to continuous heavy rains and poor visibility is anchored four miles out. Firestone lighterage equipment which was counted on for discharging the vessel is temporarily out of order so that only three lighters are now working the ship. I had contracted for 10 native surf boats averaging about 6 tons each to assist but due to the weather conditions they have not been able to reach Marshall. The bar is particularly treacherous now and even if the ship can be moved in another 2 miles it will be impossible to disChargé her in less than 3 weeks and probably a longer time will be required. A second vessel which should have been here a week ago is scheduled for tomorrow and another at the end of the week. The heavy weather will also delay the erection of barracks and the installation of other equipment. Under these circumstances I strongly urge that at least three bombers be sent to Roberts Field for temporary duty in protecting these ships and our other installations until the defense force has been properly set up. I feel that we should not rely upon the British alone who are fully occupied elsewhere.

Hibbard

27 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517] ff.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 740.0011 European War 1939/22326: Telegram

[Document 463]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 22, 1942—10 p.m.

166. Your 198, June 18, 5 p.m. War Department requests that Liberian Government be informed that no bombing planes are available for assignment to Roberts Field at present. United States aircraft will arrive in Liberia in adequate numbers as soon as training of unit is complete. Meanwhile arrangements have been effected with the British to provide air patrols in addition to which a certain amount of anti-aircraft equipment is en route to Liberia.

For your personal and confidential information it is not expected that the United States air unit referred to will have completed its training, which includes a course in dive bombing, before next fall.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/22468: Telegram

[Document 464]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 25, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received June 26—6:18 a.m.]

211. My telegram number 198, June 18, 5 p.m. The agreement was ratified by the House yesterday and the Senate this morning. The President will probably sign it tomorrow. I suggest, if the Department sees no objection, that President Roosevelt send a personal message for me to deliver to President Barclay as it would be very useful both here and at home.

Hibbard

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/22469: Telegram

[Document 465]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 25, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received June 26—7:15 a.m.]

212. Department’s telegram 166, June 22, 10 p.m. I transmitted this information to the Secretary of State this morning. He appeared satisfied with this temporary arrangement, but expressed the hope that our bombers would not be too long delayed.

Colonel Wood informs me that a British bomber landed at Roberts Field last week when the commanding officer suggested that he base his plane there for protective control. He was told that orders must first be received through the War Department. As far as I am aware no such instructions have been received and I suggest that in view of the ratification of the agreement this temporary arrangement be made effective as soon as possible.

In the past few days the members of the German Consulate have endeavored to start a war of nerves here by circulating rumors as to the destruction of Monrovia if they were forced to leave and by ostentatiously asking leading questions as to the location of light plants, radio stations or other public utilities. This unquestionably has had a certain effect among a nation as credulous and superstitious as the Liberians. Moreover, effective use has been made by the Germans of the results of the Libyan campaign.

The Secretary of State told me this morning that he had again discussed with the President the question of the departure of the German Consul. The President had asked him to wait a few days until he had secured certain information. However, the Secretary again assured me he would shortly be asked to leave. The President appears to be biding his time until the Germans give him some pretext which if they continue their present activities should not be long.

Hibbard

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 740.0011 European War 1939/22468: Telegram

[Document 466]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 27, 1942—7 p.m.

173. Your 211, June 25, 4 p.m. You may deliver the following message to President Barclay from President Roosevelt: “I am gratified at the signing of an agreement which binds our two countries together in the common purpose of resisting the forces of aggression. As a practical matter, I hope that for the present no publicity will be given to Liberia’s courageous action.”

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/22539: Telegram

[Document 467]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 29, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 3:54 p.m.]

218. My telegram 198, June 18. The Secretary of State has today handed the German Consul General the following reply to his protest: “The Government of the Republic of Liberia has taken note of the protest made on the 17th instant by the German Consul General in behalf of his Government against an alleged violation by Liberia of its neutrality in the present conflict.

The Liberian Government regrets that it has no alternative but to reject the said protest for the reason that the German Government has ignored the neutrality of Liberia by permitting its submarines to enter Liberian territorial waters where they have sunk ships of powers in amicable relations with Liberia in the course of which a number of Liberian citizens lost their lives.”

Hibbard

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/22594: Telegram

[Document 468]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 30, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received July 1—3:10 p.m.]

219. My telegram 211, June 25, 4 p.m. The following is the text of the joint resolution of the Liberian Legislature approving the agreement between the two Governments which was approved by the President yesterday and certified copy of which was sent me by the Secretary of State this morning: “It is enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Republic of Liberia in Legislature assembled:

Section 1. That from and immediately after the passage of this joint resolution, the agreement entered into between the Governments of the Republic of Liberia and the United States of America, dated March 31, 1942, which grants unto the latter the right to construct, control, operate and defend certain military and commercial airports within the Republic of Liberia, be and the same is hereby approved with the following amendments: (a) Article II of said agreement shall be construed to mean that the ‘exclusive jurisdiction granted the Government of the United States of America over any such airports and defense areas in Liberia and over the military and civilian personnel of the Government of the United States and their families’, shall not include American citizens and foreigners of non-American nationality not connected with said defense operations.

(b) Construing article II further, it is understood that the Government of the United States of America will turn over to the Liberian authorities for trial and punishment any person, not under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Government of the United States of America (as defined in subsection (a) of this joint resolution) committing an offense in such defense areas.

Any law to the contrary notwithstanding.”

The amendments were made without consulting me and I have not been able to see the President to ask for an explanation. My impression is that the amendments are a result of popular resentment against Firestone and ADP personnel28 who have recently caused many complaints by reckless driving and other disregard of Liberian law, customs and sensibilities. The plantation manager has been able to settle most of these complaints but the unpleasantness remains even with the President and since Roberts Field and Firestone plantation are unfortunately so closely connected the Government is endeavoring to retain jurisdiction over those foreigners not actually engaged on the defense project.

The President has been unable to receive the past 4 days due to the press of business incident to the adjournment of the Legislature but I hope to see him tomorrow or next day. I will withhold delivery of the message contained in Department’s telegram No. 173, June 28 [27], 5 [7] p.m. until I hear whether these amendments are acceptable.

Please instruct.

Hibbard

28 Presumably military personnel of the U. S. Armed Forces in Liberia.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 740.0011 European War 1939/22594: Telegram

[Document 469]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, July 11, 1942—10 p.m.

178. Your 219, June 30, 8 p.m. War Department feels that the position of the United States should be made secure by an informal exchange of notes with the Liberian Government substantially along the following lines: “I have the honor to refer to the agreement governing military use of airports in defense areas in Liberia, and to inform Your Excellency that my Government accepts the construction placed upon Article II by the joint resolution of June 29, 1942 of the Liberian legislature, it being understood however that nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to deprive the Government of the United States of its right under general international law to take measures to secure the safety of its own forces and their installations including but not limited to the trial by an appropriate tribunal of the United States of spies, saboteurs, and other offenders against the law of war, whatever their nationality.”

The reason for requiring such an interpretative exchange of notes is that the amendments made by the Liberian Legislature apparently do not provide for such contingencies as, for example, acts of espionage committed by a Firestone employee not connected with the defense operations, whether or not he is of Liberian nationality. We are confident that President Barclay will understand this position and that there will be no difficulty in arranging for a prompt exchange of notes.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/22920: Telegram

[Document 470]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 16, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received July 17—3:11 p.m.]

235. Department’s telegram No. 178, July 11, 10 p.m. I had a conference with President Barclay yesterday when I handed him a note embodying the War Department’s interpretation of the amendment to the agreement ratified June 29. His first reaction was that the last three words “whatever their nationality” was stretching the original agreement beyond his intention. I explained to him carefully the reasons for our desire to have such an interpretative exchange of notes regarding this amendment but he feels that all such contingencies are provided for in the very extensive emergency powers which were granted him by the Legislature for the duration of the war and 6 months thereafter. He has promised me an answer shortly.

I am sending in a separate telegram the Act granting him emergency powers.

Hibbard

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.7962/88: Telegram

[Document 471]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 10, 1942—8 p.m.

195. Legation’s despatch 715, April 8.29 It is observed that the deed of lease for Roberts Field makes no provision for possible use of the airport and of its facilities by other United States air transport interests which might at a future time be authorized to operate in Liberia.

Under a contract with the War Department, Pan American Airways, Incorporated may not impose, for its own benefit or for its own account, any landing fee at Roberts Field on other United States air carriers which may in the future be duly authorized by the United States and the Liberian Governments to operate in Liberia. According to the policy to be carried out by the War Department, fees for the use of the airport facilities, as distinguished from landing fees in such cases, may be Charged whereby each aircraft utilizing the field will pay a fair proportionate share of Pan American’s actual costs for the operation and maintenance of the field.

It is the view of the Department and of the War Department that, in order to avoid any inconsistent effect on established policy, the deed of lease should expressly provide that other United States air carriers which in the future may be duly authorized to operate in Liberia may land at Roberts Field and make use of its facilities upon the foregoing conditions.

You are requested to bring this matter to the attention of the Liberian Government and to suggest that the deed of lease be amended as indicated above. If the deed of lease has already been ratified by the Liberian Legislature, you should endeavor to have the Liberian Government address a note to the Legation stating its understanding that Roberts Field and its facilities may be used upon the conditions mentioned above by any United States air carrier which may be duly authorized to operate in Liberia.

A letter has been sent to the President of Pan American Airways, Incorporated, informing him of the action being taken by this Government.

Hull

29 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 882.7962/38a

[Document 472]

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, August 28, 1942.

My Dear Mr. President: During the latter part of January 1942 you approved, on the recommendation of the Department, the appointment of Mr. Harry A. McBride as your special representative to proceed to Liberia to engage in discussions on certain matters affecting the security of that country as well as the interests of the United States. Following Mr. McBride’s arrival in Liberia he conducted negotiations with the Liberian Government which resulted in the signing at Monrovia on March 31 of an agreement granting this Government various rights in Liberia relating to the war effort. This Government, on its part, undertook to extend to the Government of Liberia such aid as might be possible for the protection of the Republic. The agreement was subsequently ratified by the Liberian Legislature, following Mr. McBride’s return to the United States, with, however, certain amendments which had not been submitted to this Government for prior approval.

Difficulties have arisen with respect to these amendments and also in connection with the execution of the understanding of this Government that the German Consul General at Monrovia and his staff would be requested, following the arrival of an American defense force, to leave Liberia. President Barclay has, however, thus far declined to carry out this understanding. The Liberian Government has also declined to accede to our request for the establishment of censorship in Liberia.

In view of these difficulties, and taking into consideration a number of other urgent problems relating to Liberia which we should like to have discussed with President Barclay, I believe that it would be advisable for you again to appoint Mr. McBride as your special representative to proceed to Liberia as soon as possible for the purpose of conferring with President Barclay. It should not be necessary for him to remain more than two to four weeks. As pointed out at the time of his previous appointment, Mr. McBride’s long familiarity with Liberian affairs and his practical experience in that country eminently qualify him to represent the United States in the particular discussions which the Department has in mind.

The question of sending Mr. McBride to Liberia has been discussed informally with officers in the War Department and the proposed assignment meets with their approval.

It is therefore recommended that Mr. McBride be appointed as your special representative for the purposes outlined in the attached letter addressed to him. It has also been thought desirable that Mr. McBride should carry a letter from you to President Barclay bespeaking the latter’s courteous consideration of the proposals which will be offered for the solution of the present difficulties. Such a letter is therefore enclosed for your signature, if you approve. There is also enclosed for your consideration and signature a letter of instructions, which it is believed might appropriately be addressed to Mr. McBride.

Faithfully yours,

Cordell Hull

[Enclosure 1]

President Roosevelt to Mr. Harry A. McBride

My Dear Mr. McBride: I have been informed that certain circumstances have arisen in connection with the fulfillment by the Liberian Government of various understandings reached at the time of the negotiation of the recent security agreement between Liberia and the United States which would seem to make it desirable for you to return to Liberia for further discussions with President Barclay. In particular, it has come to my attention that President Barclay is not disposed to request the German Consul General and his staff to leave Liberia at this time and also that he has raised certain objections with reference to the establishment of a censorship organization in Liberia, upon both of which questions it was thought that there had been agreement.

In addition to these problems, there are other matters affecting the interests of the United States in Liberia which it is thought can be best handled through personal discussions between you and President Barclay. These include the difficulties which are being encountered in obtaining supplies of wild rubber from Liberia, monetary reform in Liberia and the use of American currency, and the possible construction of port and harbor facilities at some point on the Liberian coast.

As stated on the occasion of my previous appointment of you as my special representative to undertake the mission to Liberia, which resulted in the agreement to which reference has been made, your long familiarity with Liberian affairs and your practical experience in that country eminently qualifies you in my opinion to represent the United States in difficult discussions with the Government of Liberia. I am therefore appointing you as my Special Representative to proceed to Liberia as soon as possible to confer with President Barclay on the matters outlined herein and such others as may be placed before you by the Department of State.

It is hoped that the enclosed letter addressed to President Barclay, in which I bespeak his courteous consideration of your requests, will aid you in the accomplishment of your present mission.

Very sincerely yours,

[Enclosure 2]

President Roosevelt to the President of Liberia (Barclay)

My Dear President Barclay: A few months ago you very kindly received my Special Representative, Harry A. McBride, who was sent to Liberia for the purpose of discussing with you certain matters affecting the security of Liberia as well as the interests of the United States. As a result of your most cordial cooperation and of your generous consideration of the proposals which were made to you by my representative an agreement was reached which, as I stated to you in my telegram of June 27,30 was very gratifying to me because of its having bound our two countries together in the common purpose of resisting the forces of aggression.

Feeling that it would again be to our mutual advantage to have Mr. McBride visit your country, I have reappointed him as my Special Representative to convey to you my greetings and to discuss with you upon his arrival at Monrovia such questions as may be of interest to you with respect to the accomplishment of our common purpose.

I therefore once more bespeak your kindness in receiving my representative and in extending to him that degree of cooperation which characterized your relations with him on his previous visit and which was a source of great satisfaction to me.

Very sincerely yours,

30 See telegram No. 173, to the Chargé in Liberia, p. 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc. 466].

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.7962/117a: Telegram

[Document 473]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, September 15, 1942—11 p.m.

229. Colonel McBride is leaving shortly for Liberia as a special representative of the President. Please render him all possible assistance in the performance of his mission. Colonel Upston of the Office of the Chief of Staff will be with him, and it is hoped that he may also be accommodated at the Legation.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/118: Telegram

[Document 474]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 16, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received September 17—4:09 p.m.]

297. Department’s telegram 229, September 15, 11 p.m. I am delighted that McBride is returning. I shall be glad to accommodate him and Colonel Upston at the Legation.

I saw the President on September 14 for the first time in some weeks as he has been quite ill. I presented Colonel Kirchhoff the new commanding officer to him and the interview which lasted an hour and a half was most cordial, Barclay showing a greater desire to cooperate than he has before evidenced. We asked among other things for an auxiliary landing field at Cape Palm-as which General Fitzgerald31 has decided is necessary and for permission to send small reconnaissance detachments along the coast and in the interior to survey possibilities for other small defense areas and roads. He readily agreed but asked that the request be put in writing adding sarcastically and with some show of indignation that he had already been put in a false position by being accused of making promises he had never made, that he always kept his word and always intended to but in order that there should be no future misconception he would hereafter make his final agreements in writing. As we had previously been discussing the defense of the country about which he had made some very pointed remarks and the presence of the German Consul here there is no doubt that his reference was to the first paragraph of my note to him of August 14 in which mention is made of his promises to McBride to expel the German Consul. Aside from any personal pride he may have in his work I have recently heard that the general terms of my note have been divulged by certain Cabinet members to the Opposition which has made great use of the fact that we are dissatisfied with Barclay for not having kept his word and that if there is any further complaint we will probably use all Armed Forces here to take over the country. This has greatly irritated Barclay and McBride should be prepared for a certain amount of coldness and petulance in his first interviews.

May I suggest that McBride be prepared to discuss the following questions: 1. Final ratification of the agreement with particular reference to the jurisdiction over non-Liberian civilians in the defense area. I have heard nothing from the Department since my telegram No. 241 of July 24, 3 p.m.32

2. The lend-lease provisions for road construction. In view of increasing difficulty of contractors in securing workmen for such projects abroad, it may be impossible for any American company to undertake this work. Williams Sand Company who are building the Socony-Vacuum storage base are paying $600 a month and expenses for grader and cat skinner operators and still having difficulty in getting men. Firestone and Pan American having the same trouble. The only alternative may be for the Army to construct these roads which could easily be done as soon as the dry season sets in. The lend-lease provisions for the equipment and training of additional frontier force will also require revision. The economic situation of the country is rapidly growing worse. Not only imported foods are scarce due to lack of shipping, but increased purchasing power among the natives and the influx of the army has created a shortage in local foodstuffs which were never plentiful. It is estimated, therefore, that it will require at least a shilling a day, and probably more, per man to feed the frontier force. If the number is raised to 5,000 as Barclay wants or with the 3,000 we have agreed upon, it is unlikely the Government can raise the money to provision them even if radical budgetary rearrangements are resorted to.

3. The wild rubber purchasing plan proposed by the Board of Economic Warfare.

4. Final terms for the lease of land at Bassa Point for the Socony Vacuum bulk storage.

5. The constitution of a Liberian shipping board as proposed to the Liberian Consul General by Gilpatrick.33 See my letter of September 1 to Murray.34

6. The possibility of having representative of the War Shipping Administration assigned exclusively to Liberia to arrange for the expeditious shipment of rubber. WSA only has one man on this coast now and the work obviously required more. In my opinion there should be one for Freetown and Bathurst, one for Liberia and one for Accra.

7. I am more and more convinced of the desirability of having a special representative of the President assigned to the West Coast of Africa to coordinate with British representative Lord Swinton,35 our war effort in this area and our plans for post-war adjustments and I hope that McBride’s instructions will include trip on the coast to investigate the practicability of such an appointment.

Hibbard

31 Brig. Gen. S. W. Fitzgerald, Commanding General, U. S. Army Forces in Central Africa.

32 Not printed.

33 Not printed.

34 Not printed.

35 British Minister Resident in West Africa.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.7962/118: Telegram

[Document 475]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, September 24, 1942—4 p.m.

234. Your 297, September 16. McBride is authorized to discuss all pending matters with President Barclay. Question 5 will be taken up with the Board of Economic Warfare. Question 3 is under discussion with Walker.36

The Department feels that it would be desirable for McBride to proceed to Accra, if he is prepared to do so and if the opportunity offers, to investigate the point raised in question 7, which travel in his discretion is authorized.

Hull

36 Walter F. Walker, Liberian Consul General, New York.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24511: Telegram

[Document 476]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 25, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received September 26—2:09 p.m.]

308. From McBride. At request of President Barclay I conferred with Secretary of State Simpson this morning on question of German Consul and his two assistants and on exchange of notes to conclude our agreement.

As to Germans I had already explained our position in previous talks with Barclay. He confirmed his promise to have them leave the country as soon as a protective force had arrived but said that so far as he had been informed there were only some labor companies here. Colonel Upston told him that this was not the case, that the troops here were combat engineer companies capable of defensive action equipped with anti-aircraft and other gun power, and that complete defense force would soon arrive. As Liberians have not been kept officially informed of our progress in defense installations, Colonel Upston through General Fitzgerald is arranging to take President Barclay and Secretary Simpson on a tour of the Roberts Field area if they so desire.

In my talk with Simpson I repeated our desire that the Germans leave Liberia. He has conferred with Barclay and indicated that as we feel a protective force has already arrived they are willing to submit matter to other Cabinet officers immediately. His idea on procedure is (1) not to declare war (2) to call German Consul to his office and invite him to leave with his staff. If Consul demands this in writing he may tell him that there will be no correspondence on the subject (3) to suggest to Consul that he may turn over German interests and stores to Vichy French representative or appoint a committee of three Liberian citizens as custodians under power of attorney.

He asked me if I felt this a propitious time for Liberia to take this action in view of Liberian fear of retaliation and I told him I thought it was. He asked if we would like to have action taken while I was still here or after I left. I said my presence one way or the other did not matter, but I hoped action could be taken within 2 weeks. My idea is that Germans should be out of here before further forces are sent. Simpson said that they would discuss the matter with Cabinet and let me have decision shortly.

As to exchange of notes I feel strongly this matter is important and urgent and should be settled with expedition. Present status and validity of entire agreement is in doubt because this point has not been concluded. I do not think we should be in the position of operating here under an agreement about which there is this doubt.

Liberian Government’s position is set forth in Legation’s 241, July 24, 3 p.m.37 I believe, however, that they would agree to exchange of notes as proposed in Department’s 178, July 11, 10 p.m., if wording were as follows: “I have the honor to refer to the agreement governing military use of airports in defense areas in Liberia and to inform Your Excellency that my Government accepts the construction placed upon article II by the Joint Resolution of June 20, 1942, of the Liberian Legislature, it being understood, however, that nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to deprive the Government of the United States of its right under general international law to take measures to secure the safety of its own forces and their installations.”

This eliminates the words following the word “installations” in the original proposal. I believe this will fully protect our interests in any eventuality that could possibly occur here and will also meet the Liberian objection to wording which they consider to be a direct infringement of their sovereignty.

Hibbard and I will be grateful if Department will expedite reply on this point. [McBride.]

Hibbard

37 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 740.0011 European War 1939/24511: Telegram

[Document 477]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 1, 1942—10 p.m.

242. Your 308, September 25, 5 p.m. For McBride. Department approves of exchange of notes with wording proposed by you. It is believed, however, that the word “and” should be substituted for “in” immediately after the phrase “military use of airports”.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24616: Telegram

[Document 478]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 2, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 2:30 p.m.]

319. From McBride. As Liberian Government has gone along with the United States in military use of airfields, in deporting Germans, and is cooperating in other ways to the best of its ability, would the Department not feel that, for the war record, some form of joint statement or declaration of aims and solidarity would be to advantage? I am sure the Liberian Government would welcome such an opportunity.

The following very rough draft is submitted as a suggestion: “The Government of the United States being at war with the Governments of Germany, Italy and Japan, which have for years pursued a policy of ruthless aggression against the democracies of the world and particularly against small and defenseless nations, contrary to all precepts of international law and order, and

The Government of the Republic of Liberia, animated by its close ties of traditional friendship toward the United States since the original settlers came to the Liberian coast in 1822 and the founding of the Liberian Republic in 1847;

Do hereby jointly declare:

That, [during this period of world conflict, a spirit of strong mutual solidarity exists between the two Governments brought about by their common belief in international justice and democratic faith and]38 notwithstanding the fact that the Government of Liberia has not entered into the present world conflict, still maintaining a status of neutrality benevolent to the United Nations, the two Governments recognize and accept the responsibility for extending toward each other reciprocal assistance and defensive cooperation in so far as the aggressor nations are concerned.”

The Liberians are apprehensive that, in any settlements made by the United States during or after the war, they may not be heard. Therefore, they would probably wish that a paragraph be added to above giving some slight intimation that Liberian interests will be safeguarded. If at any time the United States feels that Liberia’s position would be improved or strengthened by a declaration of war, it is believed that Liberian Government would welcome Department’s advice at that time. [McBride.]

Hibbard

38 Portion in brackets inadvertently omitted from telegram; correction forwarded by the Chargé in Liberia in telegram No. 323, October 3, 4 p.m. (740.0011 European War 1939/24647).

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24674: Telegram

[Document 479]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 6, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 4:20 p.m.]

327. From McBride. Department’s 242, October 1, 10 p.m. Exchange of notes signed by Hibbard and Simpson has been effected. Hibbard cabling Liberian wording in separate message. I will bring original of Liberian note to be filed with agreement.

Arrangements made for General Fitzgerald and staff to come from Accra and meet President Barclay tomorrow. Have already had talks with Makins of Lord Swinton’s staff and plan to talk with Swinton at Roberts Field on October 8. Thus will be able to discuss economic and other matters with Department on my return.

This seems to exhaust my agenda except for censorship which I will take up with Barclay again this week. However, as Brazil is in war and presumably censoring mail both in and out of Brazil, this matter becomes of less importance.

If Department has no further instructions will plan to leave October 10 to 12.

How is my family? [McBride.]

Hibbard

The Liberian Secretary of State (Simpson) to Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia 882.20/636

[Document 480]

The Liberian Secretary of State (Simpson) to Mr. Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia

Monrovia, 6 October, 1942.

Dear Colonel McBride: I have the honour to inform you that an exchange of notes has been effected between the American Chargé d’Affaires and myself in the following sense: 6th October, 1942.

“Mr. Chargé d’Affaires,

I have the honour to refer to the Agreement concluded between our respective Governments dated 31st March, 1942, governing military use of airports and defense areas in Liberia and to inform you that my Government notes the acceptance of your Government of the construction placed upon Article Two by the Joint Resolution of June 20, 1942 of the Liberian Legislature, it being understood, however, that nothing contained in this Article shall be deemed to deprive the Government of the United States of its right under general international law to take measures to secure the safety of its own forces and their installations.

Be please[d] to accept, Mr. Chargé d’Affaires, the renewed assurances of my high consideration.”

The Liberian Government desire to make it definitely clear that in no case should paragraph One of Article Two of the Agreement be rescinded or modified in respect of Liberian citizens committing any offense in the defense areas, and I should very much appreciate it if you would bring this point of view to the attention of your Government.

Yours faithfully,

C. L. Simpson

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.7962/129a: Telegram

[Document 481]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 9, 1942—7 p.m.

257. Your 327, October 6. For McBride. The Department does not have in mind any further instructions except as follows: (1) Concerning censorship, there remains the unquestionable desirability of as complete coverage as possible of air and seaborne mails and of radio and wire communications entering and leaving Liberia. The adoption of appropriate measures is an objective which remains unaffected by Brazil’s entry into the war or by any censorship operations undertaken by Brazil. The Department feels that the unsupervised efforts of the Liberian authorities would be inadequate for the operation of effective censorship and, therefore, that American supervision of such censorship as the Liberian authorities may be persuaded to establish is desirable.

Please bring the above considerations to the attention of President Barclay and inform us of his reaction thereto; if he approves in principle, the Department will take up with Censorship the possibility of sending an officer or officers to effect the supervision in question.

(2) The Department has recommended the McDaniel proposals39 to the Export-Import Bank, and we now await the latter’s decision on the question of a loan to McDaniel to finance the project. You might mention this matter to President Barclay, and in the light of this development and your earlier discussions perhaps you could prepare the ground further for a possible request by McDaniel for a concession. As you know, if a loan is granted, the whole project, including a port at St. Paul River, would hinge on the granting of a concession by the Liberian Government. Pending a decision by the Export-Import Bank we wish this matter treated as confidential between the Legation and President Barclay.

(3) The Department is disturbed by the seeming ill will of President Barclay toward Firestone, since we regard close cooperation between the Liberian Government and Firestone as a matter of particular importance during the war time emergency. Perhaps you could discuss this subject discreetly with the President before you leave with a view to bringing about a better understanding.

(4) Your family is very well.

Welles

39 Proposals for the economic development of Liberia made by Mr. Charles B. McDaniel, American businessman experienced in the successful promotion of American capital investment in Europe and Africa. The proposals were favorably considered and encouraged by the Department of State. Correspondence for the period 1941–42, consisting in most part of inter-Departmental memoranda, is not printed.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.7982/139: Telegram

[Document 482]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 12, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received October 13—10:03 a.m.]

341. From McBride. Department’s 257, October 9, 8 [7] p.m. Hibbard and I had long talk with President Barclay this morning in his bedroom as he is laid up with gout.

1. Barclay is perfectly willing to start censorship, to appoint a chief censor and to accept one or two men from the United States to work under him as well as one or two Liberians. He insists, however, that this is only one of several emergency or war measures he has in mind and he would definitely prefer to initiate all of them at the same time. He feels that censorship as well as the other necessary steps should await some sort of statement clarifying Liberia’s position such as the declaration suggested in Legation’s 319, October 2, noon [1 p.m.], or something along that line. He again stated that if we thought it advisable he would sound out his elder statesmen on a declaration of war. He wants Liberia’s position to be made definite and her interests safeguarded.

We understand that the wide-open and really important leak has been Clipper mail from Natal to Lisbon via Fisherman Lake and Bolama which was not censored for our benefit at all. If that is now covered by censorship in Brazil what Liberia could do now is, as stated in Legation’s 327, October 6, 4 p.m. of less importance. There is no cable service from Liberia. Wireless messages in code from Liberian stations are already restricted to Allied Nations and Vichy, France, and are closely watched, messages from Harbel station are already censored on arrival at Akron. Air and other mail originating in Liberia is very light in volume and goes only to Britain and United States and other Allied territories, so far as we can ascertain.

For these reasons I feel that Barclay’s desires in the matter should be given consideration. [McBride.]

Hibbard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 740.0011 European War 1939/24616: Telegram

[Document 483]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 17, 1942—3 p.m.

265. For McBride. Your 319, October 2, 1 p.m. The Department does not perceive the need at this time of issuing a joint declaration of war aims with Liberia. It is believed that the preamble to our defense agreement will, when published, serve to express virtually the same sentiments as those contained in your suggestion. When announcement is made of the agreement, consideration can be given to issuing a brief supplementary statement by the Department which would be satisfying to the Liberians.

Unless there are reasons to the contrary of which we are unaware, it does not seem to us necessary for Liberia to make a declaration of war under present circumstances. Neither the War Department nor Firestone have favored such a move and the disadvantages would appear to outweigh the advantages. In order to allay any fears entertained by the Liberians as to their position after the war, you may inform President Barclay that the interests of Liberia are always kept fully in mind by this Government and that in any post-war settlement our policy would be to urge that Liberia be afforded an opportunity to state its case.

We shall be glad to discuss this matter further with you upon your return to the United States.

Welles

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 882.20/628a: Telegram

[Document 484]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, November 4, 1942—noon.

5504. The British Broadcasting Company on October 17 and October 18 made detailed announcements of the arrival and significance of American troops in Liberia, which were thereupon published in the American press. It appears that the origin of these announcements was a message filed by Mr. Murdoch, the Reuters correspondent in Monrovia, which was passed by President Barclay on the assumption that the British Censor would not permit publication of vital information of a military nature. The Government of Liberia was greatly disturbed at the announcement of American military activities in Liberia at this time, while the United States War Department was equally concerned at the publication of this military information through British channels without prior consultation with American officials.

Oral representations were promptly made on the subject to the British Embassy in Washington, and the matter was simultaneously taken up by the War Department with the British representative on the Joint Security Control Committee. Nevertheless, on October 30 additional detailed announcements were made by Reuters concerning American military activities in Liberia, the attitude of the Liberian Government in the war, and the recent confidential visit to Monrovia of Lieutenant Colonel Harry A. McBride, who had negotiated an agreement with the Liberian authorities for the presence of American forces in Liberia. Although Reuters cables are routed through New York, in absence of agreement our censor would assume censorship would take place in London or authorization at origin.

We are at a loss to understand why publicity should be given by the British to these matters without consulting us, particularly after the representations already made. In this connection, representatives of the Fighting French in Liberia have expressed to the American Chargé d’Affaires their concern regarding such announcements from British sources as to present military activities on the west coast of Africa. It is pointed out that public references of this kind are likely to give the Germans the necessary basis on which to endeavor to force an agreement upon the French Government for complete control by Germany of the French colonies in Africa.

Other instances of this character include a Reuters despatch in the latter part of July which stated that American troops had arrived in Accra, on the Gold Coast; a report in the London Daily Telegraph on October 20 that the main task of American troops in West Africa was to “combat the growing menace of U-boats” which were alleged to be “operating from Dakar and adjacent French territory”; and an erroneous report published by the Exchange Telegraph on October 20 to the effect that an American garrison had been stationed on the island of Bahrein in the Persian Gulf. It is of course assumed that the publication of these despatches and reports was authorized by the British censor.

Please bring these facts to the attention of the appropriate authorities of the British Government as soon as possible with the request that immediate steps be taken to prevent a recurrence of incidents of this kind.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.741/3a: Telegram

[Document 485]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, November 4, 1942—noon.

285. 1. In view of the recent serious leaks in information concerning American military operations which have emanated from Liberia, please inquire of President Barclay whether he would be willing to establish strict censorship on messages sent from the Monrovia Government Radio Station starting immediately. If in doubt as to the type of information which should be stopped the Liberian Censors could request advice from the Legation or Colonel Kirchhoff. You may inform President Barclay that the recent leaks are a cause of considerable concern to us as well as to the War Department.

2. If you should approach Murdoch on an informal and friendly basis, might he not be willing to consult you unofficially concerning any mail or radio dispatches he might desire to send for publication in England? We do not believe he realizes the harm his dispatches have caused to Liberia, nor the concern they have caused us. It is felt that in the common war effort he may be willing to cooperate in this way.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 882.20/629: Telegram

[Document 486]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, November 11, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received November 11—3:54 p.m.]

6337. Department’s 5504, November 4, noon, concerning announcements of arrival of American troops in Liberia was promptly brought to the attention of the Foreign Office. The Foreign Office now informs us that steps are being taken to prevent recurrence of such incidents which are much regretted and that inquiries are being made with a view to clearing up the matter. A full statement on the subject is promised at the earliest possible date.

Winant

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.741/4: Telegram

[Document 487]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, November 12, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 12:09 p.m.]

382. Department’s telegram 285, November 4, noon. President Barclay has promised to censor all radiograms emanating from Liberia along the lines suggested. I believe he will be willing to set up regular censorship as soon as the agreements are announced.

Murdoch will in the future submit all his cables to me and the British Legation before sending.

For the Department’s strictly confidential information. I know that the story of the presence of American troops in Liberia as announced by Reuter over BBC did not come from Liberia. Reuters already had the story from a South African journalistic source. Murdoch’s wire sent in response to a query from Reuter merely confirmed it and the Ministry of Information was made to believe the whole story came from Liberia. Murdoch’s message as repeated in my telegram 353 of October 18, 8 p.m.40 clearly shows there was censorship on the news here and that it was not for release. Reuters deliberately and knowingly broke the confidence. Lord Halifax41 has this information but I doubt that he has presented it to the Department as for reasons of internal politics in London the British wish to let this case drop.

Hibbard

40 Not printed.

41 British Ambassador in the United States.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 740.0011 E. W. 1939/26011a: Telegram

[Document 488]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, November 21, 1942—5 p.m.

303. The Department would be interested in a summary of the reaction in Liberia to the events which have taken place in North Africa.42 Has there been any change in the attitude of Liberian officials toward the need of protection by United States defense forces?

Hull

42 Invasion by American forces beginning November 8, 1942; for correspondence, see vol. ii, pp. 429 ff.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/26012: Telegram

[Document 489]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, November 25, 1942—8 a.m.
[Received 4:37 p.m.]

392. Department’s telegram 303, November 21, 3 [5] p.m. The news of United Nations’ successes in North Africa and particularly the capitulation of Dakar and the neighboring French colonies has caused much enthusiasm here. The President and the Government have not been entirely satisfied that our force here was sufficient to protect the country from an attack. This danger is greatly lessened now.

It is evident, however, that they would welcome more protection particularly air forces. In a conversation with Secretary of State yesterday, he asked me what had become of the defense force which he and the President understood from Colonel McBride was about to embark at the time of his last visit. I said I had no information but presumed they had been delayed due to the tremendous movement of ships to North Africa.

He told me that he had recommended in his annual report to the Legislature just presented that Liberia should declare war on the Axis Powers. He felt that this was most necessary for Liberia’s future position. The President was in agreement with him and he hoped that action would be taken shortly. At the same time he expected to regularize this country’s relations with the Fighting French.

This and other indications in the President’s message to the Legislature on November 20 and the conversation of the people clearly show that Liberians generally feel we are on the way to victory.

Hibbard

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.24/47: Telegram

[Document 490]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, December 4, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 4:53 p.m.]

401. Department’s telegram 308, November 30, 8 p.m.43 and my telegram 392, November 25, 8 p.m. [a.m.] In connection with the release to the press yesterday44 of the official announcement of the agreement between the United States and Liberia regarding defense, the Secretary of State made the following statement: “The Government of the Republic of Liberia announce that as the result of negotiations which have taken place between the Governments of the United States of America and the Republic of Liberia, the latter Government has decided on a policy of full collaboration with the United Nations during existing hostilities and to that end it has granted the Government of the United States of America permission to establish defense bases in Liberia.”

When asked by reporters if this meant Liberia had declared war on Germany, he replied that while the statement did not say so in so many words, that was the import.

He has informed me that Liberia will officially break off relations with Vichy France today.

Could I have the text of any informal statement made by the President or the Secretary at the time of the press release? In view of this declaration of Liberia’s policy of “full collaboration with the United Nations” will any further statements be made? A personal message from President Roosevelt to Barclay would be useful here and I should think effective politically at home.

Hibbard

43 Not printed.

44 For text of statement released to the press December 3, 1942, see Department of State Bulletin, December 5, 1942, p. 979.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.24/47: Telegram

[Document 491]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, December 10, 1942—6 p.m.

317. Your 401, December 4. No questions were asked by the newspaper correspondents at the time of the issuance of the press release and no special statement was made.

We are giving consideration to your suggestion with regard to a personal message from President Roosevelt to President Barclay.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.24/47 Suppl: Telegram

[Document 492]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, December 28, 1942—7 p.m.

321. Your 401, December 4. You may communicate the following message to President Barclay from President Roosevelt: “I deeply appreciate the decision of the Republic of Liberia to adopt a policy of full collaboration with the United Nations and extend my hearty felicitations on the determination of your Government to lend its aid in combatting and destroying the Axis aggressors. Liberia’s contribution to the common cause will be warmly welcomed.”

Hull

Extension of Lend-Lease aid to Liberia by the United StatesExtension of Lend-Lease aid to Liberia by the United States

[493] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 12, 1942—8 p.m.

882.24/23: Telegram

[494] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 28, 1942—7 p.m.

882.24/38: Telegram

[495] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, November 11, 1942—8 p.m. [Received November 12—9:11 a.m.]

882.24/41: Telegram

[496] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, December 4, 1942—10 p.m.

882.24/45: Telegram

[497] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, December 24, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 2:49 p.m.]

882.24/53: Telegram

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.24/23: Telegram

[Document 493]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 12, 1942—8 p.m.

51. Department’s 48, March 11, 10 p.m.45 For McBride.46 The President on March 11 found the defense of Liberia vital to the defense of the United States and, upon compliance with the formalities described below, Liberia will be entitled to receive Lend-Lease aid. For the present it is considered advisable to keep this development secret, and you are requested to see that no announcement on the subject is made in Monrovia.

Before any transactions can take place through the Lend-Lease Administration, the Liberian Government is required by the provisions of the Lend-Lease Act47 to make certain standard representations regarding transfer of title and use of defense articles and the protection of American patent rights. Moreover, the transaction of Lend-Lease business would be greatly expedited if an official in the United States is authorized by the Liberian Government to sign requisitions and other papers. It is suggested therefore that the Liberian Consul General in New York48 should be given authority as the proper person to perform these acts.

For signing the standard form of representations above mentioned, it will be sufficient if the Department and the Liberian Consul General are notified by telegraph of the Liberian Government’s willingness to have Mr. Walker serve in the absence of a diplomatic officer. For the other purposes we should receive by mail from President Barclay a letter addressed to the President certifying that Walker is a duly authorized representative of the Republic of Liberia in securing and receiving aid from the United States or from any agency or instrumentality thereof under the Lend-Lease Act of March 11, 1941, and that he has the necessary power to make the commitments required of Liberia by Sections 4 and 7 of the Act. At the same time, Walker should be notified by telegraph of the authority thus conferred on him.

The extension of credit in the sum of 1 million dollars is thus provided for Liberia in accordance with our undertaking to President Barclay. Of this amount, 200,000 dollars will be utilized immediately by the Ferrying Command in supervising the construction of essential access roads; 150,000 dollars will be available for the needs of the frontier force; and the remainder may be utilized for further development of the road and defense program. In addition Liberia will be eligible for the various forms of aid which may be supplied under the provisions of the Lease-Lend Act, subject to requisition and proof that the needs are for defense purposes. A copy of the Act is being forwarded for the information of the Legation.

Captain Nabors has now completed his course at Fort Benning and will be prepared next week to confer with the War Department on the most appropriate expenditure of the 150,000 dollars for the frontier force.

Welles

45  Ante, p. 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435].

46 Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia.

47 Approved March 11, 1941; 55 Stat. 31.

48 Walter F. Walker.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.24/38: Telegram

[Document 494]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 28, 1942—7 p.m.

279. Please inform the Department whether the Liberian Government is now prepared to proceed in the matter of Lend-Lease aid. If so, authorization should be telegraphed to Consul General Walker to sign the standard form of representations mentioned in the Department’s 51, March 12, 8 p.m., in order that an appropriate announcement may be made at the same time that a statement is issued regarding the presence of American forces in Liberia.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.24/41: Telegram

[Document 495]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, November 11, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received November 12—9:11 a.m.]

380. Department’s telegram 279, October 28, 7 p.m. President Barclay has delivered to me the following letter for transmission to President Roosevelt by pouch: “10 November 1942. Mr. President, With a view to effectuating the purposes foreseen in article V of the agreement concluded between our two Governments on the 31st March 1942,49 and the subsidiary understanding arrived at by Lieutenant Colonel Harry A. McBride and the President of Liberia in pursuance thereof, I have the honour to advise Your Excellency that Mr. Walter F. Walker, Liberian Consul General at New York is duly authorized to represent the Government of Liberia in all matters pertaining to securing and receiving aid from the United States Government or from any instrumentality or agency thereof under the Lend-Lease Act of the 11th of March 1941, and has been granted the necessary power to make the commitments required of the Liberian Government in sections 7 and 4 of the Lend-Lease Act.

Please accept, Mr. President, assurance of my high respect.

Yours faithfully, Edwin Barclay.”

The Secretary of State has told me that he has informed the Department by cable of Consul General Walker’s appointment to represent the Liberian Government in Lend-Lease matters. I have also been given a letter for transmission to him by pouch.

Barclay has again requested that he be informed well in advance so that the announcement of the conclusion of these agreements may be made simultaneously here and in Washington.

In view of the events in North Africa50 I believe he would like to make the announcement as soon as possible. The Legislature has reconvened and he will probably deliver his annual message next week. This would be an appropriate time if the Department agrees.

The task force at Roberts Field has practically finished construction work there and as the dry season has set in can begin road work at once. This would seem to be the simpler and less expensive method of complying with our obligation in this respect and I would appreciate information for my own guidance as to whether this procedure will be followed or whether a civilian contract will be set up under Lend-Lease.

Hibbard

49 For text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 275, or 56 Stat. (pt. 2) 1621.

50 Invasion by American forces beginning November 8, 1942; for correspondence, see vol. ii, pp. 429 ff.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.24/45: Telegram

[Document 496]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, December 4, 1942—10 p.m.

312. The letter addressed to Consul General Walker referred to in your despatch No. 828 of November 11, 194251 was handed to him today. In order that Liberia may obtain lend-lease aid, it will be necessary that the President’s certification of Liberia’s eligibility for such aid be made public, since such certification is communicated to Congress in the President’s quarterly reports on lend-lease operations. However, the scope and specific character of lend-lease assistance is not made public. Also, we prefer that the master lend-lease agreements with other governments concluded pursuant to the Lend-Lease Act be made public.

In view of the desire of the Liberian Government that any reference to lend-lease assistance be omitted from the press release No. 573 issued December 352 regarding the agreement dated March 31, 1942, you are requested to ascertain and telegraph the Department whether the Liberian Government is still desirous of obtaining assistance under the Lend-Lease Act and whether it has any objection to the President’s certification of Liberia’s eligibility for such aid being made public.

Meanwhile, the Department is obtaining from Consul General Walker the representations required by Sections 4 and 7 of the Lend-Lease Act which is a prerequisite to the approval of requisitions from him for lend-lease aid.

If the reply of the Liberian Government is in the affirmative we will proceed with the preparation of the text of a lend-lease agreement between the two countries. Pending conclusion of such an agreement it would nevertheless be possible for requisitions which might be submitted by Consul General Walker to be considered for action by the Lend-Lease Administration.

Hull

51 Not printed.

52 Department of State Bulletin, December 5, 1942, p. 979.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.24/53: Telegram

[Document 497]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, December 24, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 2:49 p.m.]

Department’s telegram 312, December 4, 10 p.m. I have had a conversation with President Barclay this morning for the first time in 3 weeks as he has been confined to his bed. We discussed all pending matters which will be taken up in individual telegrams.

The Liberian Government is still desirous of receiving lend-lease aid and accordingly requests that the President’s certification of Liberia’s eligibility be made public53 in the usual way and that the Department proceed with the preparation of a lend-lease agreement between the two countries.

Hibbard

53 For the public statement regarding Lend-Lease aid to Liberia, see Department of State Bulletin, January 16, 1943, p. 59.

Discussions regarding British proposal for use of American air bases in LiberiaDiscussions regarding British proposal for use of American air bases in Liberia

[498] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, April 30, 1942—1 p.m.

882.7962/85a: Telegram

[499] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 1, 1942—noon. [Received 12:46 p.m.]

882.7962/85: Telegram

[500] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 11, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 3:07 p.m.]

882.7961/4: Telegram

[501] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, May 14, 1942—11 p.m.

882.20/570a: Telegram

[502] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 6, 1942—3 p.m.

882.7962/104a: Telegram

[503] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 8, 1942—noon. [Received 5:16 p.m.]

882.20/577: Telegram

[504] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 8, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 6:39 p.m.]

882.20/578: Telegram

[505] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 12, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 6:53 p.m.]

882.20/580: Telegram

[506] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 12, 1942—8 p.m.

882.20/577: Telegram

[507] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 24, 1942—6 p.m. [Received July 28—1:18 p.m.]

882.20/603: Telegram

[508] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 5, 1942—7 p.m.

882.20/604: Telegram

[509] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, August 14, 1942—6 p.m. [Received August 15—1:39 p.m.]

882.20/604: Telegram

[510] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 30, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 1:54 p.m.]

882.796/19: Telegram

[511] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 7, 1942—11 p.m.

882.796/19: Telegram

[512] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 24, 1942—9 p.m. [Received October 25—10:30 a.m.]

882.796/21: Telegram

[513] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 28, 1942—8 p.m.

882.796/21: Telegram

[514] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] November 3, 1942.

882.796/13

[515] Memorandum by Mr. Harry A. McBride

[Washington,] November 6, 1942.

882.796/25

[516] The Assistant Chief of Staff (Handy) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, November 19, 1942.

882.796/24

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.7962/85a: Telegram

[Document 498]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, April 30, 1942—1 p.m.

102. War Department is informed that the British military authorities desire to send 11 airplanes in transit through Liberia to Freetown for defense purposes and that it will be necessary to refuel at Roberts Field because of the short range of the planes. It is understood that President Barclay has refused permission for this operation.

Please see the President immediately and explain that owing to the urgency of the situation it is imperative that these planes be allowed to carry out the flight without delay. The stationing of the aircraft at Freetown will be of practical value in the defense of Liberia pending the forthcoming arrival of American forces. A separate telegram is being sent to you on the latter subject.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7962/85: Telegram

[Document 499]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 1, 1942—noon.
[Received 12:46 p.m.]

139. Department’s 102, April 30, 1 p.m. According to President Barclay, British have not approached him in this matter. He informs me that if British request permission of his Government for this operation of 11 planes he will act favorably thereon.

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.7961/4: Telegram

[Document 500]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 11, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 3:07 p.m.]

147. My British colleague states he has been instructed to request of Liberian Government, general permission for British aircraft flying between British West African territories to land on Liberian territory for purpose of refueling, if and when circumstances require. He has approached me to ascertain if I see any reason why such request should not be made. I have informed him I can see no reason, but have asked him to wait until I received Department’s views on matter before making his request. A reply to this telegram is therefore urgently requested.

Wharton

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.20/570a: Telegram

[Document 501]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, May 14, 1942—11 p.m.

112. Please deliver a paraphrase of following secret message signed Marshall54 to Amler55 at Harbel.

If the British request further use of facilities which have been granted us in Liberia, they should be informed that the British staff in Washington is the channel through which such a request should be made.

Hull

54 Gen. George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff, U. S. Army.

55 Code name for Commanding Officer, United States Forces in Liberia.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.7962/104a: Telegram

[Document 502]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 6, 1942—3 p.m.

141. Please transmit the following secret message signed Marshall to Amler.

It has been agreed by the RAF to extend its West Africa patrols to include defense of the coast of Liberia. For this purpose British have been granted by the War Department permission to operate W/T pack set at Roberts Field and at Fisherman Lake naval radio set for purpose of communicating with Naval and Air patrols off shore. Details as to operational control and location will be arranged by you in collaboration with local representative of Royal Air Force.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/577: Telegram

[Document 503]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 8, 1942—noon.
[Received 5:16 p.m.]

179. The British Chargé d’Affaires56 has shown me a telegram from Royal Air Force headquarters in Sierra Leone instructing him to request permission from the Liberian Government to set up a pack radio station at Roberts Field with 5 operators and a similar station near Cape Palmas. The telegram states that Royal Air Force, Washington, and the British Air Ministry wish these stations for more adequate shipping protection and that they consider the British Legation here the appropriate channel through which to take the matter up. I told him that this seemed to me to be duplication of effort as we already had adequate radio facilities at Roberts Field and that it was my understanding all requests for British use of our facilities in Liberia should come through the British staff in Washington. See Department’s telegram No. 112, May 14, 11 p.m. Routh believes that consultation has already taken place in Washington although this is not clear in the telegram and has accordingly this morning requested the permission of the Liberian Government. Has the Department any instructions for my guidance?

Hibbard

56 Augustus C. Routh.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/578: Telegram

[Document 504]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 8, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 6:39 p.m.]

180. My telegram 179, June 8. The Secretary of State57 asked me to call this morning immediately after his receipt of the British request for permission to establish radio pack sets at Roberts Field and Cape Palmas. He asked me what I knew about the request and I told him that Routh had informed me of his instructions but that I had received nothing from the Department. Simpson said he had told Routh that the Liberian Government could make no commitments as regards Roberts Field without the consent of the American Government and that as far as he was aware we had ample facilities there and consequently the British installation would appear to be duplication. He told me privately that his Government would much prefer not to have British radios established here. I said I would inform the Department and ask for instructions. He will wait until I have received a reply before answering the British note.

My feeling is that if we urge Liberia to grant this request it will be the forerunner of many others which will be distasteful to this Government and in the end cause friction and otherwise complicate our position here which at present is excellent.

Hibbard

57 Clarence L. Simpson.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/580: Telegram

[Document 505]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 12, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 6:53 p.m.]

184. My telegrams Nos. 179, June 8, noon and 180 June 8, 2 p.m. The Secretary of State informed Routh this morning that after consulting the President with regard to the British desire to establish radio pack sets at Roberts Field and Fisherman Lake, the latter had stated that the Liberian Government could not grant such permission since these areas by agreement were now under the control of the American Government. In view of the Chief of Staff’s telegram to the commanding officer at Roberts Field (Department’s 141 of June 6, 3 p.m. received here June 8, 4 p.m.) this question is now settled.

Before seeing the Secretary of State, Routh had received a telegram from Sierra Leone stating that in view of our agreement with the Liberian Government there appeared to be no need to request permission for this installation. Routh had not previously known of this agreement and in discussing it with him I merely admitted its existence without giving him any details and urged upon him the necessity for secrecy until ratification by Liberia.

I believe it would be wise to withhold any further requests regarding British participation in our activity here until the agreement is ratified. While I do not anticipate any difficulties it has been made clear to me by a number of sources that the Liberians both dislike and distrust British activities here. Since the Presidential campaign has now opened it would be easy for opposition elements to exploit British participation in such a way as to create friction and make ratification difficult.

Hibbard

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.20/577: Telegram

[Document 506]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 12, 1942—8 p.m.

149. Your 179, June 8, noon. In view of the rights which this Government has acquired in Liberia, it is a matter solely for the United States to determine whether the British or any other of the United Nations should participate in the military use of defense areas in Liberia. Under the conditions governing our agreement with Liberia,58 it is not necessary for the Liberian Government to be approached on such questions, which are handled directly by the War Department in Washington.

In the present instance, the War Department has found it desirable to accede for the time being to the request of the British for the establishment of the radio facilities mentioned, as an urgent measure to assist in the protection of shipping near Liberian waters. You may inform the Liberian Government, as well as the British Chargé d’Affaires, to the above effect, making clear to the latter that there is no need for him to approach the Liberian Government in future in matters of this kind.

Hull

58 Signed March 31, 1942; for text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 275, or 56 Stat. (pt. 2) 1621.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/603: Telegram

[Document 507]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 24, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received July 28—1:18 p.m.]

243. A British naval lieutenant from Freetown called on Colonel Wood59 yesterday to ask when the barracks, mess hall and equipment and other installations would be ready for 3 officers and 15 men which the British wish to send to Cape Palmas for radio work in protecting the coast. I asked Colonel Wood to tell him that so far the United States had no defense at Cape Palmas included in the agreement between the two Governments and that consequently no installation of any kind was contemplated there at present. He was much surprised as he felt from his instructions that the entire matter had been arranged in Washington. If the War Department wishes a defense area at Cape Palmas I am sure the President will grant permission as soon as he has been informed of the location desired. He will not, however, permit the British to install a radio station there until we have taken over the area.

Hibbard

59 Commanding Officer, United States Forces in Liberia.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.20/604: Telegram

[Document 508]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 5, 1942—7 p.m.

192. Your 243, July 24, 6 p.m. War Department requested Colonel Wood to submit recommendations regarding contents of your 243, July 24, 6 p.m. In his reply Wood questioned the need of establishing a defense area at Cape Palmas but made no reference to any approach by the British on the subject of sending radio personnel to that district.

Please confer with Wood and report exact nature of British inquiry and reply made thereto. War Department appears to have no present intention of taking over Cape Palmas for defense purposes.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/604: Telegram

[Document 509]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, August 14, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received August 15—1:39 p.m.]

262. Department’s 192, August 5, 7 p.m. The nature of the British inquiry made to Col. Wood regarding a proposed installation by the United States Government to house a British radio group at Cape Palmas and his reply were approximately as reported in my telegram 243, July 24, 6 p.m.

For over 2 months the British have been endeavoring to locate a radio station at that point which they state is for use in protecting this coastal area. The Liberian Government has refused them permission for any installation here except on our defense area (see my telegrams 179, June 8 noon, 180, June 8, 2 p.m. and 184, June 12, 1 p.m.)

Each time the query has been made to Col. Wood or me, the British have been informed that we have no defense area at Cape Palmas and that all negotiations for securing one should be made by their representatives in Washington with the War and State Departments. There still seems to be confusion in their minds on this point which arises, I believe, from a certain lack of coordination between their African West Coast Command, the War Office and the British Staff representatives in Washington.

I do not believe there is any necessity at present for our requesting a defense area at Cape Palmas. Colonel Wood agrees. General Fitzgerald who is in command of American troops in this area has only spent 24 hours here and is now in Egypt so I have been unable to discuss the question with him. The final decision will, of course, depend on what strategic plans the General Staff have for this region. I do believe, however, that it would be unfair to the Liberians for us to ask for a defense area at Cape Palmas unless we intend to place American troops there and use it since they have made it very clear that they do not wish the British there or anywhere in Liberia except under our supervision. If strategic reasons make it necessary for us to put a military establishment at that point, there will be no need for a British radio station. They are now operating a pack set at Roberts Field which I am informed by our officers there is unnecessary duplication.

Hibbard

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.796/19: Telegram

[Document 510]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 30, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 1:54 p.m.]

314. I am informed that on September 6 the British Foreign Office requested their Embassy in Washington to obtain permission from the War Department for the British Overseas Airways Company to make regular as opposed to emergency stops at Fisherman Lake for refueling and other technical purposes in order to lessen the distance between stages on the flying boat route from Bathurst to Lagos. It was added that this would permit the carrying of greater loads made necessary by constantly increasing traffic pressure on this route.

On September 20 the Royal Air Force delegation in Washington informed the British Foreign Office that the War Department had affirmed on a number of occasions the agreement permitting British craft to land at Fisherman Lake and that it was felt further action was unnecessary it being assumed the permission already secured covered regular as well as emergency stops which McBride60 and I believe is not the case.

Under the terms of our agreement with the Liberian Government we have the right to permit to the United Nations the use of any of our installations here in the common war effort. This British request, however, appears to be of a commercial character and we do not believe it would be granted by the Liberian Government under normal circumstances. The British have already requested an installation at Fisherman Lake for war purposes which is out of all proportion to their needs. I suggest, therefore, that the War Department investigate further the request of BOAC and consult with the State Department before granting it.

Hibbard

60 Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.796/19: Telegram

[Document 511]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 7, 1942—11 p.m.

254. Your 314, September 30. War Department states that permission was granted to the British to refuel at Fisherman’s Lake and to station a few men in civilian clothes there but that it was not the intent of the War Department to grant the British anything in the way of a permanent or large-scale installation. War Department is discussing the matter with British air representatives in Washington and you will be advised as to the results.

Welles

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.796/21: Telegram

[Document 512]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 24, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received October 25—10:30 a.m.]

361. My telegram No. 314, September 30, 9 a.m. and Department’s reply No. 254, October 8 [7], 11 p.m. regarding British use of American air fields in Liberia. The following is a paraphrase of a telegram received by the British Legation here from the Foreign Office: “Air Ministry wishes United States authorities to be informed that Ensign land planes operating service Lagos–Freetown and later Bathurst will land at Roberts Field for refuelling. Service expected to start end October.”

The commanding officer at Roberts Field has also been shown this message which was received by the British patrol officer there.

“BOAC Ensign service (a) once weekly will commence first week November, (b) Route Lagos, Accra, Takoradi, Freetown, (c) Will require 900 gallons 90 octane fuel Takoradi weekly, arrangements have been made for dispatch to Roberts supply 90 octane fuel.”

These telegrams appear to involve a British commercial service which I do not believe is contemplated in our agreement with the Liberian Government and I would appreciate information as to whether the War Department has agreed to it.

Hibbard

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.796/21: Telegram

[Document 513]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, October 28, 1942—8 p.m.

280. Your 361, October 24, 9 p.m. The War Department has not agreed to the proposed use of Roberts Field by BOAC land planes and is taking up the matter with representatives of British Air Ministry.

Hull

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 882.796/13

[Document 514]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] November 3, 1942.

Mr. Berle: We have discussed with Colonel Johnson of the Operations Division of the War Department the question raised by Sir Ronald Campbell61 and Air Commodore Thornton regarding the use of Liberia as a refueling station for the British BOAC land planes proceeding down the West Coast of Africa. It was explained to Colonel Johnson that the British desired to use Liberian territory for this purpose in order to conserve fuel by short hops along the coast, so that a full load of vital military supplies could be flown to the Egyptian front.

Colonel Johnson said there was nothing new in this approach by the British, except that it was now being made through the State Department instead of directly to the War Department. In addition to the request for refueling facilities, the British were asking permission to introduce their own petroleum installations, their own ground crews and repair facilities, and that they were obviously desirous of making Liberian territory a base for the BOAC commercial traffic as distinct from military patrol work. The range of planes to be used on this route, according to Colonel Johnson, was easily sufficient to fly the distance between Freetown and Takoradi or Accra without coming down for refueling.

Colonel Johnson said that the War Department had been guided in its attitude on this matter by the recommendations of Colonel Harry A. McBride who had recently returned from a special visit to Monrovia, and of Colonel Wood, the Commander of the American military forces in Liberia. Both Colonel McBride and Colonel Wood felt that the use by these BOAC planes of our airports in Liberia would be contrary to commitments given by the American military authorities to the Liberian Government and would be deeply resented by the Liberians. At present the British have the right to make emergency stops in Liberia for refueling purposes when the planes are engaged in coastwise patrol work, but this understanding does not extend to British commercial planes used in ferrying supplies to the Middle East. Colonel Johnson stated that the War Department was opposed to the BOAC proposals because of the advice given by Colonel McBride and Colonel Wood, although this attitude might change in the event that Liberia should declare war at some future date.

Colonel Johnson further stated that a meeting has been arranged between representatives of the War Department and the British Air Ministry, to be attended also by Colonel McBride, in an effort to arrange an amicable solution of the problem. Colonel McBride, however, is at present ill at his home and a meeting will have to be postponed until he is well enough to attend, probably within the next couple of days. It is our view that Colonel McBride is particularly well qualified to discuss the situation, since he has just investigated the air transport problem on the West Coast of Africa, and is fully familiar with all questions relating to the various air services in that area. Colonel Johnson suggested that the matter should be left in the hands of the technical experts, particularly those who had firsthand acquaintance with the Liberian problem. This view, it seems to us, is a reasonable one and as soon as Mr. McBride is recovered I believe that we can expect a prompt handling of the matter.

Paul H. Alling

61 British Minister in the United States.

Memorandum by Mr. Harry A. McBride 882.796/25

[Document 515]

Memorandum by Mr. Harry A. McBride 62

[Washington,] November 6, 1942.

About your memorandum63 to Mr. Berle, these are my thoughts: 1. That although the United States has complete jurisdiction over the air fields in Liberia, Liberia gave up that jurisdiction because of implicit trust that they would not be used for any other purpose than for waging war against the Axis powers in the defense of Liberia if that became necessary.

2. Before I left Liberia this time, suspicion and rumor were beginning to make themselves felt that we were a little slow in taking complete defense measures in accordance with our agreement and were beginning to let in a visitor who because of past history and performance in Liberia would always be mistrusted and unwelcome. They had said that they would of course understand if we were to allow the use of these facilities to any of the Allied Nations in case of emergency. It is not as if this was American territory and I feel we are honor bound not to increase their suspicion and perhaps even change their whole attitude toward us by allowing the British unrestricted use of these facilities.

3. The Liberians would understand if we asked the British to station a few planes at these air fields to assist in sea patrol until the time we may be able to do this necessary task.

4. In any event, it seems to me that this is completely a military matter and should not be handled by the Department of State without further consultation with the War Department. It is their responsibility to defend, to use and operate these air fields. Every request of the British has been on a suspiciously ambitious scale. Is there any good military reason for asking us to build fifty-six large barracks buildings at Fisherman Lake where fifteen Catalinas would be stationed for patrol work? Why should not these planes be stationed at Freetown where the British have facilities for constructing barracks, furnishing supplies, and major overhaul of the planes? There would never be any question if they needed to stop at Fisherman Lake in an emergency to refuel but I see no good reason for actually stationing the planes at Fisherman Lake which is only one hundred miles from Freetown. I have seen several of these British requests for use of facilities in Liberia. They have all been without any explanation for the reasons why and none of them have any specific details. I do not think the War Department should be asked to decide upon the use of Liberian air fields by the British commercial air lines until it is given specific information as to the number of planes involved, the number of people they would expect to station at these fields and the specific saving that would be made in the amount of freight the planes could carry. Here again I can not see why their landing point should not be at Sierra Leone which is only one hundred miles away, it of course being understood that in any case of emergency they could always stop at Liberian air fields where the ground crews would be instructed to refuel them.

5. All of us want to do everything we can in the common war effort, but these air fields are in a foreign country. They have been placed under our jurisdiction and it would be hard to explain to the Liberians why the common war effort would not be served by merely refueling British planes—and especially commercial planes in cases of emergency—rather than to have the British set up elaborate stations of their own at these points, when their own colony is so few miles distant.

62 Marginal notation on the original: “Telephoned statement by Lt Col. Harry A. McBride Nov. 6/42.”

63  Supra.

The Assistant Chief of Staff (Handy) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 882.796/24

[Document 516]

The Assistant Chief of Staff (Handy) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

Washington, November 19, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Berle: Reference is made to your letter of November 4th64 on the subject of the regular operation of British cargo and transport aircraft through Liberian airfields controlled by the United States. The matter has been the subject of discussion and correspondence between the War Department and R. A. F. representatives of the British Air Ministry for some time.

The War Department has interposed no objection to use of these fields by transport or cargo planes operated by the R. A. F. On the contrary, it is cognizant of the fact that at least one transport of the United States Army Air Forces has been turned over to the R. A. F. to permit operation by the R. A. F. of a Bathurst-Lagos air line which stops at Roberts Field and which is used entirely for British personnel and cargo.

The War Department has opposed the use of the subject air ports as regular stops by planes of the British Overseas Airways Corporation for the following reasons: a. Although not specifically stated in the agreement between the United States and Liberia, it was clearly understood between President Barclay of Liberia and Lt. Col. McBride, who negotiated the agreement for the United States, that no commercial service by the British, or any foreign country other than the United States, was contemplated under the terms of the agreement, and further was not desired by the Liberian Government. Hence, granting the requested permission to the BOAC would be a breach of faith on the part of the U. S. Government.

b. It does not appear to the War Department that the necessary permission should be sought from the Liberian Government at this time, inasmuch as our agreement with Liberia is on a quid pro quo basis and we have not yet fully carried out our obligations thereunder.

c. Considering the route followed in the service in question, it is noted that the longest non-stop flight is from Lisbon to Bathurst, a distance of 1849 miles, whereas the distance from Freetown to Takoradi is only 948 miles. By being able to land at Roberts Field, the latter flight could be reduced by 245 miles. The increase in payload affected by that reduction in distance for a modern transport aircraft is not believed to be of material consequence.

d. The British have indicated that the cargo carried is necessary to the war effort. General Fitzgerald, Commanding General, U. S. Army Forces in Central Africa, (including Liberia), Lt. Col. Mc-Bride, Special Representative of the President to Liberia, and Mr. Hibbard, U. S. Chargé d’Affaires at Monrovia have all reported in connection with the British request that a British commercial service appears to be involved. Inasmuch as the service appears to be a commercial carrier, at least in part, and a schedule of once weekly is contemplated, the vital importance of this service in the war effort is not apparent.

At a meeting on November 18, attended by Representatives of the State and War Departments and the British Air Ministry, it was agreed no action would be taken in the matter for the present and that further discussions would be conducted by the State Department and the British Embassy. The War Department has no objection to having the State Department assume responsibility for the conduct of these discussions; however, it is believed that the State Department should be advised of the opinion of the War Department, as noted above.

Sincerely yours,

Thos. T. Handy
Major General

64 Not printed.

Insistence by the United States on the expulsion of Germans from LiberiaInsistence by the United States on the expulsion of Germans from Liberia

[517] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, May 16, 1942—9 p.m.

882.20/564a: Telegram

[518] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 20, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 12:54 p.m.]

882.20/565: Telegram

[519] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, May 20, 1942—8 p.m.

882.20/565: Telegram

[520] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 21, 1942—6 p.m. [Received May 22—1:50 p.m.]

882.20/567: Telegram

[521] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 22, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 1:45 p.m.]

882.20/568: Telegram

[522] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 26, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 12:50 p.m.]

882.20/570: Telegram

[523] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, May 29, 1942—9 p.m.

882.20/570: Telegram

[524] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 2, 1942—2 p.m. [Received June 3—10:44 a.m.]

882.20/572: Telegram

[525] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 6, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 4:15 p.m.]

882.20/573: Telegram

[526] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 22, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 5:13 p.m.]

882.20/585: Telegram

[527] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 25, 1942—9 p.m.

882.20/585: Telegram

[528] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, July 13, 1942—9 p.m.

702.6282/26a: Telegram

[529] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 30, 1942—4 p.m. [Received July 31—2:19 p.m.]

702.6282/27: Telegram

[530] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 3, 1942—10 p.m.

702.6282/27: Telegram

[531] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 12, 1942—7 p.m.

702.6282/27: Telegram

[532] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 12, 1942—8 p.m.

702.6282/28a: Telegram

[533] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 25, 1942—9 p.m. [Received September 26—2:18 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24512: Telegram

[534] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 1, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 6:37 p.m.]

702.6282/34: Telegram

[535] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 15, 1942—6 p.m. [Received October 16—1:12 p.m.]

882.20/620: Telegram

[536] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 20, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 11 a.m.]

702.6282/42: Telegram

[537] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] October 20, 1942.

702.6282/46

[538] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)

[Washington,] October 20, 1942.

702.6282/46

[539] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, November 5, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 2:33 p.m.]

702.6282/52: Telegram

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.20/564a: Telegram

[Document 517]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, May 16, 1942—9 p.m.

113. In view of the presence now in Liberian territory of what may be regarded as an adequate nucleus force,65 you may wish to discuss with President Barclay the question of inviting the Germans in Liberia to leave the country. We believe that by the time arrangements can be made for their departure, additional contingents will have arrived to help guard against the possibility of reprisals.

War Department states that adequate forces will soon be in Liberia to enable President Barclay to submit the military agreement66 to the legislature.

Hull

65 For correspondence regarding American bases in Liberia and the defense of Liberia, see pp. 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420] ff.

66 Defense and Bases Agreement signed at Monrovia, March 31, 1942; for text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 275, or 56 Stat (pt. 2) 1621.

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.20/565: Telegram

[Document 518]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 20, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 12:54 p.m.]

156. Department’s 113, May 16, 9 p.m. I have discussed with President Barclay the question of Germans leaving Liberia and informed him of the statement of the War Department in regard to the early arrival of adequate forces which will enable him to submit the agreement to the legislature.

President Barclay agrees with the suggestion concerning the Germans and states that the German Consul General has already been informally notified that if circumstances should change here the Germans would be invited to leave the country. President Barclay now states that he will immediately invite the Germans to leave Liberia.

Wharton

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.20/565: Telegram

[Document 519]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, May 20, 1942—8 p.m.

117. Your 156, May 20, 11 a.m. We have been informed that the new German Consul is scheduled to arrive at Monrovia by Air France plane on May 23, and that the British Legation at Monrovia has been instructed to protest his landing. In view of the considerations advanced in the Department’s No. 113, May 16, 9 p.m., you should make representations similar to those of your British colleague in this matter.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.20/567: Telegram

[Document 520]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 21, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received May 22—1:50 p.m.]

158. Similarly to British colleague, I have orally protested to Liberian Government as instructed in Department’s 117, May 20. Secretary of State, Simpson, states President Barclay feels it is now too late to prevent landing of new German Consul, that if suggested before something could have been done. Simpson assures me, however, that only German Consul will be permitted to land on 23d; that permission was not requested nor granted for Brohse, German secretary, that he will not be allowed to land, and that Wehrle has been so notified. I understand that Wehrle and at least two other Germans will leave here by same plane.

Referring to my 156, May 20, Simpson reports that Cabinet meeting which President desires before taking action, planned for tomorrow, cannot be held until Monday 25th. Meanwhile, President is keeping his proposed action secret.

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.20/568: Telegram

[Document 521]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 22, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 1:45 p.m.]

159. Referring to my 158, May 21. On reconsideration Secretary Simpson, by President’s instructions, notified Wehrle last evening of invitation for all Germans to leave Liberia. It is understood five will leave tomorrow by plane and all others are given 2 weeks within which to depart. Any further developments will be telegraphed.

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.20/570: Telegram

[Document 522]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, May 26, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 12:50 p.m.]

168. Referring to my 159, May 22. Von Waldheim, new German Consul, arrived and five Germans left Monrovia by same French plane May 24. Those departing, Wehrle, Kirstein, Fleck, Jantzen and Von Dein. Other Germans now planning to leave by June 6th. Secretary Simpson states that for the moment Von Waldheim will be allowed to remain here.

Wharton

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.20/570: Telegram

[Document 523]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, May 29, 1942—9 p.m.

129. Your 168, May 26, 11 a.m. For certain important reasons it would be desirable to have all Germans, including Von Waldheim, leave Liberia within the next 10 days if possible. Please endeavor to persuade President Barclay to carry out this suggestion.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.20/572: Telegram

[Document 524]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 2, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received June 3—10:44 a.m.]

172. Referring to Department’s 129, May 29, 9 p.m. I have conferred with President Barclay who states that he fully understands the desirability of having all Germans leave Liberia as suggested and, in addition to his Government’s invitation already given to Germans to leave country as reported in my 159, May 22, he will instruct Secretary Simpson intimate immediately to Von Waldheim, new Reich representative, that his departure from the country as soon as possible would be desirable.

In view of lack of commercial or other legitimate interests here after Germans’ departure and the fact that there is no treaty between Liberia and Reich obliging the reception here of German Consular officials, I do not believe that it will be difficult to arrange for Yon Waldheim’s early departure should he endeavor to remain longer.

Germans now closing down business in preparation for early departure. I am reliably informed that a Vichy plane is scheduled to make at least two flights to Monrovia to evacuate them by June 6.

In this connection, Secretary Simpson, at my suggestion, has promised to inform Emanuelli, Vichy Chargé, that the plane should avoid flying in vicinity of Marshall and Fisherman Lake.

It is reported that a Vichy plane flew over Monrovia last Saturday. Upon investigation I have been informed that this plane was intended to evacuate some Germans, but was not allowed to land since permission for plane had not been granted at that time.

There are several Jews and one Negro of German nationality here whose status is giving some concern to the President, but I do not anticipate any great trouble with them. I have told the President that I feel they should be evacuated also, but he refrained from committing himself. If they cannot be taken out of the country however I feel that their movements must be restricted. Has the Department any suggestions on this score? The President was unable to inform me definitely whether these German nationals have close relatives in Germany or occupied territory but stated that he would investigate.

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/573: Telegram

[Document 525]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 6, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 4:15 p.m.]

177. My telegram number 172, June 2, 2 p.m. The Secretary of State informed me yesterday that on the request of the German Consul the German citizens who are to leave Liberia have been given another week in which to settle their affairs. He stated that next week a Vichy plane would make four trips here and that by June 13, all will have left except the Consul. I urged upon him the necessity of having the Consul leave at once but he is hesitant to force the issue as he fears this will mean forceful reprisals. I told him that I was sure we should be well able to take care of such a contingency by the end of next week. I have not yet seen the President but expect to do so early next week when I shall press the matter further.

Hibbard

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/585: Telegram

[Document 526]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

Monrovia, June 22, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 5:13 p.m.]

202.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

There remain in Monrovia the Consul as well as Nolke and Brandt who are his non-career assistants and are living with him. I urged the Secretary of State again this morning to request their immediate departure but he is reluctant and I fear will not take action until this Government has received assurance of further protection as outlined in my telegram 198 of June 18, 5 p.m.67

Hibbard

67  Ante, p. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462].

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.20/585: Telegram

[Document 527]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 25, 1942—9 p.m.

168. Your 202, June 22, 4 p.m. The Department believes that on important questions related to the war you should endeavor to consult with President Barclay personally. Please obtain an interview with him as soon as possible and explain that the continued presence of German officials in Liberia not only constitutes a threat to the security of our operations but invites the very danger which is most feared by Liberia. With the departure of these officials from Liberian territory the possibilities of Germany receiving information on which to base hostile action should be materially lessened. It is therefore regarded as of foremost importance to have the Germans leave while we are in the process of delivering supplies and personnel intended for the defense installations in Liberia.

The War Department expresses the hope that no publicity will be given to the defense agreement when ratified by the Legislature.

Hull

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 702.6282/26a: Telegram

[Document 528]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, July 13, 1942—9 p.m.

180. In your forthcoming discussion with President Barclay, you should request that arrangements be made to terminate the code privileges of the German Consul at the same time that the latter receives notice of the Liberian Government’s decision to ask him to leave the country. Several days would doubtless elapse before transportation could be provided for the Consul and his staff, and for obvious reasons we consider it essential that he should not be able to send code messages during that period.

Welles

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 702.6282/27: Telegram

[Document 529]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 30, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received July 31—2:19 p.m.]

247. Department’s telegram No. 180, July 13, 9 p.m. Since the receipt of the telegram under acknowledgement I have talked with President Barclay three times regarding the expulsion of the German Consul from Liberia. I have presented the case from all angles and each time he has agreed with me as to the desirability of having him removed. He feels, however, that in view of this country’s neutrality and its present vulnerability he can not afford an open break with Germany. He is therefore awaiting some overt act which will give him an excuse for asking him to leave. He assured me this morning that he has the Consul under constant surveillance and would take advantage of the slightest pretext to remove him.

For 3 weeks following the arrival of our troops here all messages from the German Consulate were held up by the Government radio station. The Consul made complaints to the Secretary of State and his code messages to Berlin only are now sent.

I am informed by the President however that these are held up 2 to 3 days. They go via Freetown where the British state copies are taken for the Foreign Office. The Germans are not permitted to send any cables to other destinations although a specific request has been made for the transmission of messages to Abidjan in the French Ivory Coast. The French Consul who represents the Vichy Government but actually collaborates with the British and United States has made excuses not to send code messages for the Germans although he has been requested to do so. Both my British colleague and I have seen the correspondence between the German Consul and the Secretary of State on this subject.

There are rumors that there is a radio transmitter in the German Consulate. I can not verify this but so far none of our Army Signal Corps sets, nor the Firestone radio station, nor the set in this Legation has picked up any signals which might emanate from this source.

There is the possibility that messages are going by native hand to the French Ivory Coast and being sent from there. However this method would take at least a week and the value of much of the information so sent would consequently be greatly reduced.

Hibbard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 702.6282/27: Telegram

[Document 530]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 3, 1942—10 p.m.

189. Your 247, July 30, 4 p.m. We are dissatisfied with the situation resulting from the failure of President Barclay to invite the German Consul to leave Liberia. While the Consul may be under surveillance he is of course in Monrovia for a purpose and as long as he remains in Liberian territory he will be a potential menace to the safety of our installations and of Liberia itself. We should have thought that the protest he delivered to the Liberian Secretary of State on June 17 would have constituted sufficient evidence of the unfriendly intentions of the German Government and afforded ample pretext for President Barclay to request von Waldheim’s departure.67a

The War Department states that the forces now in Liberia or en route should be considered as having largely met President Barclay’s needs of protection, with the exception of the air equipment which is still to be supplied. It strongly concurs in the desirability of removing the danger presented by von Waldheim’s continued presence. Please do what you can to press this viewpoint upon President Barclay at every opportunity and endeavor to check in any way possible the efficacy of the surveillance and the manner in which the Consul may be able to transmit messages.

Welles

67a See pp. 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462] and 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468].

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 702.6282/27: Telegram

[Document 531]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 12, 1942—7 p.m.

197. Your 247, July 30, 4 p.m. This Government understood that President Barclay promised McBride68 to rid Liberia of all enemy aliens as soon as an American armed force arrived in Liberian territory. It was understood that Liberia would either break relations with enemy powers as was done by the Latin American countries or would by other means expel all enemy nationals. That the German Consul is still in Monrovia observing American military operations and is allowed to report upon them is of course untenable, and it is felt that the Liberian Government must correct this matter immediately.

Furthermore McBride reported that President Barclay informed him that he would institute strict censorship as soon as the Agreement was ratified. It is felt that censorship of mail and radio communications should be instituted at once to prevent subversive activities inimical to Liberia and the United States and that American officers should assist and supervise it.

You must impress upon President Barclay that this country is at war with ruthless enemies, and that in this conflict we are endeavoring to protect Liberia and to safeguard its territory and interests. Please inform President Barclay of the contents of this message and send his reply within 48 hours.

Hull

68 Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt, sent to Liberia in February 1942 to negotiate the Defense and Bases Agreement.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 702.6282/28a: Telegram

[Document 532]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 12, 1942—8 p.m.

3806. According to our Legation at Monrovia, the German Consul is sending code messages to Berlin via Freetown where copies are reported to be taken by the British authorities for the Foreign Office.

We consider such activities of the German Consul highly dangerous to our interests and are at a loss to understand why these messages should be allowed to pass through British controlled territory. Please endeavor to obtain the cooperation of the appropriate officials in putting a stop to this practice.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24512: Telegram

[Document 533]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 25, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received September 26—2:18 p.m.]

309. From McBride.69 Reference Legation’s 308, September 25, 5 p.m.70 concerning German Consul. Secretary of State Simpson came to see me this evening. He stated that since our conference this morning he had talked with President Barclay who had agreed to proceed with expulsion of German Consul and his assistants. Matter will be submitted to Cabinet next Tuesday. [McBride.]

Hibbard

69 For correspondence regarding Mr. McBride’s second mission to Liberia, see pp. 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472] ff.

70  Ante, p. 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476].

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 702.6282/34: Telegram

[Document 534]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 1, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 6:37 p.m.]

5474. Department’s 3806, August 12, 8 p.m. Foreign Office states that to the best of its knowledge telegrams normally are sent from Monrovia to Konakri over a French cable which passes along the west African coast from Cotonou. From Konakri messages can be sent by cable over the three following routes: (a) by way of Dakar, Casablanca and Marseilles (or Brest);

(b) by way of Dakar and Brest;

(c) by way of Freetown, Ascension, Cape Verde and Carcavelos.

The cable between Konakri and Freetown, Foreign Office adds, has been interrupted since July 13 and consequently no telegrams of the German Consul could recently have been sent via this route. As a matter of fact the Foreign Office adds none went that way for some weeks before its interruption.

Foreign Office also informs us that the cable passing from Dakar to Brest has for some time been cut.

With reference to the foregoing Foreign Office says that it should explain that if the cable communication between Konakri and Freetown were open it would not be the policy of the British authorities to stop messages from going that way because if they did so they would only be forcing messages into channels over which they had no control at all.

In pointing out that transmission by wireless remains open to the German Consul, Foreign Office adds that only by denying German Consul cipher privileges can his wireless messages be at all controlled.

Winant

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.20/620: Telegram

[Document 535]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 15, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received October 16—1:12 p.m.]

348. From McBride. In final conversation with Secretary Simpson this morning in company of Hibbard, he gave me a copy of a memorandum of his conference with German Consul today. Consul has requested Berlin to ask Vichy to send a French plane from the Ivory Coast for him and his staff to arrive here about October 25. Consul stated that he would much prefer to await this plane only other alternative being to go to Cape Palmas in American amphibian. He did not wish to travel in an enemy plane and in any event, due to his health, he could not cover the distance on foot from Cape Palmas to Abidjan. Simpson acquiesced in this plan and the Liberian Government has already granted request for French plane to come to Monrovia and Vichy Consul has so informed Vichy.

Will see President Barclay tonight and leave by Clipper October 17. [McBride.]

Hibbard

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 702.6282/42: Telegram

[Document 536]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 20, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 11 a.m.]

355. My telegram 348, October 15, 6 p.m. The German Consul yesterday informed the Secretary of State that he had received instructions from Berlin to the effect a Vichy French plane would arrive in Monrovia October 23, to take him and his staff to Abidjan.

He has asked the Secretary to secure a safe conduct for the party from the British and American Governments to cover the journey from Monrovia to Germany. I have told Mr. Simpson that I could not issue any such document but that I would request the commanding officer of air forces here to afford full protection in Liberian territory provided the plane did not fly over our defense areas. Arrangements for a safe conduct for the remainder of the journey would have to be made by the Vichy or German Governments with the American and British Governments through the appropriate channels.

The Germans have arranged to take with them about $50,000 in gold.

Hibbard

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 702.6282/46

[Document 537]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] October 20, 1942.

The British Ambassador71 asked urgently to see me this morning.

Lord Halifax brought with him a message from Mr. Eden saying that the British Government had just learned that, at the instance of the Government of the United States, the Liberian Government had agreed to the deportation of the German Consul General in Liberia and that the latter was to be removed by airplane from Liberia on October 25. The British Government felt strongly that it would be preferable to have the German Consul General placed under control in some form of concentration confinement in Liberia rather than to have him removed to French West Africa, which the British Government stated had been kept relatively free of German agents by Governor General Boisson. Furthermore, the British Government believed that the German Consul General undoubtedly would have full information as to military activities of the United States in Liberia, which would immediately be passed on to the German Government if the Consul General were allowed to go to French West Africa.

I told the Ambassador I would look into the matter and let him have a reply in the course of the day.

S[umner] W[elles]

71 Viscount Halifax.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) 702.6282/46

[Document 538]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)

[Washington,] October 20, 1942.

I called Mr. Hoyer Millar72 of the British Embassy by telephone this afternoon, on Mr. Welles’ instructions, to inform him of the view of the War Department that it was desired that the departure of the German Consul General from Monrovia be made, as planned, by French plane; that the War Department was sure the Consul General had no information regarding our military activities in Liberia which had not already been cabled or radioed out of the country.

Mr. Hoyer Millar informed me that the communication which had been received from London, and which was conveyed to Mr. Welles this morning by Lord Halifax, was motivated by the desire of the British Government not to grant safe conduct to the German Consul General’s flight from Monrovia prior to receiving word from us that we desired the flight to take place. He added, however, that the decision of the War Department was quite all right and that in any case “it is their funeral”.

Mr. Hoyer Millar’s interpretation of Mr. Eden’s message does not appear to coincide fully with that of Lord Halifax.

72 F. R. Hoyer Millar, First Secretary of the British Embassy.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 702.6282/52: Telegram

[Document 539]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, November 5, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 2:33 p.m.]

373. Gottfried von Waldheim German Consul General accompanied by Franz Noelke Vice Consul and Carl Heinzbrand clerk left Monrovia this morning at 11 o’clock by French plane for Abidjan, French Ivory Coast. Tomorrow at 10 o’clock they will leave Abidjan by train for Bobo-Dioulasso, where on November 10 they will take a French commercial plane for Algiers.

Hibbard

Negotiations concerning the replacement of British currency in Liberia by American currencyNegotiations concerning the replacement of British currency in Liberia by American currency

[540] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 5, 1942—8 p.m.

882.515/34: Telegram

[541] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 8, 1942—10 a.m. [Received March 9—9:38 a.m.]

882.515/60: Telegram

[542] The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 10, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 1:38 p.m.]

882.515/61: Telegram

[543] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 18, 1942—7 p.m.

882.515/60: Telegram

[544] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 25, 1942—6 p.m. [Received June 26—8:46 a.m.]

882.515/69: Telegram

[545] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 30, 1942—11 p.m.

882.515/69: Telegram

[546] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 17, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 7:24 p.m.]

882.515/71: Telegram

[547] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 23, 1942—4 p.m. [Received July 23—3:34 p.m.]

882.515/72: Telegram

[548] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 3, 1942—8 p.m.

882.515/72: Telegram

[549] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 3, 1942—9 p.m.

882.515/72 Suppl: Telegram

[550] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, August 21, 1942—10 a.m. [Received August 22—1:32 p.m.]

882.515/73: Telegram

[551] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 29, 1942—4 p.m.

882.515/73: Telegram

[552] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 3, 1942—5 p.m. [Received September 4—8:41 a.m.]

882.515/75: Telegram

[553] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 9, 1942—6 p.m. [Received September 9—3:21 p.m.]

882.515/76: Telegram

[554] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, September 26, 1942—2 p.m.

882.515/76: Telegram

[555] The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 30, 1942—4 p.m. [Received October 31—8:46 a.m.]

882.515/80: Telegram

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.515/34: Telegram

[Document 540]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 5, 1942—8 p.m.

36. Legation’s 77, September 25, 1939.73 For McBride.74 We should be glad to receive urgently at this time your views and recommendations with respect to the currency problem in Liberia.

As you will realize, the appearance of American forces in Liberia will immediately present an important commissary and paymaster problem. The War Department has expressed a desire to introduce, if possible, American currency for local expenditures and salary payments, and the various aspects of this question are now being studied by officials of the War and Treasury Departments and Firestone. We should particularly like to know whether this might furnish a suitable opportunity to open discussions with the Liberian Government on the general question of monetary reform but, owing to the need for secrecy, any approach to the military phase of the problem should be handled in the strictest confidence.

Welles

73 Not printed.

74 Harry A. McBride, Special Representative of President Roosevelt in Liberia.

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.515/60: Telegram

[Document 541]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 8, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received March 9—9:38 a.m.]

62. From McBride. Department’s 36, March 5, 8 p.m. Since arrival here have made study of currency problem and President Barclay last week said he would like to take this matter up at our next conference on Monday or Tuesday. Have also consulted with Financial Adviser and Manager of Bank of Monrovia.

The greatest obstacle heretofore has been costs involved in freight and insurance in getting British silver back to England, and in getting American silver here to replace it. These costs were estimated at 100 to 150,000 dollars which Liberia does not have available for this purpose. Further obstacle at this time is fact that Britain will not buy back the British silver circulating in Liberia.

Arrival of American forces presents an opportunity which Liberia may never have again of obtaining considerable quantities of American currency without cost to Liberia and I think Barclay will desire to take advantage of it. This would be especially true if War Department would consent to bring, in addition to its own needs, some $500,000 of American currency for the Bank of Monrovia from the bank’s funds in New York without Chargé for freight and insurance.

War Department might also be willing to anticipate its future needs here to extent of sending out about $1,500,000 in United States currency to be placed on deposit with the Bank of Monrovia to be drawn against by our disbursing officers.

In this way the problem of getting an initial supply of American money sufficient to enable the bank to handle conversion here would be solved. This currency should be confined to metal from 1–cent pieces to silver dollars. There should be no dollar bills as they are unsuited for native circulation here and commissaries and paymasters should be instructed on this point. Small quantities of bills in 5–dollar denomination and upwards could be included for larger bank transactions.

As to withdrawal of British currency there is approximately 2 million dollars worth in circulation here all in silver coins. My recommendation would be for United States Government, if feasible, to arrange for shipment on homeward bound warships of whatever quantity of British silver can be gotten together, such shipments to be without costs for freight and insurance. United States Treasury would then have to insist with British Government that over a certain period of time they take this off Treasury’s or Bank of Monrovia’s hand in the United States at a favorable rate of exchange so there would be no loss to Liberia or to Bank of Monrovia. It might be better if United States Treasury could insist with British that this British currency be accepted from our warships if delivered at Freetown, and credit established therefor in New York.

The conversion into United States currency should take place here at 4 dollars to the pound at which rate 6 pence is exactly equivalent to American 10 cents. To convert at this rate Bank of Monrovia would require guarantee that sterling taken out of circulation could be disposed of at same rate without any shipping or insurance Chargés.

There are other details such as exchange locally of Liberian copper for United States 1–cent pieces which could be determined later.

It will be appreciated if Department will consult with War and Treasury Departments on above suggestions. I will explore matter further with Barclay and report as soon as possible. [McBride.]

Wharton

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State 882.515/61: Telegram

[Document 542]

The Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, March 10, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 1:38 p.m.]

66. From McBride. Legation’s 62, March 8, 10 a.m. President Barclay is willing to proceed with monetary reform immediately provided some general arrangement such as suggested in No. 62 is found practicable by American officials. [McBride.]

Wharton

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton) 882.515/60: Telegram

[Document 543]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Wharton)

Washington, March 18, 1942—7 p.m.

57. Your 62, March 8, 10 a.m. For McBride. The Treasury and War Departments are in consultation regarding the currency problem and expect to furnish us with a definite reply to your recommendation in the near future. It is probable that your suggestions will in large measure be adopted.

Welles

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.515/69: Telegram

[Document 544]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, June 25, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received June 26—8:46 a.m.]

213. Legation’s telegram 62, March 1 [8], 8 [10] a.m. Finance officer of the American contingent has with him $300,000 worth of American silver coins and proposes to begin payment of troops at the end of the month. I would appreciate instructions as to whether this sum is to be put into circulation here as the beginning of the substitution of American for British currency as outlined by McBride in the telegram above referred to. In this case arrangements will have to be made for the gradual withdrawal by the bank of British currency. If, however, it is intended to put it in circulation side by side with British currency now here arrangements must be made to have it declared legal tender for all purposes at the rate of $4 to the pound as already suggested.

Hibbard

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.515/69: Telegram

[Document 545]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, June 30, 1942—11 p.m.

174. Your 213, June 25. The Treasury Department has agreed that assurances may be given to the Liberian Government to the effect that, as British silver coin accumulates in the Liberian Treasury or in the Bank of Monrovia in quantities beyond the financial capacity of that Government to hold, arrangements will be made from time to time to convert such accumulations of coins either into sterling balances, or into dollars at a rate of 4 dollars per pound sterling, in accordance with the needs of the Liberian Government. However, the Treasury Department considers it essential that the Liberian Government indicate the total amount of British coin to which these assurances will relate, since the Treasury does not wish to obligate itself to purchase British coin which under certain circumstances might flow into Liberia from other parts of Africa for conversion into dollars at the fixed rate. Treasury also states that it would be desirable to be assured by the Liberian Government that neither the Liberian Treasury nor the Bank of Monrovia would profit at any time from the conversion of British coin into dollars.

As to the procedure to be followed in implementing the guarantee to the Liberian Government, Treasury plans to have the Stabilization Fund from time to time purchase the accumulation of British coins in Liberia.

Please bring the foregoing to the attention of the Liberian Government and endeavor to obtain from it an indication of the total amount of British coin to which our assurances would relate.

The decision as regards declaring American currency legal tender would seem to be one for the Liberian Government to make in the light of the Treasury assurances above mentioned.

Hull

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.515/71: Telegram

[Document 546]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 17, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 7:24 p.m.]

237. Department’s telegram 174, June 30, 11 p.m. In discussing the conversion of British into American coins with the officials here there is some confusion as to exactly what the Treasury Department means by the phrase “arrangements will be made from time to time to convert such accumulations of coins either into sterling balances or into dollars” in the telegram under reference. If it means that the withdrawn British coin will be paid for in credits in New York or London the plan will [not] be feasible since neither the Bank of Monrovia nor the Liberian Government can use credits in London and a credit in New York would leave to the Government or the Bank the problem of transporting the actual coins from New York to Liberia which neither is prepared to do. It was my understanding that the plan involved transportation of United States currency to Liberia on Army transports to replace the British silver; that this currency would be deposited in the Bank of Monrovia as conversion agent which would place it in circulation as the British silver is withdrawn.

Please instruct.

Hibbard

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.515/72: Telegram

[Document 547]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, July 23, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received July 23—3:34 p.m.]

240. My telegram number 237, July 17, 1 p.m. After further discussions with the financial adviser and the acting bank manager regarding the conversion of British into American coinage here, it has been estimated that $2,000,000 will be required for the operation. McBride estimated that the Army would require approximately 1,500,000 for its payroll of which 300,000 has now arrived. In addition it was hoped that the War Department would consent to transport 500,000 for the bank from its depository in New York. All this money need not come at once and the transport can be spaced over regular intervals.

The conversion can be begun now with the Army funds on hand plus 50,000 in the hands of the bank. The present would seem a most favorable time to begin since tax money is now coming in from the interior and rice money will soon be going back. Army payroll is being held up until the Treasury reaches a decision and I would therefore appreciate an early reply to my telegram above referred to in order that final details may be completed.

Hibbard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.515/72: Telegram

[Document 548]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 3, 1942—8 p.m.

187. Your 240, July 3 [23], 4 p.m. and Department’s 174, June 30, 11 p.m. You are instructed to present to the Liberian Secretary of State a note which will read as follows: “I have been authorized by my Government to inform you that the United States Secretary of the Treasury is prepared to purchase in Monrovia from the Liberian Government British current coin held or accumulated from time to time in the Liberian Treasury or the Bank of Monrovia and offered for sale to the Secretary of the Treasury. The British coin under reference will be purchased with United States coin by the Secretary of the Treasury at the rate of $4 U.S. for 1 pound sterling, provided that the aggregate amount purchased by the Secretary of the Treasury does not exceed 500,000 pounds sterling ($2,000,000 U.S.). Payment for the British coins will be made in Monrovia with United States coin transported to Monrovia at the expense of the United States Government. Any obligation of the Government of the United States or the Secretary of the Treasury to buy British coin hereunder shall terminate on June 30, 1943, subject to earlier termination at any date by the Secretary of the Treasury, and such termination shall be without prejudice to prior transactions. It is understood that the Liberian Government agrees that such British coins acquired by the Secretary of the Treasury are free for export from Liberia for other disposition by the Secretary of the Treasury. The Liberian Government is requested to assure the Secretary of the Treasury that any British coin sold to the Secretary of the Treasury hereunder shall have been acquired by the Liberian Treasury or the Bank of Monrovia at a rate not less than $4 U.S. for 1 pound sterling.”

Please confirm agreement of the Liberian Government to the foregoing.

Welles

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.515/72 Suppl: Telegram

[Document 549]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 3, 1942—9 p.m.

188. Department’s 187, August 3, 8 p.m. Reference is made to the fourth sentence of the note transmitted to you beginning “any obligation of the Government of the United States,” etc. The stipulations that the obligation shall terminate on June 30, 1943 and is subject to earlier termination by the Secretary of the Treasury are necessitated by the legislation establishing the stabilization fund under which it is proposed that the contemplated transactions will be carried out. This legislation will expire on June 30, 1943 unless renewed by the Congress. The Department does not feel that either of these stipulations need cause the Liberian Government apprehension since they do not reflect any intention on the part of the Treasury not to complete the conversion of the British coin into American coin.

Welles

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.515/73: Telegram

[Document 550]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, August 21, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received August 22—1:32 p.m.]

269. Department’s telegram No. 187, August 3, 8 p.m. I have received a note from the Liberian Secretary of State which says in part “I wish to advise that the Liberian Treasury accepts the proposal made by the United States Secretary of Treasury to purchase in Monrovia from the Liberian Government British current coin held or accumulated from time to time in the Liberian Treasury or in the Bank of Monrovia, Incorporated and offered for sale to the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States; and that the British coin under reference will be purchased with United States coin by the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States at the rate of $4 for 1 pound provided that the aggregate amount purchased by the Secretary of the Treasury does not exceed 500,000 pounds (2 million United States dollars). Payment for the British coin is to be made in Monrovia with United States coins transported to Monrovia at the expense of the United States Government.

It is to be understood that the stipulation which provides that the obligation shall terminate on June 30, 1943 or is subject to earlier termination by the Secretary of the Treasury is necessitated by the legislation establishing the stabilization fund in the United States under which it is proposed that the contemplated transaction is to be carried out, does not reflect any intention on the part [of] the United States Treasury not to complete the conversion. And it is the Government’s desire that the transaction should go into effect as soon as possible.

Meanwhile, the Liberian Treasury hereby assures the United States Secretary of the Treasury that any British coin sold to the Secretary of the Treasury shall have been acquired by the Liberian Treasury or the Bank of Monrovia Incorporated at the rate of not less than 4 United States dollars for 1 pound and that coins shall be free for export from Liberia.”

For some reason the President wishes a confirmation that the plan is now in operation and I shall be grateful, therefore, if the Department will send me a brief message to this effect in order that I may get him to issue the first executive order declaring American currency legal tender. From conversations with the acting manager of the bank I know that the Treasury Department has been in communication with Firestone regarding the quantity and denominations of coins to be sent out. I strongly urge that no more American bills be sent as the Army has already brought 90,000 dollar bills and 16,000 five-dollar bills which are ample for the country’s needs. The Army has found them unsatisfactory as they are returned in bad condition. The natives cannot hoard them because of damp mold and insect pests and in a country where skin diseases are prevalent they are most unsanitary.

Hibbard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.515/73: Telegram

[Document 551]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, August 29, 1942—4 p.m.

211. Your 269, August 21, 10 a.m. Department’s 187, August 3, 8 p.m., and 188, August 3, 9 p.m. The agreement for acquisition of British current coin in exchange for U. S. current coin is contained in Department’s 187. The statements contained in Department’s 188 simply explained why certain provisions were contained in the proposed agreement. The explanations do not and should not form a part of the agreement. Accordingly the Treasury does not wish to confirm the agreement as stated in your No. 269. You are requested to ask the Liberian Government to confirm the agreement as stated in Department’s 187.

Welles

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.515/75: Telegram

[Document 552]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 3, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received September 4—8:41 a.m.]

287. Department’s telegram no. 211, August 29, 9 [4] p.m. I have received today a note from the Liberian Secretary of State confirming the agreement for acquisition of British current coin in Liberia in exchange for United States current coin as contained in the Department’s telegram No. 187, August 3, 8 p.m. The note is the same as the previous one except that paragraph 3 has been omitted at my request in accordance with the Treasury’s wishes. See my despatch no. 779 of August 29 [25].75

Hibbard

75 Not printed.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.515/76: Telegram

[Document 553]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, September 9, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received September 9—3:21 p.m.]

291. My telegram number 287, September 3, 5 p.m. The President is still reluctant to issue the necessary proclamation declaring American currency legal tender until he has received final confirmation from the Treasury that the agreement is approved. Would it be possible to send me a brief telegram to this effect so that the operation can be started at once.

Hibbard

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) 882.515/76: Telegram

[Document 554]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard)

Washington, September 26, 1942—2 p.m.

236. Your 291, September 9, 6 p.m., your 287, September 3, 5 p.m., and your 784–A, September 3.76 You may advise the Liberian Government that in view of their confirmation of the agreement for the acquisition of British current coin in Liberia as contained in the Department’s telegram 187, August 3, 8 p.m., the Treasury Department considers such agreement to have been approved by the Liberian Government and to be in full force and effect.

Hull

76 Despatch No. 784–A not printed.

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State 882.515/80: Telegram

[Document 555]

The Chargé in Liberia (Hibbard) to the Secretary of State

Monrovia, October 30, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received October 31—8:46 a.m.]

367. Department’s confidential telegram No. 236, September 26, 2 p.m. The following Executive Order has been signed by President Barclay and will be published on November 2: “It is hereby ordered that on and after November 1, 1942 lawful metallic currency of the United States of America and lawful currency notes of the United States of America, of denominations not exceeding $20, shall be legal tender for the payment of all private and public obligations, at the rate of $4 (United States) to the British pound now in circulation in Liberia or $4 (United States) to $4.80 Liberian silver and alloy currency.”

Hibbard

Morocco:Morocco:

Contents

Negotiations between the American Chargé at Tangier and the Spanish High Commissioner regarding American economic aid to Spanish Zone of Morocco and TangierNegotiations between the American Chargé at Tangier and the Spanish High Commissioner regarding American economic aid to Spanish Zone of Morocco and Tangier

[556] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 9, 1941. [Received December 19.]

740.00112 European War 1939/4184

[557] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 13, 1941. [Received January 13, 1942.]

881.50/41

[558] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 17, 1941. [Received January 13, 1942.]

740.0011 European War 1939/18492

[559] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 5, 1942—noon. [Received January 6—7:56 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/18237: Telegram

[560] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 7, 1942—8 p.m. [Received January 9—10:30 p.m.]

881.00/2080: Telegram

[561] President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Poughkeepsie, N. Y., January 7, 1942.

740.0011 European War 1939/19000: Telegram

[562] The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, January 17, 1942.

740.0011 European War 1939/19000

[563] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 23, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 6:20 p.m.]

881.00/2090: Telegram

[564] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 28, 1942—8 p.m. [Received 10 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/4517: Telegram

[565] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 30, 1942.

881.6363/56

[566] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 4 February, 1942.

881.00/2106½

[567] The Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, February 17, 1942.

740.00112 European War 1939/4621

[568] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, March 13, 1942—1 p.m. [Received March 15—6:14 a.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/4927: Telegram

[569] The Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard) to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, March 18, 1942.

740.00112 European War 1939/4927

[570] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, March 28, 1942—4 p.m.

740.00112 European War 1939/4927: Telegram

[571] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, March 28, 1942.

881.00/2090

[572] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, April 13, 1942. [Received April 27.]

740.00112 European War 1939/5355

[573] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, May 5, 1942—8 p.m. [Received May 6—12:11 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/5401: Telegram

[574] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, May 11, 1942—8 p.m. [Received May 11—2:51 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/5436: Telegram

[575] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, May 15, 1942—noon. [Received 6:41 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/5507: Telegram

[576] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, May 19, 1942—11 p.m.

740.00112 European War 1939/5507: Telegram

[577] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern A fairs

[Washington,] May 29, 1942.

740.00112 European War 1939/5713⅔

[578] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Wyndham White) to the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard)

Washington, June 2, 1942.

740.00112 European War 1939/5739½

[579] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, June 15, 1942—midnight. [Received June 16—7:34 a.m.]

881.00/2177: Telegram

[580] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, June 18, 1942—6 p.m. [Received June 19—8:43 a.m.]

740.00112 EW 1939/5783: Telegram

[581] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, June 19, 1942—6 p.m. [Received June 20—2:05 a.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/5792: Telegram

[582] The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Wyndham White) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

Washington, June 19, 1942.

740.00112 European War 1939/5814½

[583] The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, June 30, 1942.

740.0011 European War 1939/22731

[584] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, July 1, 1942—11 p.m. [Received July 2—12:18 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/5909: Telegram

[585] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, July 27, 1942—noon.

740.0011 European War 1939/22731: Telegram

[586] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, July 27, 1942.

740.00112 European War 1939/5401

[587] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, July 31, 1942—9 p.m. [Received 10:18 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/6213: Telegram

[588] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, August 5, 1942—4 p.m. [Received August 6—11:14 a.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/6271: Telegram

[589] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, August 14, 1942—7 p.m.

740.00112 European War 1939/6271: Telegram

[590] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, August 17, 1942—2 p.m. [Received August 17—1:47 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/6363: Telegram

[591] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, August 17, 1942—7 p.m. [Received August 17—1:47 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/6383: Telegram

[592] The Ambassador in Spam (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, August 20, 1942—10 p.m. [Received August 21—2:58 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/6424: Telegram

[593] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, August 21, 1942—9 p.m. [Received August 22—2:31 a.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/6431: Telegram

[594] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, August 21, 1942—midnight. [Received August 22—10:55 a.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/6443: Telegram

[595] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, August 25, 1942—7 p.m. [Received August 25—6:58 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/6485: Telegram

[596] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, August 28, 1942—8 p.m.

740.00112 European War 1939/6424: Telegram

[597] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, September 1, 1942. [Received September 16.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24313

[598] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, October 15, 1942—10 p.m.

740.00112 European War 1939/6669: Telegram

[599] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 23, 1942—9 p.m. [Received 10:46 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/7036: Telegram

[600] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 26, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 1:46 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/7044: Telegram

[601] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 p.m.

740.00112 European War 1939/7044: Telegram

[602] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 31, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 6:15 p.m.]

740.00112 European War 1939/7114: Telegram

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/4184

[Document 556]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 475 Tangier, December 9, 1941.
[Received December 19.]

Sir: I have the honor to report a conversation I had with Mr. Cyr (for identification see Legation’s despatch no. 333 of September 51 ) concerning the situation in North Africa.

I have found Mr. Cyr an unusually keen observer in the many talks I have had with him since arriving in Morocco. He is very well informed of what goes on in France and in Morocco, including both the French and Spanish Zones.

He said that one must understand that the Vichy Government told the French Protectorate authorities very little of what was going on. I think this fact throws a great deal of light on the uncertainty which I observed displayed on my last visit to Rabat by officials there concerning the probable course of events. My informant stated that since he had visited France recently, including both zones, he too felt as many Frenchmen were beginning to feel that the policy of collaboration for France proper was necessary for France’s survival. That did not mean that either he or others were pro-German or believed that the policy of collaboration should extend to North Africa. Indeed he felt, if anything, that anti-German feeling was increasing by leaps and bounds in France and French North Africa.

He expressed the opinion that once British troops had reached the Tunisian border, Admiral Esteva, Governor General Chatel, and General Noguès2 in Rabat would have the greatest difficulty in keeping down the upsurge of sentiment which would be found to rise among all French in French North Africa. He added that at such a moment there would not be ten Frenchmen in North Africa who were anti-Ally.

My informant expressed the view that we and the British should be giving very serious attention to a démarche with General Orgaz, Spanish High Commissioner in Spanish Morocco, at an appropriate time when British troops are approaching the Tunisian border. That moment, my interlocutor stated, would be a very critical one for North Africa, as there would be an unprecedented effervescence of French sentiment, stirred by the British cleaning up of Libya. At such a time the attitude of the Spanish Zone would become of very great importance and he suggested that we and the British might, at such a moment, approach General Orgaz, Spanish High Commissioner, and bring pressure to bear on him not to permit the use of the territory of Spanish Morocco by the Axis.

My interlocutor pointed out that there has been a considerable swing of sentiment among Spanish officials in Tetuan in recent months since the Russian campaign started. At the beginning of that campaign the Spanish were told in the Spanish Axis-controlled press that Moscow and Leningrad were to fall within a few days. They have heard that prediction made so often that they are now losing faith in Germany and there have been Spanish officials who have approached the French Consul in Tetuán with the request that he give them asylum in the coming Spanish revolution which will occur upon the overthrow of the Axis.

My informant went on to state that the officials of Spanish Morocco fully understood what their position would be in the event of an Axis defeat and that Spain would not be large enough for them. He stated that it is his belief that General Orgaz has been given most extensive powers by the Spanish Government to deal with any emergency which may arise in North Africa.

My informant is of the opinion that General Orgaz, whom he knows and with whom he has had frequent dealings, might well be amenable to an appeal from Great Britain or the United States. My informant suggested that he did not believe a threat of military force from the Democracies would be necessary. He thought it would be sufficient if we approached General Orgaz and pointed out that he had an opportunity to play a role in Spain such as General Weygand4 had been expected to play in France. It was suggested that it was in the interest of Spain that some figure such as General Orgaz should come to terms with the Democracies so as to preserve such continuity as might be possible during the changeover from the pro-Axis regime in Spain to the transitional regime necessary in the event of eventual Axis defeat. It might be pointed out to General Orgaz that, in the event he resisted any attempt by the Axis to use Spanish Morocco, the Democracies would assure him of such material cooperation in the building up of Spanish Morocco and of Spain as might be necessary after the war. My informant thinks that General Orgaz, who is a hard headed realist might be amenable to such an approach. It is suggested, however, that with the decline in the fortunes of the Axis it becomes less and less likely that Spain or Spanish Morocco would be inclined to yield to German pressure.

My informant told me that General Noguès’ references, in his conversations with me, to Spanish elements who would be anxious to see him removed probably referred amongst others to the French Ambassador in Madrid who, out of a desire for popularity with the Spanish, had been so conciliatory in his dealings with the Spaniards as to indicate a willingness to give away almost anything so far as French interests in North Africa were concerned.

My interlocutor spoke also of the great difference which existed between the two Zones in France in respect of collaboration. When he was recently in Paris his friends at the Banque de France had spoken with the greatest bitterness of the readiness of Vichy to yield to the Germans in matters on which the French in the Occupied Zone were prepared to dispute indefinitely with all the disagreeable consequences to Frenchmen who came constantly in contact with the Germans and had to bear the brunt of such disputes as Vichy did not have to suffer.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

1 Not printed.

2 Adm. Jean Pierre Esteva, French Resident General in Tunisia; Yves Chatel, French Governor General of Algeria; and Gen. Albert Noguès, Resident General in the French Zone of Morocco.

4 Gen. Maxime Weygand, Delegate General for French North Africa, September 1940–November 1941.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.50/41

[Document 557]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 493 Tangier, December 13, 1941.
[Received January 13, 1942.]

Sir: I have the honor to report to the Department that M. de Juge Montespieu of the Foreign Commerce Service of the French Residency General in Rabat, on the occasion of a call which he made on me recently, discussed at some length the matter of the supplying of the Tangier Zone from French Morocco.

M. Montespieu stated that the supplying of the Tangier Zone was in accordance with an agreement made by the French Protectorate with the International Administration in Tangier shortly after the beginning of the war and that this agreement had been continued after the Franco-German armistice and even after the Spanish occupation of Tangier.

My informant added however that the continued supplying under the agreement had been reduced gradually owing to the increasing lack of supplies in the French Protectorate. He gave me the following figures of the principal items being supplied under the agreement in December, namely: Flour 5000 quintals

Fowls 30 quintals

Vegetables 200 quintals

Tomatoes 50 quintals

Salt meat 25 quintals

Pork products 25 quintals

Eggs 300 quintals

Pigs 30 units

Cows 150 units

Sheep 800 units

I asked M. Montespieu what the quid pro quo was in the supplying of Tangier and he stated there was none. I suggested that to me of course it indicated the continuing interest of the French Protectorate in Tangier and he stated that this was correct and that the French Protectorate considered the Sultan had certain obligations toward Tangier which were being met by the provisioning of Tangier on the part of French Morocco.

M. Montespieu stated that General Noguès had expected to utilize his proposed visit with General Orgaz on November 29, which had to be postponed on account of General Noguès’ illness, to discuss the question of the supplying of Tangier from French Morocco. He said that a great deal of dissatisfaction had been caused by the exorbitant prices demanded by Tangier merchants for the supplies furnished by French Morocco and the suggestion had been made that the French Protectorate authorities make known to the Spanish Zone authorities the prices of the products furnished by the French Zone in order that price control might be better facilitated in Tangier.

M. Montespieu stated that he had heard, or was under the impression, also that the feeding of Tangier by French Morocco was a result of interest expressed by the United States in the continuance of this provisioning.

To this I replied that so far as my knowledge went, I presumed this impression had arisen in the minds of the French Protectorate authorities as a result of a remark which I had made in the early part of the year when conversations were proceeding between M. Marchal, representing the French Protectorate Government, and Mr. David Eccles, representing the British Government, during discussions which took place in Tangier regarding a North African economic accord. At that time I stated that the status of Tangier and particularly the maintenance of its neutrality were of interest to my Government.

I recalled briefly to M. Montespieu the note of protest which the United States had made in November 19405 to the Spanish Government at the time of the Spanish occupation of Tangier and its incorporation politically in the Spanish Zone. I stated that we had made a very energetic protest to the Spanish authorities and that we had been at pains to make a copy of that protest available to General Noguès in his capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs to the Sultan.

I stated these facts were all known to the French Protectorate Government and that General Noguès had expressed a particular interest in the receipt of the note of protest. M. Montespieu thanked me for this explanation and stated that he felt, himself, that the provisioning of Tangier from the French Protectorate was of a definite advantage to the French Protectorate Government in thus insuring a link between French Morocco and Tangier, if only economic in character at the moment. He also expressed the opinion that this provisioning was of definite interest to us and to all those who did not wish to see Tangier employed in the war against us.

This question of the provisioning of Tangier is one which may well recur, particularly if it develops that owing to increasing lack of foodstuffs in French Morocco, great difficulty may be encountered in the provisioning of Tangier from the French Zone. The question may well be raised by the Spanish Government or the Spanish Zone authorities with us at some future time as to how far we may be willing to go in the provisioning of Tangier or even of the Spanish Zone.

The Department will have observed from previous despatches of mine that I have already been approached on this subject on a number of occasions (see in this connection the Legation’s despatches no. 313 of August 22, 348 of September 13, 376 of October 6, 399 of October 17, 403 of October 19, 405 of October 20, 425 of November 1, and 436 of November 106 ).

Major Bentley7 was recently approached at a dinner party by the Spanish Consul in Tangier on this subject who stated that he wondered whether it might be possible for him, the Consul, to discuss informally and unofficially with me the question of an American boat calling at Tangier. (See in this connection my telegram no. 351, November 15, 11 a.m.8 )

The fact that the Spanish authorities are approaching us even informally on the subject of the supplying of Tangier and Spanish Morocco are indications of the recognition of their dependence upon the Allies for the provisioning of this area. So long as that recognition exists, it is suggested that the supplying of Spanish Morocco and Tangier serves to bind Spain closer to us, particularly if we maintain a strictly hand-to-mouth policy in the furnishing of such supplies.

Should the question be raised officially with us of the provisioning of Tangier and the Spanish Zone, the Department, it is suggested, might take advantage of such a formal request to express our interest in the continued maintenance of the neutrality of Tangier. Should the question be raised officially concerning the provisioning of the Spanish Zone, we might express our interest, in that connection, in the non-belligerence of that Zone. It will be recalled that assurances of the maintenance of the neutrality of Tangier were given Ambassador Weddell in Madrid in June 19409 in writing, assurances which were recalled in the note subsequently addressed by our Embassy in Madrid to the Spanish Government in November 1940 concerning the status of Tangier.

Moreover, it is suggested that under any formal arrangements for the supplying of Tangier and the Spanish Zone concluded with the Spanish authorities, control officers from the South American countries which have shown their solidarity with us in the present conflict might appropriately be used for the purpose of ensuring that the supplies are not diverted from this area.

Pending the conclusion of any formal arrangements, it is recommended that we continue to supply Tangier and the Zone of Morocco with non-strategic materials such as foodstuffs in limited quantities to meet the strictly current needs of Tangier and the Spanish Zone.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

5 See telegram No. 297, November 9, 1940, 6 p.m., to the Ambassador in Spain, Foreign Relations, 1940, vol. iii, p. 789.

6 None printed.

7 Maj. William C. Bentley, Jr., Military Attaché at Tangier.

8 Not printed.

9 See telegram No. 192, June 14, 1940, 1 p.m, from the Ambassador in Spain, Foreign Relations, 1940, vol. iii, p. 783.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/18492

[Document 558]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 503 Tangier, December 17, 1941.
[Received January 13, 1942.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that since our entry into the war I have observed a growing improvement in the attitude of certain of the Spanish officials in Tangier toward us, an improvement which my British colleague has also noticed in the relations of the same officials toward him.

On December 10, my British colleague and I were invited to luncheon by our Spanish colleague who is now Chief of the Diplomatic Cabinet of Colonel Uriarte, Delegate of the Spanish High Commissioner for Morocco in Tangier. At this luncheon the guests included Colonel Uriarte and the leading Spanish officials in Tangier and both Mr. Gascoigne, the British Consul General and I found the Spanish attitude toward us surprisingly cordial.

During the course of the party my Spanish colleague referred to the desire of the Spanish authorities to see an American vessel calling in Tangier and also the desire that the flow of supplies from the United States to Tangier and the Spanish Morocco should not be interrupted by the suspension of American export licenses to this area. The request was made of me informally that I be good enough to use my influence in furtherance of these aims.

I stated that I would be quite frank in informing my host that I had already communicated with the Department when our Neutrality Act was changed10 and had at that time suggested the desirability of an American vessel calling at Tangier. I added that immediately upon the suspension of American export licenses as of December 15, 1941 for certain specified areas including Tangier and Spanish Morocco, I had telegraphed the Department and sought information concerning this development but had had no reply. I stated quite frankly as I had previously stated to Señor Propper as reported in my telegram No. 396 of December 14, 12 noon,11 that there were two categories of merchandise to be considered at the present time; one, those consisting of strategic materials which might benefit our enemies and the other of goods such as foodstuffs for consumption by the local population. I said that I hoped it would be possible to bring in non-strategic goods for the strictly current needs of the Spanish Zone and Tangier but that it must be understood that our entry into the war probably made the realization of this much more difficult but I would do what I could in this regard.

My British colleague informs me today that he has had a very interesting discussion with our Spanish colleague on yesterday which showed his especially friendly disposition. On this occasion the Spanish Consul informed the British Consul General very confidentially that the Germans had made a demand on the Spanish to permit two Germans to be appointed to the local Spanish schools in Tangier, one of them to teach German and one to impart German “culture”. The Spanish Consul stated that he hoped the British would make a similar request as there was no reason why the British should not have the same facilities as those sought by the Germans. At the same time the British Consul General was requested to do everything possible to facilitate the shipment of 400 cases of condensed milk badly needed by the infant population of Tangier and the Spanish Zone. It was stated that a request for such goods had been made of the German Consul who had been quite rude in refusing to do anything to satisfy the Spanish request.

In view of the foregoing developments and the distinctly more friendly attitude shown the Legation by a number of Spanish officials recently, it is suggested that it would strengthen the Legation’s hand in dealing with the local authorities if the Department could give the Legation some assurances that favorable consideration would be given at least to those applications for export licenses covering non-strategic commodities intended for the strictly current needs of Tangier and the Spanish Zone which might be supported by us.

In view of the statement made to me by my British colleague that the feeding of Tangier and the Spanish Zone was likely to become more and more difficult from British sources, I suggest, and in this connection I refer to the Legation’s despatch No. 493 of December 13, 1941, that if practicable some system be worked out in dealing with applications for export licenses for supplies for Spanish Morocco and Tangier whereby such applications might be referred to the Legation for its preliminary comments. If that is not feasible it is suggested that the Department pursue a policy of excluding all shipments for the time being of petroleum products, that with respect to shipments of tires and tubes the licenses be issued only to firms known to the Legation or the British Consular authorities in Tangier and Spanish Morocco and that such licenses be issued in this class of goods subject to the understanding that any distribution of the tires be subject to approval by the Legation after arrival at destination. In the case of foodstuffs such as flour, condensed milk and other groceries it is suggested that licenses for these be issued in moderation in accordance with the estimated current needs of Spanish Morocco and Tangier and upon, if that may be practicable, the recommendation of the Legation.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

10 Repeal of sections 2, 3, and 6 of the Neutrality Act of 1939 approved November 17, 1941; 55 Stat. 764.

11 Not printed.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/18237: Telegram

[Document 559]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 5, 1942—noon.
[Received January 6—7:56 a.m.]

4. Legation’s despatches number 470 [475] and 503 of December 9 and 17, 1941. Evidence is accumulating that General Orgaz, High Commissioner for Spain in Morocco, is taking measures to insure himself of the united support of Spanish Morocco in any development which may cast him as the successor of Franco.12 High officials of the Spanish Zone administration are being replaced one by one with professional soldiers of unquestioned loyalty to Orgaz (see last paragraph Legation’s telegram number 421 December 29, 4 p.m.13 ). From numerous reliable sources, the Legation is informed that Orgaz who is said to be very highly regarded by the Spanish Army and who is very ambitious is taking every precautionary measure to insure himself of control as far as possible of any emergency situation that may develop.

A reliable contact of the Legation who has no connection with the informant mentioned in my despatch No. 470 [475], suggests like the latter that Orgaz should be approached and asked what he and the Spanish Army propose to do in the event of the occupation of Spain by Germany or in the event of a westward push from Tunisia by British forces. The same source suggests the Spanish Army could be mobilized by Orgaz if he were assured of material support by the Allies.

There are increasing signs of Spanish doubt of Germany’s [apparent omission]. Orgaz has remarked to a mutual friend upon the great Spanish losses in Russia while Uriarte, delegate of the High Commissioner in Tangier who has just been promoted general, has expressed to my British colleague great admiration of the recent accomplishments of the British Navy in the Mediterranean.

The increasingly friendly attitude on the part of the Spanish authorities toward the Legation reported in my despatch 475 continues. When Uriarte called with his wife on the 1st to convey New Year greetings he reiterated the hope previously conveyed through my Spanish colleague that we would send an American vessel here with supplies (see my telegram 426, December 31, 4 p.m.14 ). On this occasion he expressed the belief the war would be over by the end of this year. I stated that I did not see how this would be possible as we would not be in a position to exert our full strength for some months yet and he could rest assured that a compromise peace was entirely excluded.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

12 Gen. Francisco Franco, Spanish Chief of State.

13 Not printed.

14 Not printed.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.00/2080: Telegram

[Document 560]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 7, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received January 9—10:30 p.m.]

10. General Orgaz, High Commissioner for Spanish Morocco has informed a reliable official contact that a Portuguese military mission is to arrive in Spanish Morocco shortly. This fact was advanced in explanation of the inability of Orgaz to receive the return visit of courtesy of General Noguès, French Resident General in Morocco, until sometime after January 20.

The Chief of Orgaz’s Military Cabinet in discussing the forthcoming arrival of the Portuguese military mission explained that when Orgaz was last in Madrid he had seen the Portuguese Ambassador and had expressed a desire that “Portuguese personalities” should visit Spanish Morocco en masse.

My informant who is the Cyr mentioned in the Legation’s despatch No. 33315 draws the following interpretation from the foregoing: 1. He cites a further example of Suñer’s16 waning influence in Foreign Affairs and the intention of Orgaz to take a more and more independent line in the affairs of Spanish Morocco (see Legation’s telegram No. 4, January 5, noon).

2. Orgaz is believed to be desirous taking any measures which may be available Morocco concert with Portugal and French Morocco with a view to preserving his own status quo in the Western Hemisphere [Western Mediterranean].

My informant also states that in his conversation with the chief of Orgaz’s Military Cabinet the latter emphasized several times that Orgaz’s chief concern is that of looking out for Spanish interests and that he is not a Spanish official who is moved by considerations for other countries. My informant’s conclusion from this is that the Spanish military official wished to indicate that Orgaz is not bound like certain other Spanish officers and officials by ties to the Axis.

My British colleague expressed the opinion to me a few days ago that Orgaz is exclusively concerned with the interests of Spain and is neither disposed nor desirous of playing the Axis game.

Repeated to Madrid and Lisbon.

Childs

15 Not printed.

16 Ramón Serrano Suñer, Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs.

President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/19000: Telegram

[Document 561]

President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Poughkeepsie, N. Y., January 7, 1942.

Your cable from Childs, Tangier, number 4, January 5th. I am inclined to agree with his suggestion about Orgaz. What can you work out on this.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.0011 European War 1939/19000

[Document 562]

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, January 17, 1942.

My Dear Mr. President: Referring to your telegram of January 7 in regard to General Orgaz, High Commissioner for Spain in Morocco, the competent officials of the Department have fully discussed the suggestions made by the American Chargé d’Affaires at Tangier, and a background memorandum of information about General Orgaz has been prepared.

However, as any approach to General Orgaz would inevitably be met with a request for specific proposals or assurances on the part of the United States Government, I have requested the War Department to submit its views on the subject. As soon as a reply has been received, further study will be devoted to the problem.

Faithfully yours,

Cordell Hull

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.00/2090: Telegram

[Document 563]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 23, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 6:20 p.m.]

26. The Legation in recent telegrams and despatches has reported various trends indicative of the desire of General Orgaz, High Commissioner of Spain in Morocco, to divorce himself from the pro-Axis foreign policy of Suñer, Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs.

An instance of this policy has been the growing cordiality of Spanish officials toward the Legation and the British Consulate General and the alacrity with which various representations on our part relating to our treaty rights have been and are being acted upon to our satisfaction.

Yencken, Minister Counselor of the British Embassy in Madrid, has just concluded a visit of some days to Tangier and the Spanish Zone during which he saw General Orgaz twice.

Orgaz was at particular pains to emphasize that Spanish Morocco is neutral in the present conflict and Yencken was much impressed by the fact that several officials stressed Spanish Morocco’s neutrality.

Yencken stated he had reached the same conclusions as we had regarding the policy of Orgaz and his desire to preserve the status quo in the western Mediterranean.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/4517: Telegram

[Document 564]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 28, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received 10 p.m.]

33. Legation’s despatches No. 47517 and 432 [532].18 My British colleague recommended to his Government that the approach mentioned in last paragraph, page 2, despatch No. 47519 be made. He has now hinted that the situation would not appear to be propitious to attempt any but the most restrained approach at the present time without raising any present hope of aid or inviting a request for such.

The situation which has developed within the last few days in Libya20 appears to us all, including in particular, Colonel Eddy,20a to make this an inappropriate time for us to raise the subject and we are accordingly taking no action at this time.

Full air mail report despatch no. 58518 leaving tomorrow.

Childs

17 Dated December 9, 1941, p. 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 556].

18 Not printed.

19 i. e., first paragraph on p. 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 556].

20 On January 21 German forces under General Rommel in Libya began the drive to the east.

20a Lt. Col. William A. Eddy, Naval Attaché at Tangier.

18 Not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 881.6363/56

[Document 565]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] January 30, 1942.

I told Mr. Wyndham White21 in a general way of the reports we have been receiving from Tangier regarding General Orgaz and also regarding the supply problem in Tangier and Spanish Morocco. I explained that we were interested in the possibilities of the situation and were considering sending a letter to Mr. Childs suggesting that he sound out Orgaz with respect to a possible economic agreement along the lines of the arrangement with French North Africa, Our latest information was to the effect that British reverses in Libya had made the moment unpropitious for a political démarche, but we felt that an economic approach was still possible and might well pave the way for later action.

Mr. Wyndham White agreed entirely with this point of view and said that he thought it would be a very good idea to demonstrate to Orgaz that he can get along without metropolitan Spain, through our assistance. He mentioned that Great Britain at present allows certain quotas of supplies to be sent to Spanish Morocco, which, he said, is not within the blockade zone, and pointed out that any new agreement would have to take into consideration the existence of these quotas and the necessity for ascertaining more exactly just what the needs of the Zone are. He agreed, however, that this is a detail which could be worked out once the principle of assistance is decided upon.

I emphasized that the whole idea is extremely tentative on our part so far, as it has not even been discussed outside of the Near Eastern Division, and that it may not be approved by the executive officers.

21 First Secretary of the British Embassy.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 881.00/2106½

[Document 566]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Before he assumed his post General Orgaz had several conversations with Sir S. Hoare22 who reported that his influence was increasing and that he was regarded by many as the country’s strong man.

His career in Morocco has largely borne out this view. Some time ago His Majesty’s Consul-General at Tangier reported that General Orgaz was before everything pro-Spanish. After that he was a friend of Germany but although he admired the Germans more than the British it was doubtful if he really wished to see Germany win. His friendship for the Germans was largely based on fear, his desire to keep them satisfied in order to achieve some satisfaction in regard to Spanish claims on French Morocco, and lastly on the fact that he had to keep in with the Germans or risk dismissal by Señor Suñer.

Since this report the attitude of the General seems to have improved from the Allied standpoint. As High Commissioner he has always been well disposed towards British interests and has maintained cordial relations with His Majesty’s Consul-General, and although his subordinates have cooperated closely with the Germans and imposed certain restrictive measures on distribution of British propaganda, the situation has been somewhat restored as a result of representations to the General.

Mr. Gascoigne23 is convinced that a British victory in Libya for instance would weigh very heavily with General Orgaz and he has suggested that it would be worth while in that case for us to make some concrete proposals to bring him definitely on to our side.

In conversations with His Majesty’s Ambassador in Madrid, General Orgaz has several times repeated that his duty in the Spanish zone is to maintain strict neutrality and that he intends to maintain it in spite of pressure from outside. In the autumn of last year he strongly advised General Franco to resist German demands on Spain. The recent change in the administration of Morocco which has removed control from the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs to the office of the Head of State undoubtedly strengthens the General’s position by making him responsible only to General Franco.

The impression of the Foreign Office therefore is that General Orgaz intends to play an independent role and if given encouragement and support he might be persuaded to take active steps to stand up to any German aggression in North Africa.

Washington , 4 February, 1942.

22 Sir Samuel Hoare, British Ambassador in Spain.

23 A. Gascoigne, British Consul General at Tangier.

The Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.00112 European War 1939/4621

[Document 567]

The Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, February 17, 1942.

Dear Rives: Paraphrases of your telegrams no. 4 of January 5 and no. 10 of January 7, 1942, were transmitted to the Secretary of War under cover of a communication from the Department, in which the views of the War Department were requested in order that appropriate study might be given to the matter under review.

The Secretary of War has replied to the effect that it is felt that all possible means and every occasion should be taken to cultivate the friendship and good will of the person to whom reference was made in your telegrams. It was added that any contacts which may create a basis of rapprochement between the Spanish civil and military authorities and ourselves that might be of value and aid in a military way in the future should be furthered at this time.

Sincerely yours,

Wallace Murray

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/4927: Telegram

[Document 568]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, March 13, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received March 15—6:14 a.m.]

116. Lieutenant Colonel Eddy and I had a most cordial interview with the subject of Murray’s letter of February 17 when calling on him to present Eddy. (See also my telegrams 4 and 10 of January 5 and 8 [7].) Taking advantage of the extreme affability of my host, I remarked that General Noguès had stated to me recently he hoped to see peace maintained in North Africa and particularly in Morocco. I asked whether these hopes were shared and how they might expect to be realized.

He replied he also earnestly hoped that peace would be maintained in Morocco. He mentioned that Spanish Morocco was like a sandwich between General Noguès on the one hand and the sea on the other and that through these he counted on preserving peace.

He then stated “and what about tires”. I replied that I had been in communication with Washington on the subject of supplies for Spanish Morocco and that I had had the recent visit of our Commercial Attaché in Madrid who had not [now?] met General Uriarte with whom he had discussed the supply situation. I added that according to the information given me by the Commercial Attaché, conversations were proceeding between our two Governments concerning the supplying not only of Spain but also of Spanish Morocco and Tangier.

I added that he could count on my cooperation in this regard and stated I had had occasion to assure Uriarte that he could count on my approaching always the common difficulties confronting us in these exceptional times in a practical and cooperative spirit.

My host replied that he had learned with pleasure from Uriarte of my cordial relations with the Tangier authorities.

I asked what the particular needs of Spanish Morocco were besides tires and gasoline. He said foodstuffs generally. I stated I would be lacking in frankness if I did not again emphasize the very great difficulty in making available tires and petroleum products. I added I above all did not wish to raise any false hopes. He observed the shortage of tires and gasoline was becoming such as to make acute the problem of transportation particularly between Tetuán and Melilla.

I said that while of course he could count on my cooperation it must be emphasized that gasoline and tires were strategic products about which we were naturally concerned that they should not fall into the hands of those who might use them against our interests. He expressed full understanding with this.

I then asked what if any assurances could be given by him that supplies sent from the United States would not pass into such hands, adding that I would like to forward to Washington any assurances he might give me in order to facilitate my Government’s consideration of this problem.

He replied he could give me his solemn personal assurance, formal and without reservation, that nothing which might be sent would ever fall into the hands of our enemies or be used against us.

Eddy then asked what would be the position of Spanish Morocco if it were invaded. He asked by whom. Eddy said by the Axis. He replied “We would resist to the limit of our power and we would resist ably.” Eddy then asked what would be the position if a change in foreign policy in Madrid permitted the Germans to enter the zone. He sidestepped this point smiling “We would not know the answer to that until the day itself.” He then asked what change in foreign policy was referred to. Eddy said he was thinking of the possibility that Madrid might join the enemies of the United States at which the reply was made with considerable force “I consider it inconceivable that Spain should ever go to war with North America and would therefore rule out that possibility.”

It was obvious that he did not wish to be drawn into a discussion of the possibility of action by him independent of or contrary to Madrid. It is noteworthy that he did not commit himself to stating he would follow Madrid in all circumstances.

I asked him pointedly whether he had any other needs besides tires, gasoline and foodstuffs. I think he caught the significance of the inquiry but his answer was in the negative.

Taking advantage of his unexpected frankness and affability I remarked that I hoped he and his wife would soon lunch or dine with me. He replied at once that he was going to Madrid for a few days but upon his return would be delighted.

Such an occasion would give me an exceptional opportunity to see him alone to place before him any detailed proposals the Department might have in mind.

Both Eddy and I feel he has given us an opening which may be taken advantage of as circumstances warrant. We both feel he is well disposed to us, strong in his determination to defend Spanish Morocco and deeply conscious of the great resources of the United States.

We are not certain the time is right for making other than economic proposals. He has indicated (for which I had long been hoping) a consciousness of his dependence on our good will. I feel we should utilize that by some concrete offer of supplies, however small, accompanied by whatever conditions may be deemed desirable. Such proposals would serve the very useful purpose of keeping open our contact and should strengthen our hand appreciably with him.

During the conversation I mentioned that it would facilitate consideration of the supply question if he would let me have information on the stock position of the commodities in which he was interested with an estimate of the monthly needs of the zone. He stated that he would look into this.

It is planned to arrange the date of his dining with me some time toward the end of March but I shall be guided therein by any indication the Department may give me as to whether and when I may expect any detailed proposals to be presented to him.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard) to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.00112 European War 1939/4927

[Document 569]

The Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard) to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, March 18, 1942.

Dear Rives: We have been greatly interested in your telegram no. 116 of March 13, 1942, as well as all of your previous telegrams on the subject thereof. The Department has been giving the most careful consideration to the possibilities which you have outlined but at this date it has not been possible to give you a definite answer.

Just as soon as it is possible to do so, we shall communicate with you further. In the meantime I wanted you to know that your telegrams have aroused the greatest interest and are receiving all possible attention.

Sincerely yours,

H. S. Villard

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.00112 European War 1939/4927: Telegram

[Document 570]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, March 28, 1942—4 p.m.

55. Your 116, March 13. If possible, please postpone your dinner for subject pending receipt of letter which Department is sending you by quickest available means.

Welles

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 881.00/2090

[Document 571]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, March 28, 1942.

Dear Mr. Childs: The Department has been very much interested in your recent reports regarding General Orgaz, Spanish High Commissioner in Morocco. I refer especially to your despatches no. 475 of December 9, 1941, and no. 583, January 27, 1942,24 and to telegrams no. 4 of January 5, no. 10 of January 7, no. 26 of January 23, and no. 116 of March 13, 1942. Careful consideration has likewise been given the comments and recommendations contained in your despatches no. 493 of December 13 and no. 503 of December 17, 1941 with respect to the possible provisioning of Tangier and Spanish Morocco by the United States.

As you have undoubtedly been informed by the Naval Attaché, the Department is interested in exploring the suggestions made by the Legation’s contacts regarding General Orgaz, but we gather from your telegram no. 33, January 28, 1942 that the change in the military situation in North Africa has made the present an inappropriate time to initiate any political action. However, in view of the expressed desire of the Spanish authorities to obtain supplies from this country, it is thought, as you have suggested, that something might be done along economic lines which would serve to pave the way for a later démarche with the High Commissioner and would also have a propaganda value among the inhabitants of the Moroccan areas under Spanish control.

As you know, this Government and the Spanish Government are at present endeavoring to work out a trade program which includes Spanish Morocco, but not Tangier, within its scope.25 From the point of view of the United States, however, it appears that a separate agreement for the supply of Spanish Morocco and Tangier would be preferable, as tending to encourage an independent course of action on the part of the authorities in that area. In addition, of course, there is the possibility that the general program may not be carried out.

Accordingly, it is suggested that you consider, in consultation with the Naval Attaché, and with particular reference to the recommendation made in your telegram no. 116, March 13, the advisability of proposing to General Orgaz an agreement along the lines of that in effect between France and the United States for economic assistance to the French North African possessions.26 Under present conditions, such an arrangement would permit the purchase and shipment from this country of foodstuffs and such other non-military articles as may be available in the American market, quantities to be determined on the basis of current needs in the Spanish Morocco–Tangier area and carefully regulated to prevent the accumulation of stocks. Many articles, of course, such as rubber goods, trucks, tractors, et cetera, are in such short supply in this country that their export probably could not be permitted.

It would be understood that none of the goods received from the United States would be reexported from Morocco and that the export of similar goods would likewise be prohibited. The observance of this condition would be verified by control officers stationed in Tangier and Spanish Morocco.

Although the Department appreciates the desirability of having American vessels participate in trade with North Africa, it is unlikely that shipping could be spared for this purpose, and it would be safest to assume that supplies obtained in the United States would have to be carried by Spanish vessels.

If, after consideration of all elements involved, you feel that an arrangement such as that outlined above would be in the interests of this Government and would be favorably received by General Orgaz, you are authorized to broach the matter to him informally. You should make it clear, however, that the suggestion is merely tentative and exploratory and does not in any way constitute a definite offer by this Government.

The Department leaves to your discretion the exact manner of approach to the High Commissioner. In any case, you should explain that the suggestion is inspired by this Government’s desire to assist Tangier and Spanish Morocco in their present difficult situation and that, obviously, the maintenance of the status quo in those areas would be an essential condition to the conclusion of any agreement.

Sincerely yours,

Sumner Welles

24 Despatch No. 583 not printed.

25 For correspondence on this subject, see vol. iii, pp. 248 ff., passim.

26 The Murphy–Weygand memorandum of agreement initialed at Algiers, February 26, 1941; for text, see telegram No. 249, February 28, 1941, 10 a.m., from the Ambassador in France, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. ii, p. 226.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/5355

[Document 572]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 728 Tangier, April 13, 1942.
[Received April 27.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my telegram No. 153 of April 11, 11 pm.27 concerning the conclusion of an economic accord relating to Spanish North Africa and Tangier and to transmit herewith a copy of the memorandum which I left with General Orgaz, Spanish High Commissioner, on April 11 in furtherance of the instructions contained in the Acting Secretary’s letter to me of March 28, 1942.

It had been my original intention to discuss the matter of an economic accord with General Orgaz in the intimacy of the Legation to which he had agreed to come for the purpose of lunching or dining with me. However, it was ascertained upon the receipt of Mr. Welles’ letter of March 28, on April 7, that General Orgaz was leaving for Madrid the following week and would be unable to accept my invitation until his return. In view of his projected absence for two weeks, it was considered desirable to discuss the matter with him before his departure and I accordingly arranged to be received by him on April 11 accompanied by Miss Sophia P. Kearney of the Legation staff, who speaks fluent Spanish.

On being received by General Orgaz in the presence of the Chief of the Diplomatic Cabinet, I presented him the enclosed memorandum in Spanish. It will be observed that I have employed the term “Spanish North Africa” in that memorandum in preference to “Spanish Morocco” in order to make the area inclusive of the Spanish metropolitan areas in North Africa, including Ceuta and Melilla. I considered it preferable to allow General Orgaz to read the memorandum without first discussing the points one by one as I considered he might desire to come to a decision without the contents of the memorandum in all their details becoming known first to anyone.

General Orgaz read the memorandum through twice and then stated—“This is really a step forward”. He observed that he realized the military needs of the United States and that consequently, in order to facilitate the negotations, he would not insist upon obtaining any products which could be classified as military or as having a military character. He added that he would limit his requests strictly to foodstuffs, including particularly wheat, sugar, barley, etc. I inquired if he meant to exclude gasoline and to my surprise he remarked that he was inclined to consider gasoline as a product having a military character and therefore would not necessarily insist upon having it. I do not know whether this reserve by him is attributable to a feeling on his part that other arrangements might be made for obtaining gasoline outside the accord, or whether he wishes to avoid the receipt of products from us which possess any strategic character which might thus all the most [more?] justify a demand by us for the presence of officers to check upon the movement of such shipments.

General Orgaz remarked that as between wheat and flour, he would prefer wheat in as much as this would give work to the mills in the Zone which are at present inactive. I remarked that we had plenty of wheat to which General Orgaz answered—“We have very little here”.

The Spanish High Commissioner then remarked that he considered the memorandum offered a very good basis for negotiation. He stated he would study it and would give me a written reply before leaving for Madrid on April 15, where he was proceeding on purely military matters.

In order to enlighten him concerning the character of the officers we had in mind, mentioned in numbered paragraph four of the memorandum, I stated that what we had in mind were Vice Consuls. General Orgaz stated that this was a point to which he could make no answer at the moment as “he could offer no better control than his own guarantee”.

I remarked that he could count on my entire cooperation in the effort to achieve an agreement. He stated that he appreciated the efforts I had made and was making, that he was very grateful for those efforts and that he was saying this heartily and sincerely. He added— “Every effort will be made on my part also. If an agreement is reached, it will be a very good thing; if not, we shall lose weight. Personally speaking it would mean a great deal of good for me (General Orgaz is a stout person) but I do not know what would become, in that case, of Señor Temes (indicating his Chief of Diplomatic Cabinet who is cadaverous and thin)”.

The Spanish High Commissioner said that he would like to bring to my attention the matter of transportation and that, as I was well aware, the Spanish were suffering acutely from lack of tonnage.

I then remarked that I had felt it desirable to make the memorandum as inclusive as possible and had therefore introduced certain matters without any instructions from my Government. General Orgaz replied that he fully understood this and that he was also speaking without the knowledge of his government to which he owes an account of his actions. He added with emphasis, however, that he felt certain that any recommendations he might have to make concerning an economic accord would be ratified by his government without question.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

[Enclosure]

The American Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Spanish High Commissioner (Orgaz)

Aide-Mémoire

Mr. Childs referred to the conversation he had had with General Orgaz on March 13 regarding the possibility of economic aid for Spanish North Africa and Tangier and stated he had been authorized to broach informally to him the possibility of the conclusion of an agreement for economic assistance to those territories along the lines of the American agreement governing economic assistance to French North Africa.

Mr. Childs stated that if General Orgaz looked favorably in principle upon the suggestion and was willing to engage in negotiation of an accord he would be pleased to inform his Government.

Such an arrangement would permit the purchase and shipment from the United States of foodstuffs and such other non-military articles as may be available in the American market, the quantity to be determined on the basis of the current needs of the area concerned. It must be recognized that many articles such as rubber goods, trucks and tractors are in such short supply in the United States owing to war demands, that their export from the United States probably could not be permitted.

The suggestion for an agreement contemplates that: 1. Periodic quotas would be drawn up covering the needs of Spanish North Africa and Tangier in goods and in the amounts the United States might find it possible to furnish.

2. The supplying of Spanish North Africa and Tangier would not result in the building up of excessive stocks.

3. Measures would be taken with a view to assuring that products exported from the United States to the areas in question will be consumed in the territory and will not be re-exported in any form and further that the export from the area under reference of similar goods will likewise be prohibited.

4. With a view to carrying out the foregoing the American Government would be authorized to designate representatives stationed in the area for such control. It would obviously be desirable that such officers be permitted to reside in Melilla and Ceuta, as well as in Tetuán. The officers appointed for the control of the program of economic aid should have every facility extended them by the Spanish authorities with a view to the carrying out of their mission.

Mr. Childs observed that while at this stage he had no definite instructions concerning the reciprocal economic advantages which he [his] Government might expect in return, he considered that they might well include: 1. Facilitating the transit through the ports of Tangier, Ceuta and Melilla of products from the French Protectorate destined for the United States;

2. The granting by the authorities of the Spanish Zone of every reasonable facility to the Government of the United States to acquire any products in Spanish Morocco, Tangier or the Metropolitan areas of Ceuta and Melilla which might be of interest to the United States;

3. The granting of facilities to American oil companies operating in Spanish North Africa and Tangier in 1936 to resume their distribution of oil products.

Although the advantages are recognized of having American vessels participate in trade with Spanish North Africa and Tangier, it is considered unlikely that American shipping can be spared for this purpose and it would be safe to assume that supplies obtained in the United States would have to be carried by Spanish vessels.

Mr. Childs observed that the foregoing tentative and exploratory suggestions, which are proposed informally and would of course be subject to subsequent discussion and agreement, are inspired by the American Government’s desire to assist Spanish Morocco and Tangier in their present difficult situation. It should be obvious that the maintenance of the status quo in Spanish North Africa would be an essential condition to the conclusion of any agreement.

April 10, 1942.

27 Not printed.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/5401: Telegram

[Document 573]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, May 5, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received May 6—12:11 p.m.]

195. My 153, April 11, 11 p.m.28 I have just received a communication dated April 30 from General Orgaz, of which the following is a translation.

“In replying to your kind note concerning the importation of merchandise in the zone of Spanish Protectorate of Morocco I recognize the affectionate interest and the promptness with which (having realized the supply situation of this zone) you took informal steps with your Government which, without any commitment on your part, might serve as a basis for negotiations which involve the hope of a possible supply to this Moroccan Zone of those articles which are essential for its peace economy.

I have acquainted my Government with the suggestions that were made to me and ratify what I told you verbally in the interview which we had on the 13th of this month in the office of the High Commissariat in Tetuán.

I accept all the formal conditions set forth in that note in everything that refers to the proper and legal use of the merchandise that might be imported and also as to the insurance and guarantee that none of those articles or similar ones produced in the zone would be exported. (This in any case is impossible in view of the scarcity of the same in relation to the population). But I cannot offer other than my personal guarantee and such consumption data as may be necessary to determine (if that point were reached) the amount of importations which might be effected, since the juridical situation having to do with recognition of the protective mission entrusted to Spain gives an exceptional character to the relations between the Spanish and American authorities, a situation which the High Commissioner can only place in evidence, the possible solution of which lies within the province of the two Governments.

The possibility of securing Spanish vessels for the transportation of the articles that might be imported, from the American ports of origin to the Moroccan ports is likewise a matter appertaining to the Spanish Government.

The Spanish Government is acquainted with the note that the Chargé d’Affaires delivered to me. I take this opportunity to reiterate the testimony of my highest consideration.”

It is presumed that the reference in the second paragraph is to the interview had on March 13 (see Legation’s telegram 116 of that date) and I am endeavoring to verify this.

Repeated Madrid.

Childs

28 Not printed; see despatch No. 728, supra.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/5436: Telegram

[Document 574]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, May 11, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received May 11—2:51 p.m.]

214. My 195, May 5, 8 p.m. Following repeated inquiries High Commissariat has now telephoned to state that reference in the second paragraph of General Orgaz’ note is to the interview had on April 11.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/5507: Telegram

[Document 575]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, May 15, 1942—noon.
[Received 6:41 p.m.]

221. My 195, May 5, 8 p.m. I informed General Orgaz yesterday when he lunched at the Legation that I had received his note of April 30 and had forwarded it to Washington and would let him know as soon as a reply was received.

He stated he was coming to Tangier in June to spend the summer here when he would have the opportunity of relinquishing some of his responsibility to his subordinates in whom he has great confidence. He would then have an opportunity of discussing directly with me these matters of mutual interest.

He, General Mugica, Secretary General of the Spanish Zone, and General Uriarte, delegate in Tangier of the High Commissioner, were shown selections of photographs of the American production effort which greatly impressed them. Uriarte commented, “This is the finest kind of propaganda.”

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.00112 European War 1939/5507: Telegram

[Document 576]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, May 19, 1942—11 p.m.

98. Your 221, May 15 and 195, May 5. Department is taking up with other interested agencies of this Government the question of making specific proposals to General Orgaz. You may inform him that his note of April 30 is receiving our active consideration.

Hull

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern A fairs 740.00112 European War 1939/5713⅔

[Document 577]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. John D. Jernegan of the Division of Near Eastern A fairs

[Washington,] May 29, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Fagan (BEW)29

Mr. George (Eu)30

Mr. Riddleberger (Eu)31

Mr. Auchincloss (DM)32

Mr. Villard

Mr. Jernegan

It was unanimously agreed that there appeared to be a good possibility of arriving at an economic agreement for Spanish North Africa which would be advantageous to the United States from both the political and economic warfare point of view.

Mr. Fagan presented a memorandum33 containing a list of Spanish North African normal imports in foodstuffs and the like and a list33 of the products of Spanish North Africa which the Board of Economic Warfare would be interested in buying, either to fill our own supply needs or to prevent them from going to the Axis. He said that, with the possible exception of sugar, there would be no difficulty in supplying from this country all of the normal food imports of the area.

The question of observers to supervise the distribution of commodities sent to Spanish North Africa was raised, and all present agreed that it would not be necessary to insist upon the admission of such observers. It was felt that the quantities would be so small, and the need so great within the area, that the risk of re-export would be negligible. Mr. Fagan indicated, however, that BEW would be very much interested in sending over a buying commission which, in addition to handling our purchases, would have some opportunity to observe handling of our shipments and make reports on general conditions.

It was brought out that the British have suggested making the proposed agreement a joint Anglo-American affair. The general feeling was that it would be better not to have formal British association, although we should, of course, arrange for informal British cooperation. Mr. Auchincloss said that he would like to consult Mr. Finletter34 on this point before expressing a definite opinion.

It was further agreed that any arrangement made with General Orgaz respecting Spanish North Africa should be kept entirely separate from any similar negotiations in Madrid in connection with Peninsular Spain. It was felt that if an agreement is reached, it should be kept in operation without regard to developments in Spain itself, unless there should be some breach of its terms by the Spaniards in Spanish North Africa.

Mr. Fagan and Mr. Riddleberger said that they would inform the United States Commercial Corporation of our plans in order that the USCC should not include Spanish North Africa in its negotiations with the Spanish Government in Madrid.

Mr. Fagan said that it would probably be necessary to strike a balance between the values of goods purchased by the Spaniards in this country and those which we might buy in Spanish North Africa. However, after some discussion, it was decided that in the initial stages of negotiations we need not attempt to make a direct tie-up between the commodities we might offer and the exact quantities of goods we would like to obtain. It was agreed that Mr. Fagan should prepare another list which would include not only quantities but the approximate values of the goods to be included in the agreement. The Department could then send this list to Mr. Childs at Tangier, who would be instructed to inform General Orgaz of the articles and quantities which we would be prepared to supply and to present a general list, without specifying quantities or values, of the commodities we would like to purchase in Spanish North Africa. In the course of his negotiations, Mr. Childs could determine how far it might be practicable to go in insisting upon facilities for the purchase of the various individual items included in the list.

29 Melvin M. Fagan, Assistant Chief of the Blockade Division, Board of Economic Warfare.

30 W. Perry George, Division of European Affairs.

31 James Williams Riddleberger, Division of European Affairs.

32 John W. Auchincloss, Division of Defense Materials.

33 Not printed.

33 Not printed.

34 Thomas K. Finletter, special assistant to the Secretary of State and Acting Chief of the Division of Defense Materials.

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Wyndham White) to the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard) 740.00112 European War 1939/5739½

[Document 578]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Wyndham White) to the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard)

(W. T. 109/29/42) Washington, June 2, 1942.

Dear Harry: Please refer to my letter of May 29th35 about the projected economic accord with the Spanish Zone of Morocco. You will recall that with my letter under reference I sent you a paraphrase of a telegram from His Majesty’s Ambassador in Madrid whose conclusions were summarised somewhat as follows:

The first step is for General Orgaz to make his case with the Spanish Government and to have a better liaison with them. This, he should be able to do by availing himself of strong army influence. If the Minister of Commerce then shows that he is anxious to have goods supplied to the Spanish Zone we could make special efforts and concessions on our part to see that they get them and still foster what feelings of independence we might like to see there. If, on the other hand, we persist in separate negotiations which did not find approval with the Spanish Government we run the risk of spoiling our chance in the main negotiations with the Spanish Government which are now being pursued with a certain amount of success.

We have now had a telegram from the Foreign Office in London saying that they agree generally with the above. On the other hand, although it may not be possible to reach any agreement with General Orgaz there is, in the view of the Foreign Office, every advantage in continuing to show our interest in Spanish North Africa and letting the General understand that if he can secure the consent of the Central Government, the U.K. and the U.S. would be prepared to do what they can to grant economic assistance to Spanish North Africa.

I may add, for your information, that we have heard from Tangier that the Commissioner is now in Madrid, possibly until mid June.

Yours ever,

Eric Wyndham White

35 Not printed.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.00/2177: Telegram

[Document 579]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, June 15, 1942—midnight.
[Received June 16—7:34 a.m.]

274. The following repeated to Madrid.

General Orgaz, Spanish High Commissioner, received us most cordially when I presented to him today Colonel Johnson, the new Military Attaché.

In the course of an extended conversation during which I endeavored to draw Orgaz out he renewed previous hopes expressed to me that the status quo would remain unchanged in Morocco. He observed he saw no reason why the situation should change. When I inquired specifically whether he anticipated any military operations he said the French seem to be disturbed and referred to movements of troops in the French Zone.

I asked him against whom these were directed in his opinion and he said they were not toward the Spanish Zone frontier as the French had nothing to fear from the Spanish Zone. The troop movements he added seemed to be toward the coast and he left the impression that they were being taken against a possible allied landing (Casablanca reported on June 12 that there had been a general movement of troops from the interior to the coast).

I referred to the press campaign in the Spanish press regarding Spanish claims in North Africa (see my 271, June 1336 and similar reports from Madrid) and asked him concerning its significance. He parried my questions, but when I pressed him he said that Spain had certain claims for frontier readjustments but he did not consider the present opportune time for pressing these claims. This is in line with what Noguès stated to me on June 5th that the Spanish generals were not supporting this agitation which was inspired by Suñer and the Falange (see my 257, June 836 ). I asked if he were seeing Noguès again shortly and he said he expected to meet him in July to discuss work on a barrage to furnish waterpower to the two zones. He added with a smile it was much more interesting to discuss constructive agricultural questions than movements of troops.

I spoke briefly of our remarkable progress in war production, he interrupted me and remarked, “you do not need to tell me about this we have our own sources of information and we consider what you are doing astounding. It is astonishing to think you are supplying as you are four armies mentioning in particular Russia”.

Both Colonel Johnson and I gained the impression that Orgaz is sincerely desirous of maintaining peace in Spanish Morocco, that he is tremendously impressed by our war output and potential and that he is very favorably disposed toward us.

Spanish officials are inclining more and more to open expression of their confidence in us. In a conversation today with General Uriarte, Orgaz’ deputy in Tangier, he expressed the unqualified belief in our eventual victory.

To Casablanca and Algiers by courier.

Childs

36 Not printed.

36 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 EW 1939/5783: Telegram

[Document 580]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, June 18, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received June 19—8:43 a.m.]

746. The Minister Counselor of the British Embassy, in the absence of Ambassador, called to tell me of the receipt of a telegram from the British Embassy Washington indicating a difference of opinion between the European and Near Eastern Divisions in the Department concerning the desirability of our conducting separate economic conversations with General Orgaz in Spanish Morocco. The Minister expressed very serious objection to the principle of separate conversations with General Orgaz, who he incidentally said was pro-German, and said he intended to telegraph London and Washington, objecting in detail to the conversations.

I am unaware to what extent the subject has been discussed with the British Embassy in Washington, and I therefore have not expressed any opinion on the subject to the British Embassy. However, on the basis of information contained in copies of despatches et cetera received from the Legation at Tangier I see no objection in principle to conducting separate conversations with General Orgaz. On the contrary I see possible advantages in such conversations so long as no effort is made, under existing conditions at least, to induce General Orgaz to adopt an attitude which would be displeasing to the Madrid Government.

The Minister Counselor’s reference to Orgaz’ alleged pro-German leanings does not agree with previous opinions expressed by the British Embassy or with opinion expressed recently by Childs.

If Department wishes me to discuss this matter with the British Embassy I should appreciate being instructed what I should say.

Repeated to Tangier.

Hayes

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/5792: Telegram

[Document 581]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, June 19, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received June 20—2:05 a.m.]

752. My 746, June 18, 6 p.m. British Minister now says he did not intend to convey the impression that Orgaz was pro-German but said that Halifax had been instructed to say to the Department that we should not be too sure of Orgaz. British Embassy appears to be opposed to separate conversations with Orgaz principally because (1) it understands political commitments are to be demanded from Orgaz, and (2) because it understands the plan envisages balancing trade between Spanish Morocco and the United States. The British say they cannot subscribe to the principle of balancing trade with Spanish Morocco because Britain is importing 3 million dollars of iron ore along [alone?] from there annually. They say they have opposed the principle when suggested to them by authorities in Morocco.

Repeated to Tangier.

Hayes

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Wyndham White) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 740.00112 European War 1939/5814½

[Document 582]

The First Secretary of the British Embassy (Wyndham White) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

(W. T. 109/43/42) Washington, June 19, 1942.

My Dear Alling: In view of our conversation yesterday evening38 about the proposed economic negotiation with General Orgaz, you will be interested in the attached paraphrases of two telegrams we have had on this subject, one from the Foreign Office and one from the British Embassy in Madrid.39

Yours sincerely,

Eric Wyndham White

[Enclosure]

Paraphrase of a Telegram From the British Foreign Office to the British Ambassador in the United States (Halifax)

The case against an attempt to reach a separate agreement with Spanish Morocco is stated in earlier telegrams from Madrid on this subject (see Mr. Wyndham White’s letter to Mr. Villard of June 2nd). The following points should also be emphasized:—

The Central Government maintains complete control of all economic and political matters affecting the territory. For example, no export licences could be granted by the local authorities without reference to Madrid. Furthermore, if the High Commissioner were to give any political undertaking contrary to the policy of the Central Government, he would be immediately dismissed. Finally, it must not be overlooked that the United Kingdom already takes the whole iron ore output of the Riff mines which constitute the only substantial export of Spanish Morocco. Any proposals, therefore, for a separate agreement between the United States and Spanish Morocco would have to be carefully considered in order to avoid the danger of interrupting this export to which we attach the greatest importance.

The United States Government should also know that we have recently received reports of closer military co-operation in the Spanish Zone between the Spanish and Axis military authorities with the full knowledge of General Orgaz. These reports do not suggest that any immediate action is imminent, but they do suggest that it would be unwise to assume that General Orgaz would necessarily take the right decision should a crisis occur.

If the United States Government decide, nevertheless, to proceed with this proposal, the British Government hope that in view of the close cooperation which is developing between the two Governments with regard to the Peninsular economic policy they could be kept informed and given an opportunity to comment on the details of the proposed plan.

38 No record of conversation found in Department files.

39 Telegram from the British Embassy in Madrid not attached to file copy.

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt 740.0011 European War 1939/22731

[Document 583]

The Secretary of State to President Roosevelt

Washington, June 30, 1942.

My Dear Mr. President: I refer to your telegram of January 7, 1942 and my letter of January 17, 1942 regarding a suggestion made by the American Chargé d’Affaires ad interim at Tangier to the effect that an approach be made to the High Commissioner for Spanish Morocco, General Luis Orgaz, looking toward the continued neutrality of Spanish Morocco and Tangier. As you will recall, the Chargé d’Affaires indicated that General Orgaz might agree to oppose Axis use of Spanish Morocco provided the United States should be willing to guarantee him material support.

In accordance with your request, the Department of State, in consultation with the War Department, undertook to explore the possibilities of this suggestion. An officer of the Department made a special trip by air to Bermuda in January to discuss the matter orally with the newly-appointed Naval Attaché at Tangier, then en route to his post. Subsequent developments, notably the checking of the British offensive in Libya, made it appear that the moment had not yet arrived for a direct political approach to General Orgaz, but it was felt that a foundation for future action might be laid through an economic agreement which would assist the High Commissioner in meeting the urgent supply problems of the Spanish Zone of Morocco. General Orgaz had indicated on several occasions that he would welcome such assistance, and it was believed desirable to strengthen his position in order to facilitate any later independent action which he might be disposed to take. (I believe you were informed, in a general way, of this development.)

Accordingly, the Department authorized the Chargé d’Affaires at Tangier to ascertain the attitude General Orgaz would take if this Government should propose an agreement along the lines of the economic understanding in effect for French North Africa. The Chargé d’Affaires was instructed to suggest that Spanish Morocco would be permitted to purchase in the United States, for export on Spanish vessels, various foodstuffs and other non-military articles, under guarantee that none of these commodities would be re-exported from Morocco. In return, the United States would expect facilities in obtaining various products of Spanish Morocco. It would be understood, of course, that the execution of any such arrangement would depend upon the continued neutrality of the area.

General Orgaz appeared to welcome this tentative approach, which he discussed personally with the Spanish Government in Madrid. On April 30, 194240 he informed our Chargé d’Affaires at Tangier that he was able in principle to accept our suggestions as a basis for negotiation.

In the light of this reply, the Department, together with the Board of Economic Warfare, has been considering certain specific proposals which might be made to the High Commissioner and which may be summarized as follows: 1. The United States would permit the purchase and export of a list of essential, non-military commodities in quantities not exceeding the normal import requirements of Spanish Morocco and under guarantee that re-export of these or similar commodities from Spanish Morocco would be prohibited.

2. The Spanish Moroccan authorities would make available to the United States a number of products of the area, notably lead, zinc, manganese, copper, cork and antimony, in amounts approximating the annual export surplus of those articles. An American buying commission would be admitted to Spanish Morocco to make purchases and explore the possibilities of extending the program.

3. Spanish shipping would be provided for the transportation, in both directions, of the commodities involved.

Although certain details of these propositions remain to be worked out, we propose, if you approve,41 to go ahead along these lines.

Faithfully yours,

Cordell Hull

40 See telegram No. 195, May 5, 8 p.m., from the Chargé at Tangier, p. 461 [Pg. 461 is part of Doc. 573].

41 Marginal note: “CH OK FDR”.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/5909: Telegram

[Document 584]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, July 1, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received July 2—12:18 p.m.]

835. The British have again expressed their objection to separate economic negotiations with Spanish Morocco as reported in my 746, June 18, 6 p.m., and 752 June 19, 6 p.m. Ellis Reese the Financial Counselor discussed the matter with two members of my staff and presented arguments which were similar to those of the Minister Counselor. Ellis Reese is of the opinion that separate negotiations with Orgaz will have an unfavorable effect upon our relations with Madrid officials in connection with our program in Continental Spain. He is also of the opinion that the two areas having common currency and export regulations and not having a customs barrier should be as a unit for purposes of preemptive buying.

The UKCC42 formerly operated in Morocco directly under London. The Madrid office now exercises supervisory functions over British purchases in Spanish Morocco. Purchases up to now have been small in volume and constituted mainly of skins. However, we have been asked the specific question whether these purchases are for joint account.

The British were told that we have received no information to indicate that the USCC43 in Madrid is to participate in the Moroccan program. The British hope to have our support in recommending against separate negotiations but they have been told that we have no instructions and can only report the discussion to Washington.

Hayes

42 United Kingdom Commercial Corporation.

43 United States Commercial Company.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.0011 European War 1939/22731: Telegram

[Document 585]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, July 27, 1942—noon.

132. Your 195, May 5 and 221, May 15. Department’s 98, May 19. You may open conversations at once with the High Commissioner looking toward an agreement on the basis of the following conditions: a) The United States is prepared to permit the purchase, and will issue licenses for export to Spanish North Africa, of the commodities enumerated below: 1. Leaf tobacco

2. Coffee

3. Wheat flour

4. Wheat

5. Powdered milk

6. Sugar

7. Green tea

8. Chick peas

9. Coal and charcoal

10. Medicinal products

11. Candles

12. Soap

13. Cigarettes

14. Cotton thread

15. Cotton goods

16. Matches

17. Kerosene

(For your information, kerosene may be supplied from Tenerife refinery under general Spanish-American petroleum arrangement. However, there may be certain propaganda advantages in supplying this article direct from the United States and Department prefers to leave details open for the present. Any quantity supplied from United States would be deducted from the Tenerife quota, and vice versa. You should communicate with Walter Smith, Petroleum Control Officer attached to Madrid Embassy, regarding the type of arrangement which might be practicable in this regard.)

b) The Spanish North African authorities may suggest the amount of each of the above commodities to be purchased in the United States in accordance with the needs of the area, subject to the limitation that the maximum quantity in each case may not be greater than the normal import requirements for consumption locally. This maximum would be reduced by the amount of any imports obtained from other sources, including Peninsular Spain, of these or similar commodities. The Spanish authorities shall furnish the American representatives in the area exact monthly statistics of all imports into Spanish North Africa, by countries of origin.

c) The High Commissioner shall guarantee that none of the products imported from the United States will be re-exported from Spanish North Africa, this guarantee to apply equally to the same commodities originating in Spanish North Africa or obtained from other sources and to similar products capable of use as substitutes, or in manufactured or converted form. The Spanish authorities shall furnish the American representatives in the area exact monthly statistics of all exports from Spanish North Africa, by countries of destination.

In view of Spanish attitude on the matter, the Department does not consider it essential to insist upon the admittance of special control officers for all these commodities. It does believe, however, that it would be mutually desirable and deems it distinctly important from our point of view that the deliveries of any petroleum products, their use and distribution should be subject to the same control as that now being put into effect for Spain and Spanish possessions under the general Spanish-American petroleum agreement. (In this connection it would be well for you to consult Mr. Smith regarding his plans for petroleum control in Spanish North Africa.) You may point out that in the absence of some such agreed-on observation the whole arrangement is always at the mercy of rumors designed to injure our relations.

d) The Spanish North African authorities would make available for purchase by the United States and license the export as directed by the United States of the following materials in the specified quantities annually.

(Figures are metric tons): 1. Lead, 500

2. Manganese, 1,000

3. Zinc, 100

4. Copper, 1,000

5. Cork, 3,000

6. Dyes and tanning materials, 50

7. Palm Fiber, 250

8. Graphite, 1,200

9. Antimony, 250

10. Wool, 25

11. Goat skins, 220

12. Sheep skins, 1,200

13. Cattle hides, 265

e) In the event that quantities greater than those listed above are available, the United States will arrange a substantial premium on sales of such supplementary quantities, provided the total export surplus of the commodities in question is offered for sale to this country. If additional quantities of the specified commodities should become available from sources outside Spanish North Africa, the Spanish authorities would not interpose obstacles to their purchase by and export to the United States.

f) If, in the operation of the agreement, the total value of the American exports exceeds that of exports to the United States from Spanish North Africa, the balance in favor of the United States shall be paid in Spanish currency, which shall be equally available for use in Peninsular Spain.

g) An American buying commission shall be admitted to Spanish North Africa for the purpose of examining the commodities purchased and investigating the possibility of making further purchases.

h) The Spanish authorities shall furnish shipping for all shipments under the agreement. The first shipment, and alternate shipments there after shall be made from Spanish North Africa to the United States.

i) If, for any reason, it should not be possible to transport to the United States any commodities purchased in Spanish North Africa under this agreement, the Spanish authorities would permit their disposal in whatever manner the purchaser might desire. At the option of the purchaser, the Spanish authorities would facilitate the movement of such commodities to Peninsular Spain, for storage or reshipment as conditions might warrant.

As used above, the term “Spanish North Africa” is intended to include Tangier, but in any communications to the High Commissioner you should mention Tangier separately, as in your aide-mémoire of April 10,44 in order to avoid any apparent recognition of Spanish control of the International Zone.

You should make it clear to the High Commissioner, in whatever manner you deem advisable, that our willingness to enter into an agreement of this sort arises solely from our belief that he will not permit any change in the neutral status of Spanish North Africa and will not allow that territory to become, in any way, a base of operations for our enemies. It should be obvious that any change in the status quo which would favor the Axis would force this Government to reconsider its attitude.

For your information, the Department while keeping the British informed does not contemplate any joint action in these negotiations, and they are also separate from any plans for trade with Peninsular Spain itself. We expect to be kept informed by the British as to their economic activities in Spanish North Africa.

Please report fully by telegraph regarding the progress of your conversations with the High Commissioner.

Repeated to Madrid.45

Hull

44  Ante, p. 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 572].

45 As telegram No. 636, July 27, noon.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.00112 European War 1939/5401

[Document 586]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

No. 158 Washington, July 27, 1942.

Sir: Reference is made to the Acting Secretary’s letter of March 28, 1942 and to your telegram no. 195, May 5, 1942 regarding a proposed economic agreement with the Spanish High Commissioner to Morocco. The Department is sending you at this time a telegram46 outlining a series of specific proposals which you are being authorized to present to General Orgaz as the basis for an understanding. By way of background, there are transmitted herewith copies of two memoranda47 prepared by the Board of Economic Warfare regarding Moroccan production, imports and exports, and the possibilities, from the point of view of economic warfare, of a satisfactory American-Spanish Moroccan economic agreement. As you will observe, these memoranda form the basis of the Department’s telegram, and it is thought that they may be helpful to you in your conversations with General Orgaz, since they indicate the reasons for inclusion of the different commodities and the general attitude of the Board of Economic Warfare toward the contemplated agreement.

Although these economic considerations are important, the Department feels, and assumes that you agree, that the principal value of any understanding with General Orgaz would lie in its political aspects. The primary objective is to achieve a closer relationship with the High Commissioner, encourage him to act independently of his government to the extent that conditions permit, and pave the way for a more direct political approach when and if a favorable moment arrives. You should feel free, therefore, to suggest changes in the economic conditions outlined if you believe that such changes would facilitate agreement without affecting the political advantages to be gained.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
Dean Acheson

46  supra.

47 Not printed.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/6213: Telegram

[Document 587]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, July 31, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received 10:18 p.m.]

321. When Department’s telegram 132, July 27, noon, was received, Walter Smith of the Embassy in Madrid was here and conversations were in progress with Orgazi concerning a petroleum program for Spanish North Africa.

We had seen Orgaz on July 27 when Smith outlined the conditions prerequisite to such a program. Orgaz said he would communicate at once with Madrid and would fix another appointment with us before Smith’s scheduled departure August 1st.

Meanwhile, it seemed preferable not to pursue the question of an economic accord until it was known whether Orgaz would call for us again to discuss the petroleum problem which he did yesterday.

Upon being received by Orgaz late today, he said he had been informed by Madrid the conditions relating to a petroleum program would have to be confirmed by Madrid but at Smith’s suggestion the memorandum embodying them was signed without any question by him. Both Smith and I are very pleased with the arrangements and Smith is confident he will encounter no difficulty in obtaining approval of them by the Madrid authorities.

After the foregoing had been concluded I presented Orgaz with an aide-mémoire embodying the substance of paragraphs a to i inclusive omitting of course second paragraphs of a and c as well as second and fourth paragraphs of i of Department’s telegram under reference and adding the following.

“Mr. Childs referred to the conversation he and Mr. Smith had had with General Orgaz on July 27 with reference to the undertaking by the United States of a petroleum program for Spanish North Africa and Tangier. Mr. Childs recalled it had been stated in that conversation that it was to be expected that program would be integrated in the larger economic program which had been the subject of discussion with General Orgaz since April. In particular Mr. Childs observed his Government would expect that the authorities of Spanish North Africa and Tangier would grant to the Attaché of the American Legation who might be appointed for the purpose of overseeing the execution of the petroleum program for Spanish North Africa and Tangier all necessary facilities for the accomplishment of his mission.”

Upon the conclusion of the reading of the aide-mémoire the High Commissioner remarked with unconcealed satisfaction, “That is fine, that is very good”. He added he would have to communicate the terms to Madrid but would let me know as soon as he had a reply.

It is quite probable that part of Orgaz’ apparently great gratification with the proposals springs from relief from the uneasiness which he has recently suffered over the possibility of an Anglo-American landing in Morocco and his conclusion that these proposals are an assurance on our side of our peaceful intentions in respect of Spanish Morocco.

Sent to Madrid.

Childs

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/6271: Telegram

[Document 588]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, August 5, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received August 6—11:14 a.m.]

1029. I do not anticipate that the program as outlined in your 636, July 27, noon,48 will interfere in any way with Spanish program as it is now operating or is expected to operate during remainder this year if Spanish Government through its Embassy in Washington has indicated that it has no objection to a separate supply purchase program for Spanish North Africa and Tangier. Smith has just returned from Tangier and advises that he has made suggestions to Childs regarding petroleum supplies.

The Embassy is sending following comment to Tangier as its August 5, 4 p.m.: “The program contained in Department’s 132, July 27, noon, is not expected to conflict with program in Peninsular Spain if Spanish Government through its Embassy in Washington has indicated that it has no objection to a separate supply purchase program for Spanish North Africa and Tangier and Department has been so informed. With respect to paragraph d the following comment from here may be helpful.

1. The Spanish program involves purchase of sheep and lambskins as a preclusive item. Only those skins weighing less than 14 kilos per dozen may be exported from here. At the moment there is no evidence that the skins we are buying originate in Spanish North Africa but if skins from that area should find their way to Peninsular Spain or vice versa our two buying organizations would be bidding against each other and this situation should be watched closely.

2. With existing shortage of copper in Spain it is surprising that we hope to purchase 1,000 tons of ore in Spanish North Africa. If any such quantity is available Embassy would appreciate being informed.

3. The intention of purchasing 1,000 tons manganese is also surprising. Spanish authorities are negotiating for from 3 to 4 thousand tons from French North Africa and the French through Spanish authorities in Madrid are endeavoring to obtain 90 tons gasoline, 6 tons lubricants and 60 tires in order to move the ore from the Atlas Mountains to a seaport.”

Hayes

48 See footnote 45, p. 473 [Pg. 473 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 740.00112 European War 1939/6271: Telegram

[Document 589]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, August 14, 1942—7 p.m.

738. Your 1029, August 5. As General Orgaz has kept Madrid Government informed of all developments, Department has not considered it necessary to discuss with Spanish Embassy here question of separate economic agreement for Spanish North Africa. Do you have any special reason to believe that such discussion would be advisable?

Repeated to Tangier.49

Hull

49 As telegram No. 148, August 14, 7 p.m.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/6363: Telegram

[Document 590]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, August 17, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received August 17—1:47 p.m.]

1116. As I now have informal assurances from Foreign Office here that it knows and approves of the separate negotiations, I believe their discussion with Embassy in Washington inadvisable. Department’s 738, August 14, 7 p.m.

Hayes

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/6383: Telegram

[Document 591]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, August 17, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received August 17—1:47 p.m.]

339. Department’s 148, August 4 [14].50 I have no special reason for believing such discussion would be advisable. On the other hand I am aware of no objections to acquainting the Embassy with the background of the negotiations.

I met my Spanish colleague Saturday night and asked if he had any information on the accord. He stated the authorities in Madrid who were concerned with the economy of Spanish Morocco were not in favor of the accord and thought Spanish Morocco should meet its economic problems in cooperation with French Morocco. He thought that to overcome this opposition Orgaz would be obliged to intercede by a personal visit to Madrid. I asked if Orgaz was planning such a visit. He said he thought Orgaz might go at the end of this month.

I stressed to him the difficulties which had had to be overcome before agreement had been reached authorizing the negotiations. It was added that it seemed preferable to treat Spanish North Africa separately from the peninsula as it would relieve us of the constant necessity of referring questions concerning the accord to the Embassy in Madrid which would ensue if the peninsula accord embraced Spanish North Africa.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

50 See footnote 49, p. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589].

The Ambassador in Spam (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/6424: Telegram

[Document 592]

The Ambassador in Spam (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, August 20, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received August 21—2:58 p.m.]

1149. My 1116, August 17, 2 p.m. I am concerned over the language of the last paragraph of Childs’ aide-mémoire of July 31 transmitted in his despatch 937, August [1],51 in which it is stated in writing that our Government’s willingness to enter into such an agreement proceeds solely from the belief that he, General Orgaz will not permit any change in the neutral status of Spanish North Africa and Tangier, et cetera, and over the effect it may have on General Orgaz’s position within the Government. I am apprehensive likewise that it may have an unfavorable effect on the delicate negotiations in progress affecting our whole economic program with Spain52 especially when the German trade commission is here and German economic pressure is being applied to Spain.

While the Presidency of the Government has informed the Foreign Office that it has approved the petroleum memorandum (enclosure 2 despatch 937) it has not revealed to the Foreign Office any knowledge of the aide-mémoire (enclosure 3 same despatch).

I request authorization to inform appropriate authorities in my discretion that the negotiations with General Orgaz have been conducted on the understanding that he is keeping the Government in Madrid informed of negotiations and that the commitments entered into have the Government’s approval. I should like to be able to do this if the need should arise, in order to overcome possible suspicion that we are seeking to detach Morocco from Spain for political and military purposes, and to set General Orgaz against his superiors in Madrid. Recent conversations with Spanish officials concerning supply of petroleum to Spanish North Africa appear to confirm the impression that Spanish Government is very touchy about its “rights” in Morocco and is anxious to maintain indivisible control there.

Repeated to Tangier.

Hayes

51 Not printed, but see telegram No. 321, July 31, 9 p.m., from the Chargé at Tangier, p. 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587].

52 See vol. iii, pp. 248 ff.

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/6431: Telegram

[Document 593]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, August 21, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received August 22—2:31 a.m.]

1159. My 1149, August 20, 10 p.m. If Orgaz has not yet forwarded aide-mémoire to Madrid I believe it would be advisable for Childs to amend it by omitting last paragraph substance of which could be conveyed to General Orgaz orally. I am sure Childs could give a reasonable explanation of his action.

Repeated to Tangier.

Hayes

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/6443: Telegram

[Document 594]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, August 21, 1942—midnight.
[Received August 22—10:55 a.m.]

350. From the point of view of our own negotiations we can see no possible objection to the proposal made in Madrid’s 1149, August 10 [20]. Inasmuch as Orgaz himself has stated that he has referred our proposal to his Government it is quite probable that he would welcome the assurances suggested by the Ambassador, particularly if there appears to be any such suspicion on the part of the Madrid Government as that mentioned in the telegram under reference.

Repeated to Tangier [Madrid?].

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/6485: Telegram

[Document 595]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, August 25, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received August 25—6:58 p.m.]

354. Repeated to Madrid. Madrid’s 1149, August 20 and 1159, August 21. I saw General Orgaz yesterday to explain the delay in the arrival of petroleum products which had been promised him by September 1st by Smith. He asked me to lunch with him today in Tetuán with a few members of his immediate staff.

In an atmosphere of extreme cordiality I asked him for news of our economic accord. He said he had found it necessary to refer to Madrid only two of the questions raised in my memo of July 31 (see my 937, August 1)53 namely, transport and the means of compensation as these were the only matters which directly concern the central Government. As for the question of control and other matters treated of, these concerned only himself he emphasized. As he made no reference whatsoever to the final paragraph of my memo I thought it best not to open that subject myself the more particularly as I gathered he had either not referred it to Madrid (the most probable inference) or if he had he did not consider it constituted any obstacle to the negotiations.

I asked him twice in the course of our extended very informal discussion whether he anticipated the Madrid Government had any objections in principle to our treating directly between us the subject of an economic accord concerning Spanish North Africa. He replied in the most positive manner stating “absolutely not”.

I emphasized that in advocating with my Government a separate economic accord the advantages had been pointed out of treating with him directly for the reason that we understood better the economic problems of Spanish North Africa and we were in a more advantageous position to determine the needs and to find ways and means of satisfying these needs than the Embassy in Madrid and the central Government authorities who were obviously more preoccupied with the economic problems of the peninsula. He expressed himself in entire agreement.

He stated that he had spoken since he had seen me yesterday by telephone with the Minister of Commerce and Industry in Madrid who had referred to a conversation the latter had had 2 or 3 days previously with Ambassador Hayes and he inferred that the subject of our economic accord had been discussed between them but he was not entirely clear on this point. His whole conversation evidenced his strong continued interest in an accord, his belief that there are no important difficulties in the way of its realization and his expectation that he would be in a position to discuss the details in the not distant future.

Smith is returning here on the 3rd. Orgaz has accepted an invitation to dine with me on the 5th at which time I shall [have?] a most favorable opportunity to pursue with him further any questions of particular interest to the Department or to Ambassador Hayes.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

53 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 740.00112 European War 1939/6424: Telegram

[Document 596]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, August 28, 1942—8 p.m.

792. Your 1149, August 20, and 1159, August 21. As aide-mémoire was presented more than 4 weeks ago, Department fears any attempt to withdraw and amend it would only serve to draw undesirable attention to paragraph in question. Unless Childs has good reason to believe otherwise, we feel he should take no action at this time.

Department does not consider it desirable that you should take the initiative in mentioning Spanish Morocco negotiations to Madrid authorities. If they should query you on the subject, you may say that this Government of course assumed that General Orgaz was keeping Madrid fully informed and that conversations had their entire approval.

(On occasion of each proposal or suggestion made by Childs, Orgaz has said he would refer it to his Government. Following our first, tentative approach he specifically stated he had discussed matter in Madrid.)

Repeated to Tangier.

Hull

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24313

[Document 597]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 1019 Tangier, September 1, 1942.
[Received September 16.]

Sir: I have the honor to present certain general observations which may be of some possible interest in evaluating the probable attitude of Spanish Morocco in the event of an Allied landing in French North Africa.

In the event of such a landing, whether in French Morocco, in Algeria or Tunisia, it may be expected that pressure would be exerted at once by the Axis upon Spain for aid and assistance in repelling the Allied forces. Such aid would comprise no doubt, in part, the granting of air and submarine bases in Spanish Morocco and possibly the use of Spanish troops for the purpose of creating a diversion in French Morocco, as well as the use of Spanish vessels for employment between the Peninsula and North Africa.

The attitude of Spanish Morocco toward such demands would depend, of course, very largely on the international situation at the moment and Spanish calculations concerning the respective chances for victory of the United Nations and the Axis. Inasmuch as since about December, 1941, Spanish sentiment, as reflected locally, has betrayed a loss of faith in the possibility of a German or Axis victory, and for the reason that since that time also Spanish disinclination to be involved in the war has steadily declined, it may be assumed on the basis of the actual present situation that, in the face of German demands such as those outlined above, every reasonable effort would be made to avoid acceding to them.

Spanish calculations in such an event would no doubt be based on the assumption that a yielding to German demands for assistance which went no farther even than the granting of air and submarine bases in Spanish Morocco would probably entail inevitably the involvement of Spain and Spanish Morocco in war against the United Nations. On the other hand, the Spanish would probably calculate that a refusal to grant such aid might not necessarily involve Spain in the war through the use of force by Germany to obtain such bases. (In evaluating this factor of course much would depend on the position at the moment of Germany and whether it might have the land or air forces necessary to bring substantial pressure against the Pyrenees frontier of Spain or against Spanish Morocco.)

A distinction must be made between the probable attitude of Metropolitan Spain and that of Spanish Morocco in the eventuality outlined above. It is possible, though not altogether probable, that a decision on the part of the Madrid Government to yield to Axis demands might be met with refusal by the authorities of Spanish Morocco to execute orders of the Central Government. It is known that General Orgaz, Spanish High Commissioner, is strongly desirous of maintaining the neutral character of Spanish Morocco and at a given moment it is by no means improbable that General Orgaz might, under favorable circumstances, be induced to decline to agree to the use by the Axis of Spanish Morocco as a base of operations even if permission therefor might be granted by the Madrid Government under pressure.

There is always the likelihood that as one strong inducement to persuade the Spanish to create a diversion on behalf of the Axis in the event of an Allied landing in French North Africa, the promise of Northern Morocco and of the region around Oran would be held out by the Germans to the Spanish as the price of their support. Northern Morocco, particularly the region north of the so-called Sebou line and the region in the vicinity of Oran, have been parts of French North Africa which have figured in Spanish territorial aspirations for many years. One of Spain’s territorial aspirations in Spanish North Africa, namely Tangier, was acquired by it in 1940 following the collapse of France when the troubled international situation made it possible for Spain to take at least temporary possession of Tangier when other interested Powers were too pre-occupied with other more important problems to interfere. There can be little doubt that Spain’s hesitancy to embark upon other territorial adventures in North Africa has been due to a consideration of the risks involved. One very important consideration which might curb the Spanish in undertaking a diversionary march into French Morocco from the north or into Oran from Melilla would be the realization that no single act would do more to solidify French sentiment actively against the Axis and in favor of the United Nations. It is on that account important that should an Allied landing at any time be undertaken in the future in French North Africa, the most explicit assurances should be given at once that the Allies entertain no territorial aspirations in North Africa. Such a declaration would do much to rally French assistance actively in behalf of the Allied cause in the event Spain should choose the moment of an Allied landing for an attempt to occupy any territory in French North Africa.

In presenting the foregoing considerations it must be emphasized that much, of course, will depend upon the complexion of the situation at the given moment, and this involves so many unpredictable factors that it would be idle to attempt to do more than sketch the possibilities in the broadest outlines.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.00112 European War 1939/6669: Telegram

[Document 598]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, October 15, 1942—10 p.m.

187. Your despatch 1015, August 31.54 The Board of Economic Warfare has lately taken the position that no export licenses should be issued for supplies for Spanish North Africa pending the conclusion of the proposed economic accord. Your view as expressed in your despatch seems to favor the issuance of export licenses and navicerts on a limited basis until the accord is concluded. The Board of Economic Warfare desires to know what your present views are on the subject before considering a possible relaxation of its present policy.

What is the status at the moment of the negotiations with Orgaz?

Welles

54 Not printed.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/7036: Telegram

[Document 599]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 23, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received 10:46 p.m.]

516. Department’s 187, October 15. The last statement made to me by Orgaz on the subject of the accord was reported in my telegram 354, August 25, 7 p.m.

It is recommended to the Department that I be authorized to approach Orgaz and to refer to paragraph No. 7 of the Petroleum Accord of July 29, 1942 agreed to by him (see enclosure 2 to despatch 938 [937], August 1).55 At such a time I would inform Orgaz that as indicated both in the petroleum accord and in the proposals for a general economic accord (see enclosure 3 to the same despatch), my Government expected that action would be taken by the Spanish authorities looking to the granting of reciprocal economic facilities in Spanish North Africa. It would be pointed out that we have begun to furnish petroleum products to North Africa and Tangier in the absence of any specific written assurance. This measure has been taken by us out of recognition of the pressing economic needs of this area. Now that the petroleum program appears to be progressing satisfactorily, it is expected that the Spanish authorities will be prepared to grant facilities for the acquisition and export of the products mentioned in the memorandum of July 31 presented to him and with that in view an American purchasing agent is shortly expected to arrive in Tangier (the reference is to the anticipated arrival of Lambert now in Madrid).

Such an approach it is believed might expedite further consideration of the accord. We might then consider in the light of General Orgaz’ reply whether it might not be advisable to suspend the issuance of export licenses for supplies to Spanish North Africa other than petroleum products pending the conclusion of the economic accord.

Meanwhile, I favor the issuing of export licenses for Spanish North Africa on a limited basis and only on the Legation’s specific recommendation.

Childs

55 Despatch No. 937 and its enclosures not printed.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/7044: Telegram

[Document 600]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 26, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 1:46 p.m.]

521. My telegram 516, October 23. I received late last evening a communication by the High Commissioner, dated October 23, reading in translation as follows: “The Government of Spain replies under date of October 14 to the communication addressed to it last August by this High Commissariat enclosing a copy of the memorandum, dated July 31, 1942, in which, in representing the Government of your country and in accordance with the conversations and communications previously exchanged with Your Excellency, there was expressed in the first place the readiness of the United States to arrive at an agreement of an economic character with this High Commissariat.

The reply from Madrid expresses its gratefulness for the American good will in this regard, and still more for the steps that you have taken to bring this purpose to a successful end, but believes that for obvious reasons the commercial negotiations in question must be carried out through a single channel and require the intervention in all of them of the Spanish Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

In communicating this to Your Excellency, I must reiterate with my personal esteem my gratitude for the diligence and activity you have devoted to this.”

In view of the foregoing it is suggested that the Department’s proposal for an economic accord be submitted to the Spanish Government through our Embassy in Madrid. It might be explained that we had been persuaded to make them directly to the High Commissariat in the belief that it would facilitate the exchange proposed if the negotiation of the details were left to the Legation in Tangier and the Spanish authorities in Tetuan. It might be added that, while conforming to the expressed desire of the Spanish Government that the terms of the accord be negotiated with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Spanish Government would doubtless recognize the desirability of leaving the implementation of any accord which might be concluded to the representatives of the two Governments in Spanish Morocco and Tangier.

We have succeeded, it is believed, in building up much goodwill with the High Commissariat and the local Spanish authorities in our expressed willingness to conclude an accord. It is thought that the advantages of intimate and close contact with these authorities may still be conserved by the proposed course of action.

This need not prevent a modified form of the approach to Orgaz suggested in my 516 of October 23. It might now be stated to him that relying upon his undoubted willingness to promote a reciprocal exchange with us on the basis of war petroleum program we were sending a purchasing agent to Spanish North Africa and we were confident we could count on his doing everything possible to facilitate the work of this agent.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.00112 European War 1939/7044: Telegram

[Document 601]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 p.m.

203. Your 521, October 26. Note has been taken of the Spanish Government’s decision. The approach suggested will be given careful consideration by the Department.

You may inform General Orgaz that his sympathetic interest in our proposal has been warmly appreciated. At the same time you may also inform him that in anticipation of the successful conclusion of the economic accord we had been giving favorable consideration to the matter of export licenses for important quantities of goods for Spanish Morocco, and that in keeping with the General’s expressed interest in maintaining the economy of Spanish Morocco the Department will endeavor to correlate the needs of that area with the larger Spanish supply program.

Hull

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00112 European War 1939/7114: Telegram

[Document 602]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 31, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 6:15 p.m.]

542. Department’s 203, October 29 and my 532, October 28.56 In my conversation with Orgaz I expressed my regret that he would not be able to conclude an economic accord with us through direct negotiations. I observed he had originally proposed the accord in Tetuán in the belief it would expedite matters to have the subject dealt with by those on the spot. I added that I did not know what the intentions of my Government were but suggested that if it was determined to negotiate the accord in Madrid I thought it would be reasonable if the execution of it were left to the High Commissariat in Tetuán and the American Legation in Tangier. Orgaz expressed himself as in full agreement with this view.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

[Subsequently negotiations were transferred to Madrid to be handled as a part of the over-all Spanish relationships.]

56 Latter not printed.

Informal cooperation between the Diplomatic Agency and Spanish authorities regarding taxes and price controls in the Tangier Zone without prejudice to American treaty rightsInformal cooperation between the Diplomatic Agency and Spanish authorities regarding taxes and price controls in the Tangier Zone without prejudice to American treaty rights57

57 For previous correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 550 ff.

[603] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, February 24, 1942. [Received June 5.]

881.512/164

[604] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, March 3, 1942. [Received March 13.]

881.512/161

[605] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, May 4, 1942—11 p.m.

881.512/161: Telegram

[606] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, May 19, 1942. [Received June 5.]

881.512/165

[607] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, September 17, 1942. [Received October 5.]

881.50/47

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.512/164

[Document 603]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 640 Tangier, February 24, 1942.
[Received June 5.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to the Legation’s despatch no. 258 of July 14, 1941,58 and in particular to the note enclosed in that communication, addressed by the Legation to Colonel Carvajal, at that time Civil Governor of Tangier, taking exception to various taxes levied incident to the importation of goods through the Tangier Customs.

On February 16, 1942, my Spanish colleague,59 acting presumably in his capacity of Chief of the Diplomatic Cabinet of General Uriarte, Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner,60 called on me with reference to the above mentioned note.

My Spanish colleague remarked that his Government did not think this was the time to discuss with the United States the question of principle raised in the note. He pointed out that the “Social Relief Tax” mentioned in our note was in reality perhaps poorly defined. It was, he stated, a fund used for social protection and was employed solely for charitable purposes among all classes of the population.

He added that we have accepted a number of taxes not having a charitable character, imposed by the former International Administration, and he had been sent to inquire if we were not disposed to agree to the payment by American ressortissants of this particular tax imposed for charitable purposes.

The Chief of the Diplomatic Cabinet remarked that if we were to accept the payment of this tax, it would, he wished to emphasize, be without any prejudice to our treaty position. If, on the other hand, we wished to continue to insist on the exemption of American ressortissants from this tax, I had only to inform him of this and the High Commissioner would issue the necessary instructions exempting American ressortissants from its payment.

My Spanish colleague spent some time with me during which we discussed at some considerable length the American treaty position here in Morocco. His attitude was extremely conciliatory and he appeared to have a perfect comprehension of our position and showed no disposition to question it. He remarked that after the war, at the Peace Conference, the question of Tangier and Morocco would no doubt come before the Conference, and we might safely leave until then the raising of questions of principle, which the Spanish authorities wished now to avoid.

I am at a loss to account for the raising by the Spanish authorities of our possible acceptance of the five per cent ad valorem “Social Relief Tax” by the Customs. In view of the absence of any apparent reason therefor, I hesitate to speculate concerning the Spanish motives involved. The collection of the tax is really for the moment one of almost academic significance, in view of the fact that practically all imports made by non-official Americans have virtually ceased.

For several reasons, notwithstanding his assurances, I am disinclined to suggest acquiescence in my Spanish colleague’s proposal.

The limitation of this proposal to the five per cent “Social Relief Tax” alone among all the other taxes to which exception was taken in the Legation’s note might lead us into an embarrassing dilemma. Our refusal to grant a concession in regard to what my Spanish colleague termed a charitable contribution might eventually be used as an item of anti-American propaganda. On the other hand, our giving way in regard to this particular illegal levy might be construed by the Spanish as a recession from our position of principle on the other taxes. In as much as the Legation’s note alluded to by Mr. Soriano recalled that the Spanish Government had admitted the principle that these illegally levied taxes are reimbursable, it may very well be that they are anxious to find or to produce a flaw in our position in this respect, for the reason that this is a strong point upon which we may hold up our recognition of the Spanish position in Morocco, as long as it may suit us to do so.

Mr. Soriano’s reference to our acceptance of taxes instituted by the former International Administration of Tangier, notwithstanding our failure to recognize that Administration, suggests an argument on the part of the Spanish authorities that their own similarly unrecognized position in Morocco ought not to debar our acceptance of taxation imposed by them. They overlook the fact that the American Government’s assent to taxes and other legislation emanating from the Tangier International Administration was negotiated, not with that unrecognized entity, but with the Resident General of France in his recognized capacity of Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sultan, which was therefore entirely in keeping with our treaty position.

In view of the importance of the effect of custom and usage in this country, prejudice to that position would depend upon the consistency of our attitude and acts rather than upon assurances to the contrary by the unrecognized Spanish authorities. Mr. Soriano’s suggestion that we should mutually agree to eschew all reference to treaty principle at this time, leaving this theme for discussion at the Peace Conference after the war, and confining ourselves until then to the problem of practical collaboration, appears to be an unacceptable inversion of the situation. The Spanish can claim no authority, as Mr. Soriano hinted, incidental to their presence or de facto control in North Africa, to justify the suspension or overriding of established principles on which American treaty rights repose. It is rather the question of eventual reparation of Spanish disregard of American treaty rights and interests which might be deferred for discussion at some ulterior date.

In French Morocco we have been able to turn the difficulty by giving temporary and withdrawable assent to certain taxation measures, but there we were dealing with authorities whom we have formally recognized. It would not seem that similar action could be properly adopted in regard to the unrecognized Spanish Administration. It is suggested, moreover, that formal assent to any of the enactments of the Spanish Administration might be construed as tantamount to some measure of recognition.

In any event, it would seem to be a useful principle to follow not to accept requests from the Spanish authorities for the application to American ressortissants of Spanish taxes as long as we have not recognized either the Spanish Zone or the occupation of Tangier by the Spanish. (See in this connection pages 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 5] and 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 5] of the Legation’s despatch no. 258 of July 14, 1941.)

In reply to the Spanish Consul’s suggestions under reference the Legation believes that, while reiterating its desire to afford the Spanish all practical cooperation in the general interests of the community in this exceptional period, it is not deemed possible that any concession can be made on the principles recalled in the Legation’s note to Colonel Carvajal affecting any single item of taxation therein referred to. At the same time it might be pointed out that the material object and the present needs of the Spanish Administration, namely, the raising of revenue for social relief purposes, is in fact being attained, in so far as American ressortissants may be concerned. The latter, albeit under protest, are actually paying this and other taxes legally inapplicable to them, into the Customs to enable them to obtain the clearance of their goods. In the present circumstances the Legation is willing to refrain from disturbing this procedure pending more opportune conditions for an ulterior adjustment of this situation. In this sense, and subject to the Department’s approval, the Legation proposes to leave with the Spanish Consul an Aide-Mémoire along the lines of the enclosed draft.61

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

58  ibid., p. 559.

59 Rafael Soriano, Spanish Consul at Tangier.

60 Gen. Luis Orgaz.

61 Not printed.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.512/161

[Document 604]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 656 Tangier, March 3, 1942.
[Received March 13.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my despatch No. 640 of February 25 [24] enclosing a proposed aide-mémoire to be left with my Spanish colleague in reply to his informal request for our acceptance of the so-called “Social Belief Tax” and to state that upon reflection a revised draft aide-mémoire has been prepared a copy of which is enclosed, which it is believed better suits the situation.

It would be appreciated if, in the event the Department approved this proposed draft reply that telegraphic authorization be given the Legation.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

[Enclosure]

Draft of Aide-Mémoire

The American Chargé d’Affaires has the honor to recall his conversation with his Spanish colleague on February 16, 1942, in which the latter referred to a note, dated July 14, 1941, addressed by the Legation to Colonel Carvajal, taking exception to the levy of various taxes on American ressortissants, some of which taxes were collected by the Customs at the time of the importation of merchandise. Among the latter was a five per cent Social Relief Tax, and in regard to this the Spanish Consul inquired whether the Legation’s position might not be reconsidered and assent given to the levy of this tax inasmuch as it was, in effect, a contribution for charitable purposes affected to all classes of the local population.

The Legation has not failed to refer the informal suggestion of Señor Soriano to the Department of State which has given careful and sympathetic consideration to his conciliatory suggestions.

The Legation has been authorized to reiterate its desire previously expressed on more than one occasion to afford the Spanish authorities all possible practical cooperation in the general interest of the community in the present exceptional period. The Legation has not however been authorized to make any concessions in respect of the principles recalled in its note to Colonel Carvajal affecting any single item of taxation therein referred to.

The Legation has been instructed to point out that the material object of the Spanish administration relative to the Social Relief Tax, namely, the raising of revenue, is in fact being attained in so far as American ressortissants are concerned. The latter, though under protest, are actually paying this and other taxes not legally applicable to them into the customs house to enable them to obtain the clearance of their goods.

In accordance with the Legation’s desire to assist the Spanish authorities in a practical manner, without prejudice either to the community or to the treaty position of the United States, the Legation is authorized to refrain from disturbing the foregoing procedure pending a more opportune consideration of the situation.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 881.512/161: Telegram

[Document 605]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, May 4, 1942—11 p.m.

84. Your despatch 656, March 3. Despatch 640 has not been received. Your revised draft of aide-mémoire is approved on the understanding that the original draft does not raise any question essential to the Department’s consideration of the revised draft.

Hull

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.512/165

[Document 606]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 774 Tangier, May 19, 1942.
[Received June 5.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to the Legation’s despatches no. 640 of February 24, 1942 and no. 658 [656] of March 3, 1942, and to report that, in accordance with the authorization contained in the Department’s telegram no. 84 of March [May] 4, 1942, 11 p.m., an Aide-Mémoire 62 was left with my Spanish colleague, copies of which are enclosed, on the subject of the payment by American citizens to the Customs of the so-called Auxiliary Social Relief Tax.

When I presented the Aide-Mémoire to my Spanish colleague, he expressed great satisfaction with its conciliatory character.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

62 See draft of aide-mémoire, p. 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 604].

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.50/47

[Document 607]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 1038 Tangier, September 17, 1942.
[Received October 5.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to the Legation’s despatch No. 422 of October 29, 194163 which reported a conversation with Colonel Carvajal, at that time Administrator of the Tangier district, when he appealed for the collaboration of the Legation in keeping down the local cost of living. The despatch under reference also set forth the terms of the explanations given to Colonel Carvajal of the treaty situation of the United States in Morocco which would necessarily govern the cooperation of the Legation with the authorities for the purposes in question.

There are now transmitted herewith for the Department’s information and such comment as it may deem desirable to make, copies of correspondence exchanged with Colonel Carvajal’s successor, General Uriarte, delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner at Tetuán in the same connection. The correspondence consists of two letters both dated September 3, 194264 received from General Uriarte which reveal his misapprehension as to the situation explained to his predecessor, and the Legation’s restatement of that position as embodied in its reply dated September 15, 1942 to the aforementioned communications.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

[Enclosure—Extract]

The American Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to General Jenaro Uriarte, Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner for Morocco

Tangier, September 15, 1942.

Dear General Uriarte and Distinguished Friend: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your two letters dated September 3, 1942 in which you refer to charges made by the local Price Controller against the American protégés … of the alleged sale of toilet soap at abusive prices, and of the holding of clandestine stocks of green tea.

In response to your appeal for my contribution in the prevention of profiteering at the expense of the community in the present period of scarcity, I need hardly assure you, dear General and distinguished friend, that you may count upon the fullest cooperation possible on the part of the Legation where American ressortissants may be concerned. However, I should add that the Legation’s efforts to secure the practical attainment of the purpose in view could not involve resort to measures, or the adoption of any form of procedure prejudicial to the American treaty position.

The Legation has no authority to waive or to compel American ressortissants to waive the exercise of their existing treaty rights in Morocco, such for instance as their right to conduct their businesses in complete liberty without interference of any kind on the part of the Moroccan authorities. Consequently, American ressortissants cannot be legally coerced, either by administrative action on the part of the Legation or by judicial action of the American Consular Court, into making declarations of stocks held by them, or into selling their goods at arbitrarily fixed prices. In these circumstances it is obviously beyond the power of the Legation to give its sanction to the imposition of fines, such as those suggested by the Price Controller on … for their failure to comply with regulations which they cannot be judicially constrained to observe. That is the legal position and, as the Shereefian Government has been informed by the Legation, the Department of State is unable to give its formal approval to any departure therefrom.

This situation was explained to Colonel Carvajal on the occasion of his visit to me on October 23, 1941 when he informed me of the appointment of a Price Controller in Tangier, referred to a revival by decree of October 21, 1941 of a law dated November 2, 1939 passed by the Tangier Legislative Assembly which imposed restrictions and control over trading in the Tangier Zone, and asked me to apply these measures to American nationals and protégés. In accordance with the position above set forth, I informed him that although these measures, in as much as they were derogatory of the principles of the Moroccan treaties, could not be legally enforced upon American ressortissants, the Department had directed the Legation to examine with the Moroccan authorities arrangements designed to avoid special difficulties prejudicial to the interests of the local communities which might result from the failure of the American Government to give its formal approval to legislation enacted in Morocco as a result of the present exceptional circumstances.

Colonel Carvajal was informed that the Legation would be glad to extend to the Spanish authorities such a regime of cooperation, subject of course to the Department’s stipulations that the contemplated arrangements did not prejudice the American treaty position or the legitimate activities and interests of American ressortissants in Morocco. Colonel Carvajal expressed his satisfaction and added that the Spanish authorities understood the extraterritorial situation of the United States in Morocco and had every intention of respecting it. I replied that I considered that American ressortissants, as members of the Tangier community, should cooperate to the fullest possible extent in the welfare of that community and that, moreover, I did not anticipate any difficulty in persuading them voluntarily to do so.

Indeed, in view of the foregoing explanations as to the constitutional limitations on the action of the Legation in the premises, it will be appreciated that the only possible basis for the cooperation of the Legation with the Spanish authorities lies in the use of its persuasion to induce American ressortissants voluntarily to accommodate their methods of trading with those implied in the local regulations to which you allude in this connection. The Legation is confident that it will be able to persuade American nationals and protected persons, in these exceptional times, to observe their moral obligations in this respect toward the community of which they are members, and it will spare no efforts, in its administrative capacity, to prevail upon them faithfully to carry out such voluntary undertaking once it is given. As an example I would point to the full measure of cooperation which has been encountered by the local authorities on the part of American oil companies.

However, any inference on the part of the authorities that the Legation should depart from the above basis of operation, such as the expectation that it should impose administrative fines on American ressortissants, could only tend to render its task more difficult.

The Legation’s cooperation with the authorities, and particularly with the Price Controller, can repose only on an informal, though very friendly and sympathetic basis. I endeavored to make this clear to Colonel Carvajal when, in my reply dated January 29, 1942 to his request of January 26, 1942 that the American protégé, Mr. David S. Bergel, attend upon the Price Controller, I informed him that such attendance had been ordered by the Legation without prejudice to American treaty rights and would be limited to the purpose of giving information.

Subject to these conditions the Legation will be pleased to continue its cooperation with the Price Controller. It will examine with equal objectiveness how far the profits of American ressortissant traders can be rationally limited and in what measure such limitation is compatible with the sale prices fixed and with other conditions imposed by the authorities on trade, without jeopardy to the maintenance by American ressortissants of the continued existence of their businesses.

On this basis, my dear General and distinguished friend, I feel sure that our joint efforts in the interests of the community should prove to be successful.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

With kind personal regards,

Sincerely yours,

J. Rives Childs

63  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 571.

64 Neither printed.

Representations by the United States regarding attempts by the Spanish customs officials at Tangier to open official packages addressed to the American LegationRepresentations by the United States regarding attempts by the Spanish customs officials at Tangier to open official packages addressed to the American Legation

[608] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, June 18, 1942. [Received June 26.]

852.711/103

[609] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, July 20, 1942. [Received July 30.]

852.711/104

[610] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, July 29, 1942. [Received August 4.]

852.711/105

[611] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, August 13, 1942. [Received August 24.]

852.711/107

[612] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, August 27, 1942. [Received September 16.]

852.711/108

[613] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, September 24, 1942—11 p.m.

852.711/108: Telegram

[614] The Chargé at Tangier (Schott) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 1, 1942. [Received October 14.]

852.711/110

[615] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 11, 1942. [Received November 24.]

852.711/114

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 852.711/103

[Document 608]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 843 Tangier, June 18, 1942.
[Received June 26.]

Sir: I have the honor to report that a controversy has arisen between the local Spanish authorities and my British colleague65 concerning an attempt on the part of the former to open ten cases and four parcels of official supplies and printed matter addressed to the British Consulate General. Details concerning this controversy will be found in the enclosed copy of a communication, dated June 9, 1942, addressed by my British colleague to General Uriarte, the Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commission, the paraphrase of a telegram dated June 9, 1942, addressed by my British colleague to the Foreign Office on the subject, and a copy of General Uriarte’s communication of June 15, 1942, to the British Consulate General,66 stating that it “is not within the latter’s power to interfere with the customs regime in force in Spain and in the Zone of the Spanish Protectorate in Morocco”, adding that “this measure in no way interferes with rights and privileges and that it affects all persons in general”.

My British colleague informs me today that the position with him at the moment is that he is waiting to see whether the Foreign Office feels inclined to give him any guidance in the matter. He adds that if he permits the Spaniards to open these parcels it may create an awkward precedent. He observes that if he sends the parcels back to Gibraltar whence they came, the Spanish will be likely to harbor suspicions against him and it does not seem that it will solve the problem for the future. Incidentally, while the British packages consist of nine cases of paper and office supplies, four cases comprise propaganda material intended for distribution in Spanish North Africa.

This morning I sent a servant of the Legation to the Spanish post office to withdraw seven parcels addressed to the Legation by the American Embassy in Madrid, presumably containing magazines which are thought to be copies of En Guardia or Selecciones which we have been distributing in this area. The customs official in attendance insisted that the packages be opened for examination. The Legation servant declined to permit this and left the parcels in care of the post office, returning to the Legation to report the occurrence.

As there did not appear to be any great urgency in obtaining delivery of the seven parcels, I have thought it preferable to forward under cover of this despatch to the Department a copy of a note which I propose to address to my Spanish colleague67 who is Chief of General Uriarte’s Diplomatic Cabinet. I would appreciate receiving as soon as possible by telegram any comments the Department may have to make on my draft.

At the same time I am requesting the Embassy in Madrid to forward future shipments of publicity material to us in a sealed diplomatic pouch through the open mail. In this connection my Spanish colleague is reported to have suggested to my British colleague the advisability of pursuing this practice in order to avoid raising the issue which is the subject of this despatch.

My British colleague has informed me that he understands the Spanish are applying the new regulation concerning the opening of packages addressed to diplomatic and consular establishments in Tangier, other than diplomatic pouches, to the German Consulate General, but he has not yet been able to obtain any particulars on the subject.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

[Enclosure]

Draft of Proposed Note From the American Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Spanish Consul at Tangier (Soriano)

Mr. Consul and Dear Colleague: I have the honor to inform you that when on June 17, 1942 a moghzani of this Legation, duly provided with the customary pass addressed to the Customs Administration, presented himself at the Spanish Post Office in Tangier to withdraw seven parcels addressed to the Legation by the American Embassy in Madrid, the customs official in attendance required him to open the packets for examination. This the moghzani declined to do, left the parcels in the care of the Post Office, and returned to the Legation to report the occurrence.

This is the first occasion in the history of the Legation in which such a pretension has been put forward by the Moroccan Customs Administration in regard to the examination of the contents of parcels, addressed to the personnel of the Legation or to the Legation itself under cover of a pass from the latter and it is contrary, as you are no doubt aware, to treaty, custom and usage in this regard. Immunity from the attempted inspection which is the subject of this protest proceeds from the construction which has been invariably applied for nearly a century to the provisions of Article 3 of the British-Moroccan General Treaty of 185668 and of Article 3 of the Spanish-Moroccan Treaty of 1861.69 The sole requirement of these in respect of articles imported free of duty by diplomatic or consular officers in Morocco, is the furnishing by them to the Customs of a note in writing as to the number of packages so imported.

In a telephone communication on the subject between the Legation and the Chief of Customs this morning, the latter was understood to state that as to customs examination a distinction was to be made between goods and mail matter received by diplomatic missions, and that in connection with the latter, diplomatic pouches alone were exempt from inspection. The Legation feels bound, on the basis of our treaty rights, to take exception to such a theory.

In as much as it is presumed that the position taken by the Customs Administrator in the premises can be due only to a misapprehension on his part of the treaty situation, I shall therefore be grateful if you will take the necessary measures to cause the Customs Administration to desist in its obstruction to delivery by the Customs Administration at the Spanish Post Office of the packages under reference.

Please accept etc.

65 A. Gascoigne, British Consul General at Tangier.

66 None printed.

67 Rafael Soriano, Spanish Consul at Tangier.

68 Signed at Tangier, December 9, 1856, British and Foreign State Papers, vol. xlvi, p. 188.

69 Signed at Madrid, November 20, 1861, ibid., vol. liii, p. 1089.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 852.711/104

[Document 609]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 906 Tangier, July 20, 1942.
[Received July 30.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the Department’s telegram no. 129 of July 18, 9 p.m.,70 authorizing me to submit to the Spanish authorities the draft of the note enclosed in my despatch no. 843 of June 18, 1942, on the understanding that the failure of the British Consul General to base a similar complaint on the British-Moroccan Treaty of 1856 does not involve any question as to the validity of my proposed statement in our note concerning the construction of Article 3 of that treaty, in view of the absence of any reference to the treaty in the British Consul General’s representations of June 9 to the Spanish authorities.

Mr. Gascoigne, the British Consul General, after being acquainted with my proposed note, referred to Article 3 of the British general treaty of 1856 in a subsequent communication which he addressed to the Spanish authorities on June 22, 1942, of which a copy is enclosed.70 There is likewise enclosed a translation of the reply70 to his representations from General Uriarte, Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner.71

In view of the foregoing I have forwarded the note which the Department has authorized me to make to the Spanish Consul72 and will not fail to inform the Department of any reply that may be received.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

70 Not printed.

70 Not printed.

70 Not printed.

71 Gen. Luis Orgaz.

72 Apparently dated July 20, 1942; for text, see supra.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 852.711/105

[Document 610]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 928 Tangier, July 29, 1942.
[Received August 4.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my despatch no. 906 of July 20, 1942, transmitting a note addressed to the Spanish authorities74 concerning their attempt to open official packages addressed to the American Legation, and to transmit herewith copy of a note dated July 24, 1942 together with translation which I have received from my Spanish colleague in answer to my note.

I likewise enclose a copy of my rejoinder in which I have renewed the Legation’s objections to the inspection by the Customs authorities in Tangier of the contents of packages addressed to the Legation.

My British colleague informs me that he has not yet replied to General Uriarte’s note to him on the same general subject, which formed enclosure no. 3 to my despatch no. 843 of June 18, 1942. My British colleague states that he proposes to follow the same general lines in his reply to General Uriarte as I have taken in my enclosed note of July 29, 1942 to the Spanish Consul.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

[Enclosure 1—Translation]

The Spanish Consul at Tangier (Soriano) to the American Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

No. 25 Tangier, July 24, 1942.

Mr. Chargé d’Affaires and Dear Colleague: In reply to your kind communication of July 20, 1942 concerning various cases lying in the Customs house addressed to the Legation under your charge and which are subject to inspection, I have the honor to inform you that such inspection is effected solely for statistical purposes which imply absolutely no diminution of the diplomatic privileges which our authorities are obliged to observe. It is merely a measure of control now applied in the Customs house following the assumption by Spain of the charge of that administration under a special regime, and by analogy with the rules established in Madrid in respect of any foreign representation, according to which every Chief of Mission disposes of a fictitious credit in pesetas, of a greater or lesser amount according to his rank, against which duties that should otherwise have been applied, are debited on each parcel of goods imported under franchise, without involving the payment of any amount. All this procedure, as I have stated above, is purely for statistical purposes, and parcels or packets exclusively constituting the diplomatic pouch are alone exempted from this measure of control.

I avail myself [etc.]

Rafael Soriano

[Enclosure 2]

The American Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Spanish Consul at Tangier (Soriano)

Tangier, July 29, 1942.

Mr. Consul and Dear Colleague: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your kind communication of July 24, 1942 in reply to my note of July 20, 1942 which, on the grounds of treaty, custom and usage, took exception to the intended inspection by the Customs authorities in Tangier of the contents of certain packages addressed to the American Legation.

You have been good enough to explain that such inspection measure now adopted in respect of parcels imported into Tangier under diplomatic franchise proceeds from the assumption by Spain of charge of the Customs administration in Tangier, and follows the rules established in Madrid for the Spanish Customs in this matter.

I note with pleasure your assurance that the inspection, which is required solely for statistical purposes, implies no impairment of the diplomatic privileges which the Spanish authorities are obliged to observe. The Legation would recall, however, that in Morocco this obligation on the part of the Spanish authorities implies observance of the privileges under reference such as they are established by treaty, custom, and usage, and as was pointed out in my note above mentioned in reference to Article 3 of the British-Moroccan treaty of 1856, and Article 3 of the Spanish-Moroccan treaty of 1861, have invariably been construed as granting to foreign missions and consulates, not only immunity from payment of customs duties, but also from inspection of the packages imported by them.

In the circumstances the Legation has no alternative but to confirm its position in the premises as set forth in its note of July 20, 1942, and consequently to renew its request that you will be good enough to take such action as may be necessary to cause delivery to be made to the Legation of the packages in question unexamined by the Customs authorities.

As stated in the Legation’s note above mentioned, its position on the point of inspection has never been questioned, and the franchise passes issued by the Legation, in accordance with the treaty provisions above cited, indicated merely the number, without specification of their contents, of the packages to be passed. However, a few years ago, the Chief of the Statistics Division of the Tangier Customs made an informal request that the Legation include in its franchise passes indications as to the nature, value, and if possible the weight of the articles imported by it. He explained that this would be a personal favor to him inasmuch as it would save him the time and trouble otherwise required to search for such data in ships’ manifests and in the parcel post returns of the various post offices in Tangier. Needless to say the Legation gladly acceded to this request and will be happy to continue this practice to facilitate the statistical work of the Spanish administrators of the Moroccan Customs.

Please accept [etc.]

J. Rives Childs

74 See footnote 72, p. 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609].

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 852.711/107

[Document 611]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 970 Tangier, August 13, 1942.
[Received August 24.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my despatch no. 928 of July 29, 1942 concerning a claim asserted by the Spanish authorities in Chargé of the Moroccan Customs of their right to open official packages addressed to the American Legation, and to transmit herewith a copy of a note dated August 11, 1942 together with a translation, which I have received from General Uriarte, Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner, in reply to my last communication on this subject.

I likewise enclose a copy of my reply. I believe the Department will find the enclosed correspondence self-explanatory. It will be noted that General Uriarte has stated that the question is being submitted to the Madrid government “for the purpose of eliciting the rule to be followed in practice”.

My British colleague has shown me the text of a practically identical note dated August 11, 1942, which he has received from General Uriarte. In transmitting it to his Foreign Office he comments on it as follows: “It remains to be seen what decision is taken by the Spanish authorities in Madrid with regard to the question of the interpretation of the Treaties in question. Meanwhile, however, articles of various kinds, which have been addressed to me officially and privately, are accumulating in the go-downs of the Tangier port, and unless I can receive a reply fairly soon from the Spanish authorities, I shall be obliged to permit the authorities to examine the said articles, but under full reserves, and pending a final decision of the question at issue.”

A copy of this despatch is being communicated to our Embassy in Madrid and it is suggested that the Department may find it desirable to indicate its own views on this subject to the Embassy.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

[Enclosure 1—Translation]

General Jenaro Uriarte, Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner for Morocco, to the American Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

No. 514 Tangier, August 11, 1942.

Mr. Consul General and Dear Friend: Reference is made to your communication dated July 29 last addressed to the Consul of Spain in this city concerning the position which you take on the question of the inspection by our customs service of seven postal packets received by the administration of the Spanish Post Office and consigned to your Consulate General.

In respect of the measure adopted by the customs service, I would inform you that this proceeds from the fulfilment of regulation duties which are in accordance with those very conventions to which your Consulate General refers in its last note (Article 3 of the Anglo-Moroccan Treaty of 1856 and Article 3 of the Spanish Moroccan Treaty of 1861) the letter and spirit of which are neither contradictory nor contrary to customs inspection of the merchandise.

It should be repeated that the immunity of the diplomatic pouch, which is not contested, must be distinguished from the remission of customs duties conceded to foreign diplomatic representatives (custom franchise) in respect of articles or objects for their personal use or for that of their families. Any assimilation of the immunity referred to with the last mentioned prerogative is deemed by this Delegation to proceed from an erroneous interpretation of the treaties.

On these grounds therefore, and for the purpose of eliciting the rule to be followed in practice, I am consulting the superior authorities in the matter while, at the same time, submitting to them your views as to the interpretation of the treaties under reference.

Please accept [etc.]

J. Uriarte

[Enclosure 2]

The American Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to General Jenaro Uriarte, Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner for Morocco

Tangier, August 13, 1942.

My Dear General Uriarte: Acknowledgment is made of your kind communication of August 11, 1942 in reference to my note of July 29, 1942 addressed to my honorable Colleague of Spain in Tangier in which, on the grounds of treaty, custom and usage I claimed exemption from customs examination of all parcels consigned to this mission or to the American Consulate General.

In reply I would inform you that I am unable to concur in your suggestion that my objection to such examination proceeds from an error in the interpretation of the treaty provisions under reference, (Article 3 of the Anglo-Moroccan Treaty of 1856 and Article 3 of the Spanish-Moroccan Treaty of 1861) an interpretation which, moreover, is sanctioned by the unvaried application of these provisions in practice by the Moroccan Customs Administration for close on a century.

I note, however, that you are submitting this question to the consideration of your superior authorities and I would inform you that I am likewise transmitting to my Government the views expressed on both sides in the correspondence exchanged between us on the subject.

With kind personal regards,

Sincerely yours,

J. Rives Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 852.711/108

[Document 612]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 1005 Tangier, August 27, 1942.
[Received September 16.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my despatch no. 970 of August 13, 1942, and previous despatches on the subject of the opening by the Spanish Customs authorities of packages addressed to foreign diplomatic and consular representatives in Tangier, and to report certain interesting observations made to my British colleague by local Spanish officials in this connection.

Mr. Gascoigne, the British Consul General, has informed me that General Uriarte, the Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner, in discussing a day or two ago this question, had stated that the Spanish had proposed to open packages addressed to us containing publicity material as a result of their discovery of the importation by the German Consulate General of quantities of very violent anti-Jewish propaganda. General Uriarte stated the character of this propaganda had been discovered by accident. As a result the Spanish authorities had felt it essential in the interest of local public order to exercise a surveillance over the importation in the future of material likely to excite and inflame local passions.

General Uriarte stated that the question of the opening of packages of the American Legation and the British Consulate General had been referred to the Madrid government.

He suggested to Mr. Gascoigne that even in the event it should be decided by Madrid to exempt packages destined for the American Legation and the British Consulate General from examination, the Spanish authorities would greatly appreciate an offer on our part voluntarily to submit packages containing publicity material to examination as evidence of our good faith, which he did not question, and in order to strengthen the hands of the Spanish authorities vis-à-vis the Germans in respect of the opening of similar packages addressed to the German Consulate General. Subsequently a plea in behalf of this procedure was made to Mr. Gascoigne by his Spanish colleague. The subject has not been raised by any Spanish official with me.

In a conversation with me the British Consul General stated he was inclined to favor the Spanish suggestion and I on my part consider that it might be desirable to accede to the desires of the Spanish in this regard. So far as I know the packages which have been held up by the Spanish authorities addressed to us contain either copies of Selecciones or En Guardia and therefore the opening of packages containing them could not possibly prove embarrassing to the Legation. In the event the Spanish authorities do not recognize the contentions we have advanced concerning our treaty rights in the premises, a possible solution for the settlement of this controversy might be for us to submit to the examination of the packages with the entering of full reservations with the Spanish authorities as to the principle involved in respect of our treaty rights.

I would appreciate receiving an expression of the Department’s views concerning the suggestions made above.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 852.711/108: Telegram

[Document 613]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, September 24, 1942—11 p.m.

173. Your despatch 1005, August 27. Department approves the action suggested in your penultimate paragraph.

Hull

The Chargé at Tangier (Schott) to the Secretary of State 852.711/110

[Document 614]

The Chargé at Tangier (Schott) to the Secretary of State

No. 1063 Tangier, October 1, 1942.
[Received October 14.]

Sir: I have the honor to enclose herewith a copy of a Note dated September 30, 1942 addressed by the Legation to General Uriarte, Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner in Morocco, in connection with a pretension contrary to treaty provisions put forward by the Spanish authorities in charge of the Customs in Tangier, to their right to examine the contents of packages addressed to foreign diplomatic and consular representatives at this post.

The note referred to follows the suggestion contained in the concluding paragraph of the Legation’s despatch No. 1005 of August 27, 1942 approved by the Department’s cable instruction No. 173 of September 24, 1942.

The Legation will not fail to apprise the Department of General Uriarte’s eventual response to the communication, and of any further developments in this matter.

Respectfully yours,

William W. Schott

[Enclosure]

The American Chargé at Tangier (Schott) to General Jenaro Uriarte, Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner for Morocco

Tangier, September 30, 1942.

My Dear General Uriarte and Distinguished Friend: Reference is made to previous correspondence, in particular to Mr. Childs’ note of August 13, 1942, replying to your communication of August 11, 1942, concerning the question of the customs inspection of seven postal packages which arrived in mid-June and two at the beginning of August last addressed to this Legation, and are still lying at the Spanish Post Office.

In order to dispose of this matter I would inform you that I am prepared to acquiesce in the examination by the Customs of the contents of the nine packages under reference, without prejudice to the treaty principles involved, or to the specific American treaty rights in the premises as recited in Mr. Childs’ note of July 29, 1942 addressed to his Spanish colleague, Señor Soriano, which was the occasion of your note to him of August 11, 1942, and on the further understanding that such inspection shall not be taken to imply a precedent for the treatment of any parcels which may arrive in the future for this Legation or for the American Consulate General.

When acknowledging this communication will you be good enough, dear General and distinguished friend, to let me know the date and hour when it may be arranged for a member of the Legation, bearing the customs franchise passes, to be present at the opening of the parcels in question by the Customs officers.76

With kind personal regards,

Sincerely yours,

William W. Schott

76 In despatch No. 1072, October 8, 1942, the Chargé reported that on October 6 the Legation sent a Vice Consul to the post office and in his presence one package of each of two sizes was opened. The packages were then delivered without delay. (852.711/112)

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 852.711/114

[Document 615]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

No. 1114 Tangier, November 11, 1942.
[Received November 24.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform the Department that General Uriarte, in a note dated November 3, 1942, recalls that he had submitted to the Madrid Government the matter of his controversy with the Legation concerning the claim asserted by the Spanish authorities in charge of the Moroccan customs of their right to open postal parcels addressed to the Legation and states that the point of view expressed by him to the Legation in this connection is upheld by his Government.

In acknowledging this note I have reiterated full reservations of our treaty rights in the premises and informed General Uriarte that I have forwarded to the Department a copy of his communication. Copies of the notes under reference are enclosed herewith.77

There would appear to be no further action which could now be usefully taken in the matter. It is believed that our position and the circumstances pertinent to a consideration of the case have been sufficiently set forth in the Legation’s despatches on the subject to dispense with further comment or suggestions at this time. My despatch No. 970 of August 13, 1942 deals particularly with General Uriarte’s reference of the dispute to his Government.

Respectfully yours,

J. Rives Childs

77 Not printed.

Policies and actions of the United States regarding Spanish Morocco in connection with the invasion of French North Africa by American forcesPolicies and actions of the United States regarding Spanish Morocco in connection with the invasion of French North Africa by American forces78

78 For correspondence in regard to American economic aid for the Spanish Zone of Morocco and Tangier, see pp. 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 556] ff.; for correspondence regarding the invasion of French North Africa, see vol. ii, pp. 429 ff.

[616] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 26, 1942—9 p.m. [Received October 27—11 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25109: Telegram

[617] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 a.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/25109: Telegram

[618] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 a.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/25109: Telegram

[619] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 30, 1942—9 p.m. [Received October 30—5:17 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25177: Telegram

[620] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 30, 1942—10 p.m. [Received October 31—9:58 a.m.]

852.00/10196: Telegram

[621] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 3, 1942—10 p.m. [Received November 4—1:52 a.m.]

881.00/2360: Telegram

[622] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 8, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 10:15 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25321: Telegram

[623] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 8, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 9:58 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25322: Telegram

[624] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 9, 1942—11 p.m. [Received November 10—1:32 p.m.]

740.00114A European War 1939/100: Telegram

[625] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 10, 1942—8 p.m. [Received 11:20 p.m.]

740.00114A European War 1939/104: Telegram

[626] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 10, 1942—10 p.m. [Received November 10—3:56 p.m.]

740.00114A European War 1939/102: Telegram

[627] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 10, 1942—11 p.m. [Received November 10—9:25 p.m.]

740.00114A European War 1939/103: Telegram

[628] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, November 11, 1942—5 p.m.

740.00114A European War 1939/102: Telegram

[629] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 12, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 9:55 p.m.]

740.00114A European War 1939/108: Telegram

[630] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 13, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 10:50 p.m.]

740.00114A European War 1939/112: Telegram

[631] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 13, 1942—noon. [Received 2:14 p.m.]

811.248/777: Telegram

[632] The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, undated. [Received November 14, 1942—9 p.m.]

740.00114A European War 1939/113: Telegram

[633] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, November 18, 1942—10 p.m.

740.00114A European War 1939/113: Telegram

[634] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 18, 1942—10 p.m. [Received November 19—3:25 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25811: Telegram

[635] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 22, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 6:07 p.m.]

811.248/791: Telegram

[636] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 26, 1942—7 p.m. [Received 11 p.m.]

881.7961/26: Telegram

[637] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, December 3, 1942—5 p.m.

881.7961/26: Telegram

[638] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard)

Washington, December 3, 1942.

851R.20/42½

[639] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, December 14, 1942—10 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/26567a: Telegram

[640] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 17, 1942—11 p.m. [Received December 18—10:40 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/26601: Telegram

[641] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 22, 1942—10 p.m. [Received 10:30 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/26663: Telegram

[642] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 22, 1942—midnight. [Received December 23—5:15 p.m.]

881.00/2385: Telegram

[643] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 24, 1942—3 p.m. [Received December 25—7:35 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/26699: Telegram

[644] The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 30, 1942—8 p.m. [Received 9:40 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/26831: Telegram

[645] The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, January 2, 1943—8 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/26831: Telegram

[646] The Chargé in Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 4, 1942 [1943]—11 p.m. [Received January 8—11:12 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/27000: Telegram

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25109: Telegram

[Document 616]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 26, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received October 27—11 a.m.]

523. For the Secretary and Under Secretary only. Repeated to Madrid for confidential information of Ambassador. My British colleague79 has raised with me the character of the communication which we might be authorized by our respective Governments to present to General Orgaz, Spanish High Commissioner in Morocco, in the event of an Allied landing in Morocco. Mr. Gascoigne, British Consul General, expressed the view that we should, in his opinion, be authorized both to assure Orgaz that (1) our Governments intended to respect the territorial integrity of Spanish Morocco providing Spain maintained a neutral status toward the occupation and (2) our Governments would give the most sympathetic consideration to Spanish claims to certain territories in French Morocco.

I informed Mr. Gascoigne that I presumed in the hypothetical eventuality which he was discussing I would be authorized by my Government to make a communication to Orgaz reassuring him concerning American intentions at the same time that the American Ambassador in Madrid80 was making such a communication to the Spanish Government. I added that it seemed to me highly desirable that under the circumstances envisaged assurances should be given both the Spanish and French authorities in Morocco disavowing any territorial aspirations in respect to Moroccan territory. I expressed, however, serious misgivings as to the advisability or the necessity for making any commitment to the Spanish authorities regarding the satisfaction of their territorial aspirations in French Morocco.

Mr. Gascoigne expressed the view that in the absence of some such assurance the Spanish military authorities might very well take matters into their own hands and proceed to the occupation of that part of French Morocco north of the Sebou line to which they had laid claim for so many years with the result that the situation might become most complicated in respect of the occupying forces and might even lead to war between Spain and the occupying country.

I informed Mr. Gascoigne that I did not at this time share his apprehensions. I had just visited Spain and had had the opportunity of talking with our Ambassador there, his Counsellor and the Minister Counsellor of the British Embassy. From what I gathered the general feeling is that Spain was farther than ever removed from the prospect of involvement in the war.

I observed that in the event of an Allied landing in Morocco we might expect Spanish forces in Spanish Morocco to march at once into French Morocco or to maintain an attitude of reserve while awaiting developments and it was to be presumed that the Allies would not make the fatal mistake of attempting an occupation of French Morocco with insufficient forces. Assuming therefore, that such forces would be adequate for their task it was extremely doubtful provided the Spanish Army did not act at once that it would be moved to act after a successful landing and occupation of French Morocco.

Whatever action the Spanish Army might take at the moment of an Allied landing it would appear a reasonable hypothesis that such action would have been determined upon some time in advance. It was considered extremely unlikely that any assurances we might offer to Orgaz would weigh the slightest in the scales of Spanish calculations the more particularly as any decision on the Spanish part to act would have been taken in advance with presumably full account taken of all the possible consequences. The Spanish would themselves have weighed the risks involved in intervening at the time of an Allied landing. They would doubtless take into account that any attempt to advance to the Sebou line for the sole purpose of staking their claim to that territory would involve them in the risks of belligerency which they seemed in the highest degree to avoid. While not minimizing the possibility of Spanish action we should not even estimate that possibility or fail to take into account natural Spanish hesitations to make an overt move should an Allied landing eventuate.

Moreover there was a further consideration of some weight so far as the French were concerned. It was presumed that at the same time that our Governments were conveying to the Spanish Governments evidences of our respective intentions to respect the territorial integrity of Spanish Morocco similar assurances would be given by us at least to the French peoples. Any assurance of our readiness to give sympathetic consideration to Spanish pretensions in French Morocco would tend to vitiate the assurances given the French people. Any sweeping assurances given the Spaniards would certainly become known and would do more than anything else to alienate popular French support which might be essential locally to the success of an Allied landing.

I therefore concluded that any assurances to the Spanish authorities which extended beyond a disavowal of any territorial aspirations with respect to Morocco would be inadvisable for the reason that such assurances would be inexpedient both morally and practically and could serve so far as I could see no useful purpose.

I naturally would not make any démarche whatsoever in the absence of specific instructions.

Childs

79 A. Gascoigne, British Consul General at Tangier.

80 Carlton Hayes.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.0011 European War 1939/25109: Telegram

[Document 617]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 a.m.

201. The Department fully endorses the position taken by you in the conversation reported in your 523 of October 26, 9 p.m. The American Ambassador in Madrid fully comprehends the policy of this Government; that the United States understands and appreciates the desire of the Spanish Government and the Spanish people to remain neutral in the present world crisis and that there is nothing in the policy of the United States itself that would necessitate any departure by the Spanish Government from their neutral purposes. The American Ambassador has been instructed so to state in his official conversations in Madrid.

You are authorized only in case of urgent necessity in your discretion to seek out General Orgaz and orally reassure him as to this attitude of your Government. You may inform your British colleague confidentially in this sense.

With appropriate references you will repeat this telegram to Madrid as Department’s no. 1115.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 740.0011 European War 1939/25109: Telegram

[Document 618]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 a.m.

5381. You should see Eden81 at the earliest moment and explain to him the British Consul General has approached the American Chargé d’Affaires at Tangier as to securing authorization from their respective governments to assure General Orgaz that “(1) our governments intend to respect the territorial integrity of Spanish Morocco providing Spain maintained a neutral status toward the occupation and (2) that our governments would give most sympathetic consideration to Spanish claims to certain territories in French Morocco”. You will point out to Eden that any such assurance as contained in (2) above is entirely contrary to the purposes of this Government for respecting the integrity of the French Empire and that the American Chargé d’Affaires in Tangier has been instructed today to inform his British colleague confidentially that the American Ambassador in Madrid “fully comprehends the policy of this Government; that the United States understands and appreciates the desire of the Spanish Government and the Spanish people to remain neutral in the present world crisis and that there is nothing in the policy of the United States itself that would necessitate any departure by the Spanish Government from their neutral purposes. Furthermore that the American Ambassador has been instructed to so state in his official conversation in Madrid.”

Hull

81 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25177: Telegram

[Document 619]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 30, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received October 30—5:17 p.m.]

6069. We took up immediately with Cadogan82 in Eden’s absence the matter of the report of the official assurances which the British Consul General at Tangier desires to have given to Orgaz (Department’s telegram No. 5381, October 29, 11 a.m.). Cadogan said that there must be some misunderstanding since Gascoigne had been given explicit instructions that he should not encourage Spanish aspirations with respect to French Morocco. He said that point 2 definitely did not represent the views of the British Government and that further instructions to correct the impression would be sent immediately to Gascoigne.

Sir Alexander said that the view of the British Government is that the question of Spanish aspirations for territorial acquisition at the expense of French Morocco is a matter to be settled between France and Spain at an appropriate time. Meanwhile he said the British Government has no intention of compromising the position of either party.

Winant

82 Sir Alexander Cadogan, British Permanent Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 852.00/10196: Telegram

[Document 620]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, October 30, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received October 31—9:58 a.m.]

539. My British colleague has informed me that on October 24 the British Ambassador in Madrid83 repeated to General Franco84 the assurances previously given to Jordana85 that the Allies had no intentions to interfere in the internal affairs of Spain or any designs to violate the territory of Spain including the peninsula and its insular possessions. Hoare is stated to have added that his Government wished to assure Franco that it was not plotting to restore “the Reds” to power in Spain and that it was not encouraging any separatist tendencies.86

Hoare has reported to his Government that although he has given similar assurances to the Spanish authorities on several occasions before, these last appear to have produced a particularly favorable impression.

The Foreign Office has authorized my British colleague to convey similar assurances to General Orgaz and he proposes to do this on November 2 orally and incidentally in the course of a courtesy visit.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

83 Sir Samuel Hoare.

84 Gen. Francisco Franco, Spanish Chief of State.

85 Count Jordana, Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs.

86 For correspondence regarding assurances to Spain, see vol. iii, pp. 248 ff.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.00/2360: Telegram

[Document 621]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 3, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received November 4—1:52 a.m.]

548. After acquainting my British colleague confidentially in the sense of the Department’s telegram 201, October 29, 11 a.m. he informed me he had decided not to convey any assurances on his part to General Orgaz such as he had been authorized to do in his discretion as reported in my 539, October 30, 10 p.m.

He saw Orgaz yesterday who stated he was leaving for Madrid this week for a few days to discuss the Spanish Moroccan budget (he will leave I learn on the 5th).

Concerning maneuvers Orgaz said they would be continued after his return and would take place both in the western part of Spanish Morocco around Larache as well as in the eastern part around Melilla. He explained that since he had become High Commissioner he had not had the opportunity of seeing his troops in the field in any numbers.

He was very cordial and is described as being in the best of humor.

He stated he thought the year [way?] the Allies had gained by the course of the war this year was a great triumph for them.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25321: Telegram

[Document 622]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 8, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 10:15 a.m.]

560. My British colleague called on me a few moments ago to state that he had been yesterday instructed to seek out General Orgaz at 2 a.m. this morning in order to give him certain assurances concerning the peaceful intentions of the British Government toward Spain in connection with the American landing in French North Africa.

He showed me a copy of the statement he had been instructed to read to Orgaz which he said had been drafted by the American and British Government and British Embassy Madrid. He added he had been specifically instructed not to disclose purport of his message from his Government before it had been delivered to anyone including myself.

My British colleague stated that in the absence of Orgaz in Madrid he had delivered the message to General Mugica, Acting High Commissioner, with whom he had succeeded in establishing contact at 2 a.m. as instructed. Mugica evidenced great surprise and is stated to have remarked rather plaintively that it was a pity Orgaz was not in Morocco. He asked where the landings were taking place to which Gascoigne replied that he was not informed. Gascoigne stated to me that in his journey to and from Tetuán the zone appeared quite normal and that this was also the impression of the British Consul in Tetuán.

Inasmuch as the absence of any specific assurance from the American representatives in Spanish North Africa such as I was authorized to make by the Department’s 20187 might be misinterpreted in view of the assurances made by my British colleague, I am proceeding at once to Tetuán to convey them to Mugica.

Childs

87 Dated October 29, 11 a.m., p. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 616 and Doc. 617].

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25322: Telegram

[Document 623]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 8, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 9:58 p.m.]

563. 560, November 8, 10 a.m. After vainly seeking even a doorman at the High Commissariat in Tetuán, in order to learn the whereabouts of General Mugica or someone in authority, he was finally found in his home.

He received me most pleasantly. I stated I understood General Orgaz was in Madrid and that I accordingly would convey to him the message I had been authorized to make to the High Commissioner. I then conveyed to him the statement that the United States understands and appreciates the desire of the Spanish Government and people to remain neutral in the present world crisis and that there is nothing in the policy of the United States itself that would necessitate any departure by the Spanish Government from their neutral purposes.

Mugica said the British Consul in Tangier had conveyed the peaceful intentions of the British Government toward Spain early in the morning and that Orgaz, with whom he had been in telephonic communications in Madrid, had stated similar assurances had been given the Spanish Government by Sir Samuel Hoare. He added that Orgaz was returning by plane today and would arrive in Tetuán about 5:30 p.m.

Mugica was perfectly placid throughout our conversation, he was constantly called during our interview to answer the telephone in another room to receive reports on the North African situation which were being telephoned to him every few minutes from Melilla and various other places. He said he had just heard we had occupied Safi, Port-Lyautey, Casablanca, Oran and Algiers. He went in search of an atlas and said that the diffusion of operations in such a fashion would ordinarily, in his opinion, have been very dangerous in exposing our forces to so many points of attack, unless we could count on the cooperation by important French elements. He was called again to the phone and came back to say he had just heard of reports that General Giraud had made a statement a few moments ago in Algiers in our behalf and that it was evident his, Mugica’s surmises had been correct and that we had very important French support. I said I had no more authoritative information than he had, but I felt certain we also had forces in very great strength.

Owing to the fact that Tetuán is without electric current except for a few hours in the evening, the news of the landings had not become generally known there even upon my arrival at noon in contrast to Tangier where the news had spread like wildfire after it was received by radio.

There was no traffic on the road between Tangier and Tetuán, either going or coming, other than a few of the regular buses. Tetuán was calm, the streets of the town being filled as usual with the customary throngs of Sunday promenaders.

Unless I am badly deceived, the Spanish will not stir from the Spanish Zone. They appear to have been caught quite unprepared by our action; they seem very much impressed by the rapidity and effectiveness until now of it, and they appear anything but displeased by it.

Tangier remains entirely calm.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00114A European War 1939/100: Telegram

[Document 624]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 9, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received November 10—1:32 p.m.]

573. The British Consul in Tetuán informs me that an American plane was forced to land near Tetuán yesterday with a crew of 11 who have been brought into a barracks in Tetuán by the Spanish authorities. There is a report also from the British Consul in Melilla which is not yet confirmed that three American planes made a forced landing at Tistuten yesterday. One was said to be able to leave with the crews of the others but the planes were reported to have previously dropped 15 parachutists who have been rounded up and detained by the Spanish.

I am approaching the authorities in Tetuán tomorrow to learn fuller information and to make arrangements for their welfare.

In the past the British have arranged with the Spanish for the release of British airmen similarly brought down in Spanish Morocco as against German and Italian aviators who have made forced landings and who have been released. It is suggested the Department may desire to take up with the British Foreign Office the question of arranging that in future the release of American and British interned aviators in Spanish Morocco against Axis personnel should be undertaken in concert.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00114A European War 1939/104: Telegram

[Document 625]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 10, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received 11:20 p.m.]

582. My 573. I asked for an appointment last evening with Orgaz for this morning which was accorded me without delay. He received me at noon. Before enquiring concerning the interned American aviators I thought it appropriate to state that I fully appreciated the difficulty and delicacy of his position at the present time and that he might count on my full cooperation in approaching our common problems with complete understanding and my desire to resolve them with the least possible difficulty.

Orgaz replied he had just returned from Madrid where he had been with the Generalissimo when the assurances of President Roosevelt had been conveyed to the latter.88 In as much as he realized that these assurances applied to Spanish Morocco, he was not surprised by my assurances.

I observed that we had been associated together over a period of more than a year during which time we had exchanged views with perfect frankness. I had had the privilege of having not only formal relations with him but that we had dealt with problems together in the informal atmosphere of friends. I added I hoped this would continue.

He replied that he fully reciprocated my feelings, that the times were indeed most difficult and that there would be obstacles to overcome but he had no doubt we would successfully overcome them.

I said that we had had certain exchanges of views regarding the economic problem of Spanish North Africa and that I hoped he would feel free to raise with me at any time the solution of any particular problem he might have to overcome in this regard and that he would have my backing in these matters pending the decision of my Government concerning the entering into negotiations at Madrid for the correlation of the economic needs of this area with those of the peninsula.

Orgaz replied that his immediate problems were not economic. He said that “where I need the backing of your Government and yourself is in the preservation of a correct and strict neutrality in Spanish North Africa” which he intended to maintain and I could render him the greatest service in assisting him to that end. He added by way of illustration that he hoped there would be a check on the activities of “American agents”.

I inquired as to what particularly he had in mind in that connection. I motioned toward Booth89 who was present as interpreter and said that I assumed he was not making reference to the activities of the Petroleum Attaché.

He smiled broadly and threw up his hands in remonstrance remarking that that was farthest from his thoughts. He added that what he had in mind was that we should refrain from adding to his difficulties by propaganda amongst the natives in particular or publicity activities which might incite the population (there is no doubt that these authorities are concerned by the ebullition of public opinion in our favor particularly amongst the Republican elements). I said that he might count on my loyal and sincere efforts to cooperate with him in the direction he had indicated.

I then said that I had a few matters of incidental importance to take up with him and inquired whether I was trespassing on his time. He answered in substance that whatever I had to discuss with him was of importance to him and that his time was mine. I then referred to the draft of a statement he had submitted to me a few days previously giving publicity to our petroleum shipments. I remarked that Booth and I found this statement in general quite satisfactory. Orgaz said he regretted that since sending me his letter the situation had changed in these last few days and he preferred that any publicity be suspended for the time being in line with his desire to avoid anything that might be suggestive of propaganda. Not feeling the moment propitious for pressing this question, I answered that I did not think that there would be any objection either from Mr. Booth or from me as to the suspension of this question for the time being.

I then said that I had heard there were several parties of American aviators who had been obliged to make forced landings in Spanish Moroccan territory and I asked if full details might be given me, if I might have the opportunity of visiting any men who might be found in Tetuán and of sending a representative to see any others elsewhere.

Orgaz replied that some 54 Americans had landed in Spanish Morocco of whom 9 were in Tetuán and the others in Targuist, halfway between Tetuán and Melilla (according to a memorandum later given me there appear to be 3 captains, 5 lieutenants and 42 soldiers at Targuist). He gave me the fullest possible assurances that everything would be done for their welfare and added that I or any member of the staff of the Legation would be given access to them if I would give my word that we would make no effort to assist them to escape. I immediately gave him this assurance. He emphasized that naturally these men would not be treated as prisoners but as internees.

I asked if he would accord them liberty of movement and he said he would if they would give their word not to escape.

I asked if it might be possible for these men to come to Tangier and he replied that this would not be possible. I have hopes, however, that it might be possible to arrange this a little later. He stated that they would either be concentrated for the time being in Tetuán or [in Xauen?] but that they would under the conditions mentioned be permitted to have a certain liberty of movement in the district where they might be installed.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

88 For text of President Roosevelt’s message to General Franco, see vol. iii, p. 306; for General Franco’s reply, see telegram No. 1766, November 12, noon, from the Ambassador in Spain, ibid., p. 308.

89 Walter B. Booth, Jr.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00114A European War 1939/102: Telegram

[Document 626]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 10, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received November 10—3:56 p.m.]

584. The 19 American aviators and soldiers mentioned in my 582 of November 10 landed at the air drome in Tetuán early on November 8 after losing their way and running short of petrol. They were forced off their course by AA fire. Their plane was landed in perfect condition and is now under guard of the Spanish authorities.

The Lieutenant in command informed me privately that it was his understanding that he was not to destroy his instruments in a neutral country and unfortunately he had not undertaken this. The plane is a troop carrier.

Please instruct urgently what representations if any I should make concerning the status of this plane.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00114A European War 1939/103: Telegram

[Document 627]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 10, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received November 10—9:25 p.m.]

585. My 584, November 10, 10 p.m. General Rios Capape, Commander of the military district of Tetuán personally accompanied me in visiting the American internees and introduced me to the officers of his garrison who were looking after the welfare of the men. He and his officers could not have been more cordial in their assurances to accord our men every possible amenity.

I asked General Capape whether it would be agreeable if Colonel Johnson, our Military Attaché, or one of his assistants might visit the men and he immediately replied that any member of the Legation would be given every possible facility to visit these men and to provide for their welfare at any time. Booth is proceeding to Targuist tomorrow to look after the welfare of the American internees there.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.00114A European War 1939/102: Telegram

[Document 628]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, November 11, 1942—5 p.m.

215. Your 584, November 10, 10 p.m. War Department requests that you ask Spanish authorities urgently to place strict guard around grounded American planes. Instructions are being sent direct to the Military Attaché with regard to the instruments which the planes carried.

The Department would appreciate your views as soon as possible as to how far you feel you could go in endeavoring to obtain the release of the crews without raising difficulties or complications with Spanish officials.

Hull

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00114A European War 1939/108: Telegram

[Document 629]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 12, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 9:55 p.m.]

602. Department’s 215, November 11. I addressed a note to General Orgaz which was delivered to him at noon asking that a strict guard be placed around these planes.

I have also seen Castillo90 (see my 590, November 1191 ) and repeated the request. He said I need have no fears on the subject that the planes would be put in hangars and carefully guarded and sealed.

I asked if it might not be possible for me to place the Legation’s seals on the planes. He said he did not know what international law was on the subject and I said I did not either as such problems were so new. He said he was seeing Orgaz in 2 hours and would raise the question and hoped it might be possible to accede to this request.

I said I had another matter to mention and that was the request Orgaz had made of me that we cooperate with him in maintaining the neutrality of Spanish Morocco by refraining from activities amongst the native population and other activities likely to disturb the local situation. I said I had cautioned my staff, had informed them of the assurances I had given both Orgaz and he himself and that some questions had arisen in our minds concerning the extent of the assurances which were being sought and obtained from the Axis representatives. I emphasized the importance of this. Castillo referred to my mention yesterday of the two civil members of the Italian Armistice Commission and said that they were not interned at Ceuta and that orders had been given that all members of the Armistice Commissions from French North Africa whether civil or otherwise be interned.

I said that I knew he had many matters to consider but one to which I hoped he would devote some thought in the immediate future was that of our interned aviators. I recalled that the Spanish authorities had released a number of British aviators interned in Spanish Morocco against Axis aviators who had made forced landings on Spanish protected territory (I did not think the present moment propitious for going into details with Castillo but it seems to me that we might eventually effect the release of our aviators against the release of the German and Italian Armistice Commission members who may be interned in Spanish North Africa). Castillo said he would give this the most favorable consideration and that he thought the Spanish Government would be quite disposed to effect any arrangement which might be found mutually satisfactory to the American Government on the one hand in the case of the American interned aviators and the Axis Government on the other in the case of their interned belligerent forces.

I do not believe that there is any possibility at the present time of effecting the release of these aviators on any other basis than an exchange against Axis interned personnel. I believe that with patience we may succeed in effecting their release pari passu against Axis nationals. This has been the experience of the British (see my despatch 967, August 1192 ). Seven British aviators have lately been released against the release of seven Axis aviators by Spain.

Childs

90 Cristobel del Castillo, Spanish Minister from the Ministry for Foreign Affairs delegated to Spanish Morocco to serve as special liaison officer between the foreign diplomatic and consular establishments in Tangier and the High Commissariat in Tetuán.

91 Not printed.

92 Not printed.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.00114A European War 1939/112: Telegram

[Document 630]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 13, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 10:50 p.m.]

611. Castillo left for Madrid this morning for a few days. My Spanish colleague informed me this morning the High Commissioner had been greatly impressed by the assurances I had given him.

Concerning the American planes (my 602, November 12) the Spanish Consul said these planes would be as Castillo had informed me, carefully guarded and sealed but it would not be possible to accede to the suggestion I had made that we also seal them.

Concerning our American aviators, it was suggested Washington authorize our Embassy in Madrid to discuss this question with the Spanish Foreign Office and that we propose their exchange against German or Italian prisoners who may be in our hands. It was stated that it would not be possible to exchange them against members of the Axis Armistice Commissions as the two categories were entirely different and the members of those Commissions who have taken refuge in Spanish Morocco and have then proceeded [to] Ceuta and Melilla were now in Spanish territory and had not been interned.

When I pressed my Spanish colleague for more precise information as to their status, he was evasive and spoke of the fact that their status was not comparable with our aviators as the former were civilians and were in Spanish national territory.

I recalled the very explicit assurances Castillo had given me that the members of the Commissions whether civil or military would be interned in Ceuta or Melilla. I said that there could be no misunderstandings on this subject as I had already made an observation on the presence of two civilian members of the Italian Armistice Commission here whom Castillo had assured me would be immediately interned.

My Spanish colleague was extremely friendly and conciliatory and stated that this would be taken up at once with the High Commissioner by telephone. I emphasized to the Spanish Consul my belief that there should be no difficulty in the exchange of our aviators against at least military members of the Axis Commissions who might have sought refuge in Spanish Morocco. I pointed out that in fact I considered my Government might reasonably ask for an exchange of these aviators against members of the Axis Commissions whether civilian or military, inasmuch as such members were of military age.

The Spanish Consul stated he did not believe there were many military members of the Commissions but I contested this statement remarking that in the case of the German Commission, practically the entire personnel if not all were military. I ended the conversation on this subject by remarking I felt certain my Government would expect the Spanish to release a number of the American aviators now interned against an equivalent number of the German and Italian Commission members who might have sought refuge in Spanish Morocco and who might be allowed to pass into Spain or out of the control of the Spanish authorities.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 811.248/777: Telegram

[Document 631]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 13, 1942—noon.
[Received 2:14 p.m.]

612. My 611, November 13, 11 a.m. In my conversation with my Spanish colleague he said he would like to make a personal suggestion to me in the interests of our good relations which were being cemented by events. He suggested that my Government offer the two American planes which had been obliged to make a forced landing as a gift to the Spanish Moroccan Air Force.

I thanked him for his suggestion and the spirit animating it but made no comment other than to say that it was an interesting suggestion.

The most practical aspect of the suggestion to me from our point of view is in the possibility that might be afforded by such a gift of stating to the Spanish authorities at the same time that while we are desirous of making this gift in the interests of the friendship between the two Governments we find it necessary for military reasons to ask that the Spanish authorities return certain equipment possessed by the planes which represent equipment with which only the American military authorities are familiar. The gift of these planes might give us an excellent opportunity of retrieving by a formula such as that suggested or some other secret equipment installed in these planes.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State 740.00114A European War 1939/113: Telegram

[Document 632]

The Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) to the Secretary of State

Madrid, undated.
[Received November 14, 1942—9 p.m.]

1778. The following telegram has been sent to Tangier.

November 13, 2 p.m. Your 573 to Department November 9, 11 p.m. British Embassy in Madrid has obtained release and departure of British aviators forced down in Spain and this Embassy will attempt to do likewise in similar cases.

There is a possibility that American aviators now in Morocco might be released if you make representation to that end. If not suggest you telegraph following information to me: name in full, branch of service, rank and serial numbers.

Repeated to Department.

Hayes

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes) 740.00114A European War 1939/113: Telegram

[Document 633]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Spain (Hayes)

Washington, November 18, 1942—10 p.m.

1250. Your 1778, November 14. War Department is greatly interested in the maintenance of friendly relations with Spain at this time and has expressed the desire to avoid any action which might possibly lead to friction or give rise to an incident. In any discussions you may have, therefore, on the subject of the aviators and their planes, you should bear in mind the War Department’s wishes and carefully refrain from any expression which might prove to be a source of irritation.

Repeated to Tangier as Dept’s 234.

Hull

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25811: Telegram

[Document 634]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 18, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received November 19—3:25 a.m.]

652. I called on Orgaz today with Colonel Johnson to give the High Command account of our visit to French Morocco. He was keenly interested and appeared much impressed.

We asked concerning the significance of the partial mobilization in Spain. He emphasized it extended only to Spain and not to Spanish Morocco where not one soldier had been sent since our operations.

Regarding our internees he expressed regret that living conditions were not comparable to those in the United States but he assured me he was doing everything possible for them. The two planes belonging to the soldiers landing at Targuist might be brought to Tetuán for better protection. The sick would be permitted to come to Tangier as I had requested. He thought the best solution for the internees would be for them to be transferred to Spain where greater facilities existed for their housing and feeding. I said I was in correspondence with Washington concerning their possible exchange for internee members of the Axis Armistice Commissions. He replied that was a question which would have to be settled in Madrid (I thought it useful to keep actively before him our interest in the Commission members).

I recalled his assurances to me concerning the maintenance of the neutrality of Spanish Morocco and my own assurances of cooperation. He interrupted to remark that two responsibilities were involved, that he had to think not only of the neutrality of Spanish Morocco but also that of Spain.

I said I had given the strictest injunctions to my staff with a view to the fulfillment in letter and spirit of my assurances particularly as concerned propaganda among the natives. He would realize that there would be efforts to muddy the water between United States [and Spain?] on the part of the Axis in particular. I cited the case of a Spanish officer which had been brought to my attention who had been heard to say that we were in Morocco to dispossess the natives. I said that the Germans had a weekly news bulletin in Arabic which we had never attempted to imitate which was still continuing publication and I felt he would agree we might legitimately combat propaganda directed specifically against United States among the natives. I thought an excellent means to that end not inconsistent with my assurances to him would be a publication in Arabic of the President’s letter to the Sultan.93 He expressed his instant concurrence observing that he did not consider that this could possibly be productive of the agitation he wished to avoid.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

93 Department of State Bulletin, November 28, 1942, p. 961.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 811.248/791: Telegram

[Document 635]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 22, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 6:07 p.m.]

681. The Chief of the Diplomatic Cabinet of the High Commissariat at Tetuán telephoned on behalf of General Orgaz to state that the three American planes which made forced landings in Spanish Morocco on November 8 have been sent this morning to Madrid in accordance with instructions of the Spanish Government.

I asked how they were sent and the statement was made that no details were available.

Repeated to Madrid.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.7961/26: Telegram

[Document 636]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, November 26, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received 11 p.m.]

703. Following note dated November 25th received today from the Spanish High Commissariat.

“I have the honor to inform you that on the 24th instant from 2:30 p.m. until 5 p.m. 34 motored [three 4–motored?] planes have passed over Ceuta singly and later another also singly and nine bombing planes in formation all American over the port and the fortress of Hacho.

On the same date at 3:45 p.m. a fighter American plane flew over Punta Malabata circling over the cape and flying thence in a westerly direction.

Finally at 11 a.m. of the 25th instant fighters of American nationality flew over the city of Alcazarquivir at very low altitude returning afterwards to the French zone.

His Excellency, the High Commissioner, has asked me to inform you of these repeated violations of the above mentioned territories and to express together with his energetic protest the request that you communicate to whom it may concern the necessity of avoiding in future incursions of this kind that may provoke incidents of which the High Commissariat will not consider itself in any way responsible.”

When I called on the High Commissioner today to present Consul Flood, General Orgaz mentioned the above note and said that in addition 26 planes had flown within the last few days over Larache. He added that there had been several previous flights by American planes over Melilla which he had not brought to my notice as he considered they had been made in ignorance.

I expressed skepticism concerning the American identity of these planes but he was very pleasantly insistent on this point. I said that if they were American planes I felt sure that the flights had been made entirely in ignorance. I said that I would communicate the protest immediately to my Government which would I feel sure bring the facts to the attention of the proper authorities.

Orgaz received us very affably and assured Flood that he hoped that he would call on him if there was anything he needed to facilitate his task as Consul at Ceuta.

At Colonel Johnson’s request who had just returned from French Morocco I informed Orgaz that our Military Attaché had asked me to state that owing to the necessity of avoiding too great a congestion of our troops at Casablanca there would probably be a movement shortly to spread these troops out more to the north but that he should not be concerned in any way should such a movement take place.

Orgaz asked how far north they would advance. I replied I was not informed.

He smilingly suggested that they might have been dispersed south rather than north. I replied that the movement north from Casablanca was not only a perfectly normal one in the interest of decreasing the concentration at Casablanca but that the troops would be more conveniently disposed for movement if necessary eastward.

He seemed entirely satisfied with this explanation. I commented to Orgaz on the general calmness in the Spanish Zone. He said that it was true and that he had much less work to do in consequence as conditions were much less disturbed than they had been some 2 weeks ago. He added that this was true except as concerned Tangier where the situation was usually in a ferment, he did not know why.

Repeated to Madrid. Paraphrase to Casablanca for WTF.94

Childs

94 Western Task Force, one of three subordinate commands comprising the Allied Force, North Africa; it was commanded by Maj. Gen. George S. Patton, and at this time its headquarters was located at Casablanca.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 881.7961/26: Telegram

[Document 637]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, December 3, 1942—5 p.m.

248. Your 703, November 26. You may inform General Orgaz that the War Department has instructed the appropriate American military authorities not to permit American planes to fly over Spanish territory in North Africa.

Hull

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard) 851R.20/42½

[Document 638]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard)

Washington, December 3, 1942.

Participants: General Hull, Operations Division, War Department

Mr. Murray95

Mr. Villard

General Hull came in to discuss a number of questions which had arisen in connection with our military occupation of French North Africa.

General Hull described a decision arrived at by the military authorities to move a token force of American troops northward from the Casablanca area as far as the Sebou River in order to safeguard the lines of communication between Morocco and Algeria. This force would be stationed on the north bank of the Sebou River near Souk-el-Arba and to the east of that point. The purpose of the move would be to forestall the possibility that Spanish troops might seize the present moment to move south from Spanish Morocco and establish themselves at the line of the Sebou River, thus occupying an area long coveted by Spain.

General Hull said that he did not anticipate trouble from the Spaniards in this respect but that it was necessary to take into account the possibility that our communication lines by rail and road through that area might be cut off by some such move on the part of Spanish forces. General Hull explained that the American troops which would be moved up to the Sebou River constituted no threat to Spanish territory and would in fact remain at a distance of approximately 25 miles from Spanish Morocco. In the event that any alarm were manifested by the Spanish authorities, or any questions asked of us as to the significance of the move, we were authorized to state that the maneuver contained no threat whatever to Spanish interests and was merely a part of the general deployment of American forces in their task of occupying French Morocco.

Asked whether the War Department feared any military moves by the Spanish authorities, General Hull replied that there was no evidence at present along those lines. The Spanish situation was a puzzle, however, and until it was solved we have to be particularly careful. If Spanish troops should cross over into French Morocco and take up positions along the Sebou River it would be necessary to eject them by force, even if that involved us in hostilities with Spain. It would not be possible to permit Spanish occupation of this strategic region as it would interfere with our vital lines of communication between Casablanca and Oran.

95 Wallace Murray, Adviser on Political Relations.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.0011 European War 1939/26567a: Telegram

[Document 639]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, December 14, 1942—10 p.m.

267. In conversation with Ambassador Hayes on December 7, Foreign Minister Jordana suggested that a good effect would be produced if the Commander in Chief of the American forces should call upon General Orgaz in Spanish Morocco. This suggestion was passed on to the War Department, which has now signified its intention to ask General Patton to call upon General Orgaz. Although it was proposed that General Eisenhower should call upon General Orgaz, the latter will appreciate that it would be difficult for Eisenhower to absent himself from the theatre of war during the present military operations. General Patton has therefore been designated in his stead, but General Eisenhower will hope to give himself the pleasure of calling on General Orgaz at an early date.

You are therefore directed to make the necessary arrangements with General Orgaz and inform General Eisenhower by direct communication to Murphy,96 bearing in mind the following views expressed by the Department to the War Department at the request of the latter. These views are for your confidential information and guidance.

(1) This should be a courtesy call of a purely military nature and with no diplomatic implications. It should be effected simply, in the most normal way, and with as little ceremony as possible.

(2) It is understood that this step will be taken without consultation with the British, but that the British will be informed of the decision by our General Staff. You should not make any communication on the subject to your British colleague except as you may deem necessary after the event.

Report developments to the Department. Madrid advised.

Hull

96 Robert D. Murphy, Chief Civil Affairs Officer of Allied Forces in French North Africa.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/26601: Telegram

[Document 640]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 17, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received December 18—10:40 a.m.]

849. The following telegram has been sent to Algiers.

96, December 17, 11 p.m. For Murphy. In accordance with Department’s telegram number 267, December 14, 11 [10] p.m. I saw General Orgaz today and stated that General Patton desired to pay him a visit of courtesy. I explained that General Eisenhower would have liked to call on him but he would doubtless appreciate that it was difficult for General Eisenhower to absent himself at this time but he hoped to give himself the pleasure of calling on Orgaz at an early date.

Orgaz said he was leaving for Madrid on the 19th but would return about 23d after which date he would be pleased to receive General Patton. I said that I would be at Orgaz’ disposition upon his return in order to make whatever arrangements might be necessary.

It is possible Orgaz may wish to offer a luncheon to General Patton. If he does not, I shall be pleased to arrange such a luncheon at the Legation to which Orgaz would be invited if this is agreeable. Repeated to Madrid and to Department as my number 849. Childs.

I mentioned to Orgaz before leaving that Ambassador Hayes desires to meet him. Orgaz stated he had hoped to call on him on his last visit but he had too little time.

If it were possible on this occasion, he would do so but he was not certain.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/26663: Telegram

[Document 641]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 22, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received 10:30 p.m.]

881. My 849. While in French Morocco in accordance with the Department’s instructions I discussed with General Patton the subject of the call on Orgaz. Patton at first thought it would be appropriate for me to be present at the interview but later said he had referred to his instructions and he thought the meeting should be confined to him, Major Bernadoni as interpreter and Colonel Eddy the Acting Military Attaché. Patton also said he wished the meeting to be arranged as near the frontier as possible where he would be met by Orgaz but that he would have no objection to proceeding to a point inland near Larache if Orgaz so desired.

I believe that in the light of my 880,97 the occasion would be a propitious one for General Patton to raise with Orgaz the question of possible military and other aid to Spanish Morocco in the event the Axis should attack Spain, Spanish possessions or Spanish protected territories.

Repeated to Madrid. True reading to Algiers.

Childs

97  Infra.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 881.00/2385: Telegram

[Document 642]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 22, 1942—midnight.
[Received December 23—5:15 p.m.]

880. Potous, the new civil interventor in Tangier, ex-Spanish consular officer who served many years ago in New Orleans, Jacksonville and Philadelphia, lunched with me today.

He said when he had been offered the position he had remonstrated with General Orgaz stating that he had no sympathies whatever with the Falange and that he was a monarchist. Potous added Orgaz had replied “I am a monarchist also”, and had assured him his political attitude did not in any way stand in the way of his appointment.

Potous then went on to say that Jordana’s statement in Lisbon regarding Spain’s neutrality had been extremely welcome by Spaniards. He remarked that Spain desired above all things to keep out of the war, that 90 per cent of the Spanish people were against the Falange and that sympathy for the Allies was very widespread.

I asked Potous what Spain’s attitude would be in the event of a German attack. He answered that Spain and the Army would defend itself vigorously. He said “We are determined to defend ourselves from attack from whatever quarter it comes. We shall fight you if you attempt to invade us and our resistance to the Axis will not be halfhearted”.

In the course of the conversation he said significantly “If the Axis attacks us we shall count on aid from you and Great Britain”. Potous assured me that both Orgaz and Uriarte98 are very friendly disposed to us and that they are both most anxious to maintain Spain’s neutrality. He emphasized specifically that Uriarte and Orgaz inferentially were more friendly disposed to us than to the Axis.

I asked him if German pressure had not been very strong recently on Spain and he said that Germany was doing everything possible to stir up the Falange against us but he did not believe it would succeed. The above are the frankest and most explicit statements made to me by a Spanish official since I have been in Tangier. I believe Potous is very friendly disposed to us and that he could be a most useful intermediary in case of necessity. See my immediately following telegram.98a

True reading to Madrid, Algiers and Casablanca.

Childs

98 Gen. Jenaro Uriarte, Delegate in Tangier of the Spanish High Commissioner in Morocco.

98a No. 881, printed supra.

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/26699: Telegram

[Document 643]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 24, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received December 25—7:35 a.m.]

888. Castillo, Spanish Minister here, strongly intimated to my Belgian colleague a few days ago that the Spanish Government would welcome the presence of strong American forces in proximity to the Spanish Moroccan frontier as a counter-weight to the German forces in German occupied France on the Spanish border.

Repeated to Madrid and Casablanca.

Childs

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/26831: Telegram

[Document 644]

The Chargé at Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, December 30, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received 9:40 p.m.]

926. My 881, December 22, 10 p.m. General Orgaz informed me this afternoon he would be very happy to meet General Patton at the frontier at Arbaoua on any day between now and January 8th with the exception of January 1st, 3rd and 6th. He is leaving for Madrid the 8th. When questioned he expressed a preference for the 4th or 5th but stated he would make his plans to conform with the convenience of General Patton. Orgaz said he wished [to give?] to General Patton and the members of his staff who may accompany him a luncheon at Larache where he and General Patton would be able to talk together. He asked me to let him know as soon as possible the date and approximate hour for the rendezvous at the frontier and the names, rank and order of seniority of the accompanying officers.

Orgaz stated he expected I would also be present and that I would also be his guest for lunch. I thanked him and stated it was my understanding the meeting was a purely military one and for that reason I would be unable to accept his kind invitation. He was insistent and said “I expect you to be present if only in a private capacity”. In view of his insistence I felt I might give offense and that he might misinterpret my insistence on being unable to be present. I therefore would appreciate urgently the Department’s instructions.

Orgaz said he would like to be informed by General Patton as to what military ceremonies he might desire and if there were any particular dishes he could offer him. I stated it was my understanding the visit was to be effected with as little ceremony as possible and that I would be happy to convey his gracious intentions to General Patton. Orgaz added he had only the simple fare of a soldier to give General Patton but he wished to receive him with all the courtesies and hospitality which a Spanish officer might offer.

I informed him General Patton wished Major Bernadoni, Assistant Military Attaché to be present as interpreter. Silvela, Spanish Consul who speaks perfect English who was acting as interpreter for me will also be present at Orgaz’s orders.

Repeated to Algiers for Murphy, to Casablanca for the necessary information to be telegraphed to us as soon as possible and to Madrid.

Childs

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs) 740.0011 European War 1939/26831: Telegram

[Document 645]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé at Tangier (Childs)

Washington, January 2, 1943—8 p.m.

2. Your 926, December 30, 8 p.m. The Department approves your acceptance of Orgaz’ invitation.

Hull

The Chargé in Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/27000: Telegram

[Document 646]

The Chargé in Tangier (Childs) to the Secretary of State

Tangier, January 4, 1942 [1943]—11 p.m.
[Received January 8—11:12 a.m.]

19. My 7 January 2, 8 p.m.99 General Patton met General Orgaz at Arbaoua at noon today and was escorted by Orgaz to Larache where luncheon was served. In addition to a number of Orgaz’ staff officers General Ninzian of the Larache garrison and General Bartolomeo of the Ceuta garrison were present.

The meeting took place in a spirit of unusual cordiality for Orgaz and Silvela, Spanish Consul present with me stated Orgaz was exceedingly pleased. I personally have never found Orgaz as informal and affable as he showed himself today. Aside from the usual exchange of mutual good wishes General Patton emphasized to Orgaz the assurances President Roosevelt had given concerning the absence of any territorial ambition on the part of the United States in North Africa incident to our military operations in this area.

One of the most notable statements made by Orgaz was the expression of his opinion that General Patton had no more important problem to face in French Morocco than that involving the relations of his troops with the native population. Orgaz emphasized that this of course, was a matter wholly concerning General Patton but he was moved to make the observation as one soldier to another in the spirit of mutual frankness which had characterized their meeting. General Patton stated he fully appreciated this and had taken all possible measures to guard against incidents on the part of the troops with the natives. General Patton asked if Orgaz had heard of any unfavorable comment concerning these relations or if any particular untoward incidents had been brought to his notice. Orgaz replied that on the contrary he had heard nothing but the most favorable reports of the behavior of American troops (this statement is particularly interesting by reason of the widespread Axis propaganda in Tangier and Spanish Morocco reporting the mistreatment of Moorish women and the native population by our forces).

In my opinion General Patton’s visit was most successful and made the most favorable impression on Orgaz and his officers.

Repeated to Madrid, Casablanca and to Algiers.

Childs

99 Not printed.

Muscat and Oman:Muscat and Oman:

Contents

Negotiations concerning use by the United States of air bases in Muscat and Oman (Documents 647-648)

Negotiations concerning use by the United States of air bases in Muscat and OmanNegotiations concerning use by the United States of air bases in Muscat and Oman

[647] The Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell) to the Secretary of State

New Delhi, August 23, 1942. [Received September 14, 1942.]

811.248/720

[648] The Secretary of State to the Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell)

Washington, November 4, 1942—6 p.m.

811.248/720: Telegram

The Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell) to the Secretary of State 811.248/720

[Document 647]

The Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell) to the Secretary of State

No. 26 New Delhi, August 23, 1942.
[Received September 14, 1942.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my telegram No. 373 of June 15, 1942, 5 p.m.,1 in which I repeated a telegram sent to the Legation at Cairo on June 9, 1942, reporting that the Secretary to the Government of India in the External Affairs Department had suggested informally the advisability of the Government of the United States making diplomatic arrangements with the Sultan of Muscat for facilities to be availed of in Muscat by the American Ferry Command. It was reported that, according to the Secretary, the Sultan, who had in the past been aloof and easily offended in his dealings with the British, was being cooperative and that for that reason … any American personnel sent there should be carefully chosen. This was particularly true with respect to Salalah where the Sultan was in summer residence, a retreat where he had in the past often sought refuge from the British.

In my telegram No. 379 of July [June] 16, 1942, 9 p.m.,1 I reported further information received from the Secretary to the effect that the Sultan was concerned with the unheralded arrival at Salalah of four employees of the Pan American Airways who stated they had come to make the necessary arrangements for ground facilities. A copy of a self-explanatory aide-mémoire on the subject of June 13, 1942, handed me by the Joint Secretary in the External Affairs Department is enclosed.

In compliance with the instructions contained in the Department’s telegram No. 321 of July 3, 1942,1 I asked the Secretary whether the Government of India would be willing to instruct the British Representative in Muscat to approach the Sultan in this connection on behalf of the American Government. After several days I received an affirmative answer and addressed a note to the Secretary on July 8, 1942, expressing the desire of obtaining the Sultan’s approval of facilities for the United States Army similar to those already accorded to the British, including the use of airfields in Muscat by planes under the jurisdiction of the United States Army and the landing of personnel, both military and civil, required to service the planes, to establish and operate radio and weather stations. A copy of this note is enclosed.

As reported in my telegram No. 514 of July 25, 1942, 1 p.m.,2 there was some delay on the part of the Government of India in forwarding the instructions to the British Representative in Muscat due to the necessity of consulting with the British military authorities in Cairo regarding the radio and weather reporting facilities requested. Difficulty was also experienced in obtaining air transportation for the British Political Agent from Muscat to Salalah. Ordinarily only a very junior assistant political agent is kept at Salalah.

However, I have now received a note dated August 21, 1942, from the Joint Secretary describing the results of the Political Agent’s discussions and correspondence with His Highness the Sultan, and giving the Joint Secretary’s helpful comments and offer of assistance. A copy of this communication is transmitted herewith. As the Department will note, His Highness has agreed to the facilities requested but has made five conditions upon which their granting is contingent. The Joint Secretary believes these conditions are usual and reasonable and states that the British Political Agent and Assistant Political Agent would, if the Department so desires, be responsible for the conduct of American personnel as they are for that of Royal Air Force.

It is respectfully requested that Department instruct me by telegraph as to whether the Sultan’s conditions are acceptable. Meanwhile it is understood that there will be no difficulty in obtaining the necessary facilities in Muscat on a provisional basis.

Respectfully yours,

George R. Merrell

[Enclosure 1]

The Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the External Affairs Department (Weightman) to the American Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell)

Aide-Mémoire

On the 6th of June 1942 Mr. Merrell was informed that the Government of India had received intimation that the U. S. Ferry Command intended to establish staging parties at aerodromes in Muscat territory on the Southern Arabian air route, i. e. at Salalah, Ras-al-Hadd, and possibly Masirah. Mention was made of the treaty relations that exist between the U. S. Government and the Sultan of Muscat3 and it was suggested that it would be well to arrange that before U. S. base troops were sent to aerodromes in Muscat territory the U. S. Government should seek His Highness the Sultan’s formal consent. It was explained that so far as the British Government was concerned the prior consent of His Highness the Sultan was obtained to the construction of aerodromes, the operation of aircraft from them and the location of ground personnel to maintain and protect them. It is understood that Mr. Merrell has addressed the State Department accordingly.

2. Information has now been received from Salalah that four Pan American Airways personnel have arrived there stating that they have come to establish a staging post for a P. A. A. service between Khartoum and Karachi, that more of their men are expected within a few days with wireless equipment, that they expect to carry private passengers if bookings of Government priority passages permit this, and that they wish to negotiate with the Sultan of Muscat for a camping site, local labour and supply of provisions.

3. The report suggest that the Sultan of Muscat is concerned at the unheralded arrival of this personnel and at the moment insists that the men should “undertake to be associated with the Royal Air Force and to be bound by his rules for the Royal Air Force”.

4. The statement made by the Pan American Airways personnel at Salalah in regard to the intention of the Company to carry private passengers if bookings of Government priority passages permit is at variance with the assurance given by Colonel Louis Johnson4 at the meeting held in the External Affairs Department on the 27th April, 1942 to the effect that P. A. A. come under complete military ownership and control and that its operations are determined absolutely by the War Department, and that nothing now done will have or is intended to have any effect in establishing commercial rights.

[File copy not signed]
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
New Delhi, 13 June 1942.

[Enclosure 2]

The American Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell) to the Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the External Affairs Department (Weightman)

No. 20 New Delhi, July 8, 1942.

Sir: I have the honor to refer to conversations held recently at the Foreign Office regarding the use by planes and personnel under the jurisdiction of the United States Army of airfields at Salalah, Ras-al-Hadd and Masirah, Muscat, and to the Joint Secretary’s aide-mémoire on this subject of June 6 [13], 1942.

I have the further honor to inform you that I have now been directed by my Government to request the Government of India to be good enough to instruct the British Representative in Muscat to approach His Highness the Sultan of Muscat in this matter on behalf of the Government of the United States. The desire of my Government would be to obtain His Highness’ approval of facilities for the United States Army similar to those already accorded to the British, including the use of airfields in Muscat by planes under the jurisdiction of the United States Army and the landing of the minimum personnel, both military and civil, required to service the planes, to establish and operate weather and radio stations.

The information relative to the new service as obtained from the American War Department which follows is submitted in order that it may be utilized in forwarding instructions to the Representative of Great Britain:

Brigadier General S. W. Fitzgerald, United States Army, has been designated to take command of ferry operations in the Middle East and Africa and will have under his supervision and direct control the operations of the Pan American Airways in these areas. The proposed service is considered highly desirable in connection with the transportation of essential military cargo to Karachi, the ferrying of transport planes and the return of ferry pilots.

According to a contractual arrangement with the American War Department, the Pan American Airways will operate flights from Khartoum to Karachi transporting war material and military personnel. In cases where space is available, however, after the essential military requirements have been met, it is desired that the planes be allowed to carry any non official passengers whose travel has been designated as urgently necessary by United States representatives in the region.

In taking up this matter with the Government of India, I am instructed to lay particular emphasis on the importance of this new service to India’s defense.

I have [etc.]

George R. Merrell

[Enclosure 3]

The Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the External Affairs Department (Weightman) to the American Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell)

No. 7195–X/42 New Delhi, 21 August 1942.

Sir: I am directed to refer to your letter No. 20 dated the 8th July, 1942, in regard to the matter of facilities required for the United States Army Air Force in the territories of His Highness the Sultan of Muscat similar to those accorded to the R. A. F. A report has now been received from His Britannic Majesty’s Political Agent in Muscat regarding the result of his discussions and correspondence with His Highness the Sultan and I am to state the position achieved for your information.

2. His Highness the Sultan has agreed to grant to the Government of the United States for the United States Army Airforce facilities similar to those already accorded to the British Government, including specifically the use of aerodromes in Muscat territory by aircraft under the jurisdiction of the United States Army, permission to erect buildings at Salalah, Masirah and Ras-al-Hadd (including Khor Jarama) and to station formations of aircraft at those places. Permission is also accorded to the landing of minimum personnel required to service these aircraft and to the establishment and operation of weather and radio stations, should it be necessary for the United States Army Airforce to duplicate such services already established and operated by the E. A. F. The concessions accorded by His Highness include further the exemption from customs duty of petrol and lubricants for United States of America Army Airforce aircraft and of provisions, stores and fittings imported into Muscat territory for the operation of those aircraft.

3. The Sultan has however made the grant of these facilities subject to certain conditions, which can best be stated in his own words. The five conditions which he wishes to impose are:— (1) “Provided that it is made clear to us as on whom responsibility will rest and who will reply to any question that may arise regarding the conduct of American personnel, etc.

(2) The grant of sales in recognition of grant of these facilities of (a) 200 rifles and 200,000 rounds of ammunition,

(b) 2 machine guns with spare parts and sufficient ammunition,

(c) 4 hand machine guns with spare parts and sufficient ammunition,

(d) Two motor lorries of medium size which are used by military men,

(e) Such medical supplies as may be considered reasonable by our friend the British Government.

(3) An undertaking that compensation will be paid for any damage caused by American personnel or aircraft to our property or the persons or property of our subjects.

(4) An undertaking that American personnel will accept and abide by all our local rules as they are or may be made for their behaviour particularly those regarding the posting of guards for their camp and personnel.

(5) An undertaking that guards of American Camp and personnel supplied by us will be accepted and paid for.”

It would perhaps be well to add some comment on these conditions in the light of experience gained by the Government of India in their relations with the Sultan of Muscat.

4. In regard to condition (1), it is an unfortunate fact that the Sultan’s inherent suspicions of foreigners have been reinforced by certain conduct to which His Highness has taken exception on the part of Pan American Airways personnel who for a time were at Salalah under insufficient supervision and control. The Political Agent advises that His Highness attaches the greatest importance to this condition and that it will be necessary to satisfy him fully in regard to it. The Government of India will be happy to offer their assistance in this matter and, if the Government of the United States so desire, they will be prepared to give an assurance to the Sultan that their Political Agent and Assistant Political Agent in Muscat will act for the U. S. A. Army Airforce in exactly the same manner as they do for the R. A. F. in their relations with the Sultan.

Condition (2) is consistent with the customary practice of Arab Rulers granting facilities in their States to foreign Powers, and the Government of India do not doubt that the United States Government will be content to meet His Highness the Sultan’s requests. Should your Government desire to receive suggestions as to the type and quantity of medical supplies which might be made available to the Sultan the Government of India will be very ready to call for a report from the Political Agent in the light of local conditions and circumstances. It should be added here that on the Political Agent pointing out that the provision of the arms, motor vehicles and medical supplies for which the Sultan asks might involve some delay, the Sultan informed him that he did not regard their supply as being in any way a condition precedent to the grant of the facilities required.

The third, fourth and fifth conditions will, it is assumed, not be regarded as introducing any particular difficulty. The R. A. F. have accepted certain local rules for their behaviour in Muscat territory and in regard to the posting of guards for their camps and personnel, and these have not been found onerous in practice. A copy of the standing orders for personnel of the R. A. F. stationed on the Southern Arabian Aerodromes in Muscat territory is enclosed for your information.5

As for the fifth condition, the Political Agent, Muscat will be instructed to use his influence to ensure that the Sultan will not make unreasonable demands in respect of the number of local guards to be employed or the pay which they are to receive.

5. I am to enquire whether His Highness the Sultan’s conditions are acceptable to the Government of the United States and if so to request your agreement to the Political Agent being instructed to inform the Sultan accordingly.

I have [etc.]

H. Weightman

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

1 Not printed.

2 Not printed.

3 Treaty of amity and commerce, signed at Muscat, September 21, 1833, Hunter Miller (ed.), Treaties and Other International Acts of the United States of America, Vol. 3, p. 789.

4 Personal Representative of President Roosevelt in India; Colonel Johnson had returned to the United States in May 1942 and did not go back to India. For correspondence on this subject, see Vol. i, pp. 593 ff.

5 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell) 811.248/720: Telegram

[Document 648]

The Secretary of State to the Officer in Chargé at New Delhi (Merrell)

Washington, November 4, 1942—6 p.m.

636. Reference Mission’s despatch No. 26 of August 23 and subsequent telegrams.6 The War Department has informed the Department that it will meet the several conditions imposed by the Sultan of Oman as set forth in enclosure No. 3 to the despatch under reference. With regard to the first condition, the War Department states that Brigadier General S. W. Fitzgerald, Commanding General of the Africa Middle East Wing, Air Transport Command, United States Army, with headquarters at Accra, British Gold Coast, is the person who will reply to any questions regarding the conduct of American personnel. If, however, the Sultan desires a person in or near the territory of Oman, the Secretary of War will request General Fitzgerald to designate an officer of his Command so situated.

With regard to the second condition, the War Department states that it is in a position to procure and deliver the military supplies to the Sultan within a reasonable period of time. The Government of India should be requested to indicate the type and quantity of medical supplies to be furnished. The War Department considers the third condition entirely reasonable and states that the fourth and fifth conditions are consistent with the maintenance of good order at the points where American personnel will be stationed and should, if reasonably interpreted, present no obstacle.

In the light of the foregoing, the Mission should request the Government of India to direct its political agent at Muscat to convey on behalf of this Government the necessary assurances to the Sultan.

Hull

6 Telegrams Nos. 815, October 23, 10 a.m., and 835, October 29, 5 p.m., not printed.

Palestine:Palestine:

Contents

Attitude of the United States toward Zionist and Arab agitation regarding British policy in the Middle East and the future status of Palestine (Documents 649-664)

Attitude of the United States toward Zionist and Arab agitation regarding British policy in the Middle East and the future status of PalestineAttitude of the United States toward Zionist and Arab agitation regarding British policy in the Middle East and the future status of Palestine1

1 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1941, Vol. iii, pp. 596–623.

[649] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 2, 1942.

867N.01/1812⅕

[650] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] June 17, 1942.

890G.50/13

[651] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] June 18, 1942.

890G.50/14

[652] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Gordon P. Merriam of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] June 18, 1942.

867N.20/123

[653] Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 7, 1942.

867N.01/1812⅖

[654] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 31, 1942.

867N.20/140

[655] Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 31, 1942.

867N.20/134

[656] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] September 1, 1942.

867N.20/134

[657] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] September 4, 1942.

867N.20/135

[658] The British Ambassador (Halifax) to Mr. Alfred A. Strelsin

Washington, October 24, 1942.

867N.20/159

[659] Press Release Issued by the Department of State, October 30, 1942

October 30, 1942

867N.01/1821

[660] The Chairman of the American Palestine Committee (Wagner ) to President Roosevelt

New York, December 4, 1942. [Received December 7.]

867N.01/1835

[661] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)

[Washington,] December 4, 1942.

867N.01/12–442

[662] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , December 16, 1942.

867N.00/604

[663] Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] December 17, 1942.

867N.01/12–442

[664] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. W. Leonard Parker of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 22, 1942.

867N.00/614

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1812⅕

[Document 649]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Secretary of State

[Washington,] June 2, 1942.

Mr. Secretary: With reference to the recent conference held in your office concerning the harmful effects of Zionist agitation on the war effort, there is attached, in accordance with your instruction, a draft declaration, based on Atlantic Charter2 principles, setting forth this Government’s attitude toward the Near Eastern peoples generally, and the peoples of Palestine in particular. There is also enclosed a suggested letter of transmittal to the President.

The drafts have been approved by Mr. Hoskins,3 and initialed by Mr. Dunn4 and Mr. Hackworth,5 who, you will recall, took part in the conference. Mr. Dunn and Mr. Hackworth feel that before it is issued, the declaration should be cleared with the British. I concur in their view, and suggest that it might be shown to the British before being sent to the President.

If you concur, would you please indicate the manner in which you desire this matter taken up with the British.

Wallace Murray

[Enclosure 1]

Draft Declaration or Statement 6

Some uncertainty appears to exist as to the attitude of the Government of the United States toward the peoples of the Near East, with particular reference to their future. It is therefore desirable to make known this Government’s attitude, which is as follows:

The war objectives of this Government as stated in the Atlantic Charter include the “desire to see no territorial changes that do not accord with the freely expressed wishes of the peoples concerned”, and respect for “the right of all peoples to choose the form of Government under which they will live”.

This Government is of course dedicated to the application of these principles in the Near East as elsewhere. In Palestine, despite past difficulties, it is highly desirable that a political solution be reached through agreement between the Arab and Jewish communities, and this Government earnestly hopes that outstanding problems will be settled on that basis.

The record shows that the Axis powers have repeatedly and cynically dishonored their promises and engagements. Therefore it is inconceivable that any Near Eastern peoples place either faith or credence in them. The Axis aggressors threaten the extension and maintenance of freedom in the Near East; consequently, increased participation in the war effort by all Near Eastern peoples would be in their own interest and naturally would be welcomed by the United States Government.

The participation of the peoples of Palestine in the war effort obviously presents a difficult problem. The British Government as the Mandatory is responsible for the defense of Palestine. It is understood that the British Army is open to able-bodied Palestinians, and that numbers of them have already enlisted. However, if it should be deemed preferable to form separate Arab and Jewish military units, and if the necessary equipment can be made available, such an arrangement would be agreeable to the Government of the United States. In the same way that United States forces are used wherever danger threatens, these units would be utilized, under United Nations command, wherever their services are required.

[Enclosure 2]

Draft Letter to President Roosevelt

My Dear Mr. President: The agitation for the formation of a Jewish army in Palestine is having such alarming effects in the Near and Middle East that I am impelled to draw your attention to the matter. From the reports of our military and political observers, it is clear that the British and ourselves cannot use these territories as bases of operations against Germany, Italy and Japan and as routes of access to the combat areas in Libya, Russia and China, if, in addition to combatting the Axis forces, we have to defend ourselves against the local populations.

The essential fact which has to be faced is that the Near and Middle East is overwhelmingly Moslem. In India the only worthwhile fighting material of significance is drawn from the large minority group of 80,000,000 Moslems.

These peoples are becoming more and more hostile to the United Nations’ cause due to the fear that their fellow Moslems in Palestine will be overridden. As the result of continuous agitation by the Zionists of their ambitions in Palestine, the Axis propagandists have been broadcasting, with good effect from their viewpoint, that the United States intends to turn Palestine over to the Jews despite the opposition of the Moslem majority in that country. Of course, this agitation, which has recently taken the form of full-page advertisements in the metropolitan press advocating the formation of a Jewish army to defend Palestine, and a widely publicized dinner here in Washington, gives the Axis powers additional oil to pour on the fire, which is already dangerously high. We have just learned that the Axis powers have promised the Arabs their independence and the elimination of the Jewish national home in Palestine. Doubtless, the Axis will in the near future make public announcement of this promise as further evidence of their friendship for the Moslems.

Much has been written and a great deal of blood has been spilled over the Palestine problem, which admittedly is difficult. It is evident, however, that no satisfactory and lasting political solution can be reached except on the basis of common agreement between the Arabs and the Jews in that country. So long as the Zionists feel that they can obtain outside support which will enable them to impose their own solution, they will not be disposed to treat with the Arabs on equal terms. A settlement in Palestine resulting from the use or threat of force, would, of course, be completely opposed to the principles for which we fought the last war and are fighting the present war.

For a year our representatives in Egypt and elsewhere in the Near East have been calling attention to the progressive undermining of the military and political position in the Middle Eastern area as a result of Zionist agitation, and the fact that the authorities here, through silence, appear to support the objectives of political Zionism. I believe that the time has come when the position of this Government, based squarely on the Atlantic Charter, should be made known. To that end, I enclose a draft of a declaration or statement7 which might now be issued to clarify the situation.

Faithfully yours,

2 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, Vol. i, p. 367.

3 Harold B. Hoskins, Executive Assistant to Assistant Secretary of State Berle.

4 James Clement Dunn, Adviser on Political Relations.

5 Green H. Hackworth, Legal Adviser.

6 An attached memorandum dated July 9, 1942, by Mr. Alling reads as follows: “On June 26, 1942, at the direction of the Secretary, I dictated to one of the President’s secretaries the attached draft declaration for urgent consideration with a view to issuance at the earliest possible moment.”

7  supra.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 890G.50/13

[Document 650]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] June 17, 1942.

Mr. Alling: I received this morning a visit from Rabbi Wise and some of his colleagues. Dr. Wise informed me that there were news reports alleging that the Prime Minister of Iraq8 had officially stated in Baghdad that the Iraqi Minister to Washington had reported that the latter had received assurances from this Government that the United States desired, after the war, to see the establishment of Arab states in Iraq, Palestine, and Transjordania.

I assured Rabbi Wise that no such statements could possibly have been made officially to the Iraqi Minister.

Can you throw any light on this report? If not, I suggest that you take an early opportunity of informing the Iraqi Minister that this report has come to my attention and that, while I naturally assume there is no truth whatever in it, I shall appreciate having any information he can give you about it.

S[umner] W[elles]

8 Nuri as-Said.

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 890G.50/14

[Document 651]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] June 18, 1942.

Mr. Welles: With reference to your memorandum of June 179 on the above subject,10 I may say that this story is apparently in current circulation as I recently received an inquiry in regard to it from the Washington representative of one of the press associations, who was acting at the instance of his principal in New York. I told him that I did not know what the source of the assurances might be.

According to a recent report from the Legation at Baghdad, the Prime Minister of Iraq recently expressed hopes to the Chamber of Deputies that the Arab countries would ultimately obtain their independence. Nuri Pasha added: “In this connection, I wish to inform the High House that I am in receipt of a telegram from our Minister in Washington11 containing what may reassure the future of these states. I am unable, under the present circumstances, to say more than this.”

In accordance with your directive, I asked the Iraqi Minister to call this morning. I told him of the reports which had reached you and that you would appreciate receiving any information he might be able to furnish with regard to them. The Minister said that at the time he had presented his letters of credence to the President the latter had referred to his acquaintance with the late King Feisal, which had been made at the Peace Conference in Paris. The Minister added that the President had gone on to say that he hoped that Syria would attain its full independence after the war and that some satisfactory solution could be reached on the Palestine problem. The Minister stated that he had of course reported these remarks to his Government, and he assumed that they formed the basis of the statement made in the Iraqi Parliament by the Prime Minister, Nuri Pasha.

In line with the foregoing, I think you will be interested to learn that Mr. Hoyer Millar, of the British Embassy, came in to see me early this week and showed me a document which he said was a report made by the Egyptian Minister to his Government. Mr. Hoyer Millar added that the report had been obtained in Egypt … In this report the Egyptian Minister said that at the time he had joined with the President in inaugurating the telephoto service to Cairo, the President had talked with him briefly concerning Near Eastern affairs. The Minister said that he had been highly gratified at the liberal attitude of the President toward Near Eastern countries and that the President had implied that the Jews were not to enjoy “exclusive habitation in Palestine after the war” and that some Jewish refugees would be directed to other territories. The Minister also reported that the President had told him that Ethiopia would enjoy autonomy after the war and would be governed with the assistance of an international commission.

Paul H. Alling

9  Supra.

10 i. e., “Alleged Assurances from United States Government that United States Desires Establishment of Arab States in Iraq, Palestine and Transjordania.”

11 Ali Jawdat.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Gordon P. Merriam of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 867N.20/123

[Document 652]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. Gordon P. Merriam of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] June 18, 1942.

Participants: Dr. Emmanuel Neuman, Zionist Organization of America

Mr. Alling

Mr. Merriam

During the course of a long call this morning, Dr. Neuman observed that in Zionist circles there was a growing feeling that there would be far less opposition to the creation of a Jewish army if a similar equal opportunity to create an army were to be offered to the Arabs. It was stated in reply that this might well be true.

When speaking alone to Mr. Merriam, Dr. Neuman said he had heard that the Department was considering the issuance of a statement on the Jewish army question, to which Mr. Merriam replied that he had no idea whether or not any such statement would be issued. Dr. Neuman did not pursue the question in this form, but observed later in talking with both Mr. Alling and Mr. Merriam that army circles considered the question to be largely political in character. Dr. Neuman was told that while that might be true, the fact remained that up to the present time the question of supplying arms and equipment even to existing forces had been one of great difficulty.

Dr. Neuman said that in Zionist circles it was felt that the Palestine question should be settled in connection with a general settlement involving the countries neighboring Palestine as well as that country itself, and he asked whether we felt the same way. It was said to him in reply that most of the thought and energies of the Department in these days were being devoted to minute-by-minute problems directly connected with the war. However, there seemed to be no preconceived ideas in the Department as to whether the Palestine problem should be handled on a narrow or a wide territorial basis. Any settlement agreed upon by the peoples concerned would be pleasing.

Dr. Neuman then alluded to reports of a recent statement by the Prime Minister of Iraq to the effect that the Iraqi Minister at Washington had received assurances from this Government regarding the future independent status of Syria, Trans-Jordan, and Palestine, and asked whether the Division of Near Eastern Affairs had given any such assurance. Dr. Neuman was informed that we had received a report from the Legation at Baghdad giving the text of Nuri Pasha’s statement to the Chamber of Deputies. The statement did not name any Arab countries, but was to the effect that the Prime Minister had received from the Minister of Iraq in Washington an assurance in regard to the future independence of the Arab states and that no more could be said at the moment. Dr. Neuman was told that the Division had given no such assurance nor had anyone in the Department so far as we were aware.

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State 867N.01/1812⅖

[Document 653]

Memorandum by President Roosevelt to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 7, 1942.

The more I think of it the more I feel that we should say nothing about the Near East or Palestine or the Arabs at this time.12 If we pat either group on the back, we automatically stir up trouble at a critical moment. Furthermore, the question of arms for Palestine ought not to be mentioned because it is impossible from the military point of view to get them just now.

F[ranklin] D. R[oosevelt]

12 For correspondence regarding a separate proposal for the issuance of a declaration of policy by this Government with respect to the Near East, see pp. 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 17] ff.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 867N.20/140

[Document 654]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 31, 1942.

The British Ambassador13 called to see me this afternoon at his request. The Ambassador stated that Mr. Harold Butler,14 in accordance with the suggestion I had made to him, had spoken with Mr. Elmer Davis15 regarding the propaganda appearing in the American press recently clamoring for the creation of a Jewish army and criticizing the British Government for its failure to create such an army. Mr. Davis had apparently said to Mr. Butler that there didn’t seem to be anything very much that he could do about the matter inasmuch as no question of censorship was involved with regard to this problem. I said to Lord Halifax that of course I had never had the remotest idea of the exercise of censorship in this connection but that I had suggested to Sir Ronald Campbell16 that Mr. Butler discuss with the Office of War Information the best way in which the British Government could make known, through proper channels in this country, its own position with regard to the creation of a Jewish army and its own explanation as to what its policy had been in regard thereto up to the present time. I said furthermore that there were many Jewish leaders in this country who were opposed to the kind of propaganda that was going on and I had no doubt that they would welcome all the accurate information which could be given them regarding the policy which the British Government had pursued up to now.

S[umner] W[elles]

13 Viscount Halifax.

14 Minister, British Embassy.

15 Director, Office of War Information.

16 Minister, British Embassy.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 867N.20/134

[Document 655]

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 31, 1942.

Mr. Welles: The Committee for a Jewish Army has been besieging the White House. McIntyre17 eventually sent them to me. They were then thinking of a huge delegation to convince the British that the Jewish Army ought to go forward. They have finally got their suggestions to a point where they wish to send four people, namely: Alfred A. Strelsin of New York;

Kenneth Leslie of the “Protestant Digest”;

Andrew L. Somers, a Member of Congress, and

Peter H. Bergson, a Palestinian expert,

on private passports to England to lay their cases before the British authorities. The chairman of the committee, Strelsin, has been talking at length to Field Marshal Sir John Dill,18 and this is the procedure finally recommended by him.

I see no reason why we should not grant passports with reasonable priority; but the understanding is that they are merely going to state the case as well as they can to the appropriate British authority and try to persuade the British to make up their minds. This Government does not assume any responsibility for them except as it permits their trip. Do you see any objection?

A. A. B[erle], Jr.

17 Marvin H. McIntyre, Secretary to President Roosevelt.

18 Ranking British officer on the Combined Chiefs of Staff.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 867N.20/134

[Document 656]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] September 1, 1942.

Dr. Berle: The British Ambassador is very much exercised about this whole matter. It does not seem to me that we should grant passports to these people, at a time when there is such a tremendous need for priorities on urgent official business, unless the British Ambassador himself agrees that they should go. I wonder if you will not take this matter up with the British Embassy and get their views. If the British Government and the British Embassy agree that these people should go, of course passports should be issued. Otherwise it seems to me we should inform the members of this delegation that they should communicate their views and their suggestions to the British Ambassador in Washington.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) 867N.20/135

[Document 657]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle)

[Washington,] September 4, 1942.

Lord Halifax came in to see me, at his request. He said he came in to renew acquaintance, which he did for approximately an hour. The discussion was wide and discursive and related to views on how the war will come out, and so forth.

I took advantage of this opportunity to say that Mr. Albert [Alfred] Strelsin had been asking for passports on behalf of the Committee to urge a Jewish army. I said that he had first asked that the United States press the British to accept a delegation and that we had refused to do that. I said that we had steered him to the British Embassy to talk to Sir John Dill; Strelsin came back and reported that he had done that and that Dill had advised that he and two or three other people go to London and discuss the matter and its technical phases. They had then put in for passports. I said I wished to know whether the British Embassy had objections to his going. We were distinctly not pressing the British Government in the matter, but merely inquiring.

Lord Halifax inquired what I thought.

I said that we were worried about the agitation and that the best thing that could be said for allowing these men to go would be that it might conceivably quiet down the agitation here, through a quiet discussion on the technical level in London. I said that this apparently had been the view of Sir John Dill, though I had only the report which Strelsin had given me on that score.

Lord Halifax said that he thought that conceivably sending these people might do some good, especially if they were sensible fellows. He would talk to Colonel Montgomery, in Dill’s absence, about the matter. After he had talked to Montgomery he would let me know whether to put the Committee directly in touch with him. I said that I would handle it along those lines.

A. A. B[erle], Jr.

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to Mr. Alfred A. Strelsin 867N.20/159

[Document 658]

The British Ambassador (Halifax) to Mr. Alfred A. Strelsin 19

Washington, October 24, 1942.

Dear Mr. Strelsin: As you know, I telegraphed to London the suggestions which you put forward at the meeting we had here on October 1st. I regret the delay in replying, but it was necessary to consult a number of different departments, all of whom as you may imagine are now under extreme pressure of work owing to war conditions.

I have now had a reply from London. The British Government appreciate the motives which prompted your suggestion of a visit to London, and they would have been glad to adopt this suggestion if they had felt that it would lead to any valuable result. But they have so repeatedly had occasion to give careful consideration to this matter that they fear no useful purpose would be served by a further discussion on the lines you suggest, particularly since all the proposals you put forward had already been taken into account when the British Government reached their decision on this subject.

In view of the thought that you and your Committee have devoted to these questions, I feel that I owe it to you to make plain the attitude of the British Government, in so far as it affects them, to the problem of Jewish participation in the war. As they see it, this question falls into two parts. The first is that of opportunities for Jews to serve. The second is the defence of Palestine. As regards the first, the British Government has given continuous consideration to the proposals which your Committee has so strongly and sincerely advocated; but they have decided, and Parliament has approved this course, that so far as they are concerned they are unable to give their support to the proposal for a separate Jewish Army. They are well aware of, and sympathise with, the desire of Jews both in Palestine and elsewhere, to take their full share in the military effort to defeat the Axis powers. But they believe that Jews can make their most effective contribution to this end by serving in the armed forces of the countries to which they owe allegiance. Stateless Jews have in addition abundant opportunities for volunteer service in the British Army, and no doubt in other forces of the United Nations.

The question of the defence of Palestine was fully dealt with by the Secretary of State for War in his speech in the House of Commons on August 6th last, and I need not recapitulate what he then said. The conclusion which he reached was that if full advantage were taken of the facilities offered to Palestinian Jews for service in the armed forces there would only be a very small part of the man-power available in Palestine which was not being employed to good advantage against the common enemy.

I realise that the attitude of His Majesty’s Government as set out above is not fully in accord with the objectives which your committee favour. But I hope you will none the less believe that His Majesty’s Government’s policy does represent a sincere attempt to reconcile the need for the most efficient mobilization of man-power and resources with the natural desire of Jews everywhere to make their full contribution to the war.

Yours sincerely,

Halifax

19 Copy sent to the Assistant Secretary of State (Berle) by the British Ambassador.

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, October 30, 1942 867N.01/1821

[Document 659]

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, October 30, 1942

October 30, 1942

Statement by the Secretary of State

In commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the publication of the Balfour Declaration by the British Government on November 2, 1917,20 a memorandum was presented to the Secretary of State by a group of Rabbis. Secretary Hull observed that the Balfour Declaration had aroused wide attention in the United States, and that this country had followed with interest and sympathy the work which had been done under it, in which American citizens have played a useful part. He added: “This country was shocked and outraged, when tyranny and barbarity again commenced their march, at the brutality which was inflicted on certain races, and particularly on the Jewish populations of Europe. Apparently no form of abuse has been too great, and no form of torture or oppression too vile, to be meted out to these populations by the Nazi despots. And, in taking this attitude towards the Jewish race, they have made it plain by concrete acts that a like attitude would be taken towards any other race against whom they might invent a grievance.

“The Jews have long sought a refuge. I believe that we must have an even wider objective; we must have a world in which Jews, like every other race, are free to abide in peace and in honor.

“We meet today when the battle for freedom is being carried on in the East and in the West and our every effort is concentrated on a successful issue. We can with confidence look forward to the victory when liberty shall lift the scourge of persecution and the might of the United Nations free mankind from the threat of oppression.

“Of all the inhuman and tyrannical acts of Hitler and his Nazi lieutenants, their systematic persecution of the Jewish people—men, women and children—is the most debased. The fate of these unhappy people must be ever before us in the efforts we are making today for the final victory; at the moment of triumph under the terms of the Atlantic Charter the United Nations will be prepared not only to redeem their hopes of a future world based upon freedom, equality and justice but to create a world in which such a tragedy will not again occur.”

20 Declaration contained in a letter of November 2, 1917, from the British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, Lord Balfour, to Lord Rothschild conveying the following statement, approved by the Cabinet: “His Majesty’s Government view with favour the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavours to facilitate the achievement of this object, it being clearly understood that nothing shall be done which may prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country.”

The Chairman of the American Palestine Committee (Wagner ) to President Roosevelt 867N.01/1835

[Document 660]

The Chairman of the American Palestine Committee (Wagner 21 ) to President Roosevelt

New York, December 4, 1942.
[Received December 7.]

Dear Mr. President: I am privileged to transmit herewith a statement commemorating the 25th Anniversary of the Balfour Declaration, signed by sixty-three members of the Senate and one hundred eighty-two members of the House of Representatives.

Sincerely yours,

Robert F. Wagner

[Enclosure]

Text of Statement by Members of the United States Senate and House of Representatives

Twenty-five years ago the British Government issued the Balfour Declaration pledging itself to facilitate the establishment of a National Home for the Jewish people in Palestine. The Declaration was published to the world with the approval of the other Powers allied with Great Britain in the World War, and with the encouragement and support of the Government of the United States. It was written into the Peace Treaty21a with the aid and approval of President Wilson who publicly expressed his confidence that the purposes of the Declaration would be fulfilled. A few years later, the House of Representatives and the Senate of the United States, by unanimous vote, adopted a joint resolution favoring the establishment of the Jewish National Home, and on September 21, 1922, the resolution was duly signed by President Harding.22 Since then, this policy has been reaffirmed by every succeeding Administration, including the present. It has thus become the declared and traditional policy of the United States to favor the restoration of the Jewish National Home.

The Balfour Declaration was justly hailed throughout the world as an act of historic reparation and as a charter of freedom for the Jewish people. It was designed to open the gates of Palestine to homeless and harassed multitudes and to pave the way for the establishment of a Jewish Commonwealth.

The reasons which, twenty-five years ago, led the American people and the Government of the United States to favor the cause of Jewish national restoration in Palestine are still valid today. In fact, the case for a Jewish Homeland is overwhelmingly stronger and the need more urgent now than ever before. In Palestine the resettlement has advanced from the status of a hopeful experiment to that of a heartening reality, while in Europe the position of the Jews has deteriorated to an appalling degree. Millions of uprooted and homeless Jews will strive to reconstruct their lives anew in their ancestral home when the hour of deliverance will come.

We, therefore, take this occasion, the twenty-fifth anniversary of the issuance of the Balfour Declaration, to record our continued interest in and support of the purposes and principles which it embodies. We wish to send a message of hope and cheer to those in Palestine who are confronting the common enemy with courage and fortitude and are contributing unstintingly of their manpower and effort to the democratic cause.

Faced as we are by the fact that the Nazi government, in its Jewish policy, is attempting to exterminate a whole people, we declare that, when the war is over, it shall be the common purpose of civilized mankind to right this cruel wrong insofar as may lie in our power, and, above all, to enable large numbers of the survivors to reconstruct their lives in Palestine where the Jewish people may once more assume a position of dignity and equality among the peoples of the earth.

Our Government may be assured that in continuing the traditional American policy in favor of so just a cause, it can rely upon our individual support and the approbation of the American people.

21 Robert F. Wagner, Senator from New York.

21a i. e., the Treaty of Sevres, signed August 10, 1920, British and Foreign State Papers, Vol. cxiii, p. 866.

22 42 Stat. 1012.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) 867N.01/12–442

[Document 661]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray)

[Washington,] December 4, 1942.

Mr. Murray: I received the visit this afternoon of Dr. Chaim Weizmann.23 Dr. Weizmann is anxious to discuss with some officer of the Department of State the future possibilities of Palestine. He informed me, for my secret information, that Mr. Churchill had stated to him that he desired to make Ibn Saud24 the “boss of bosses” in the Arab world, with the understanding that this would be accomplished if Ibn Saud was willing to work out with Dr. Weizmann a sane solution of the Palestine question.25 He added that Mr. Churchill had stated to him that the President was in accord on this subject. (I should mention that the President has never mentioned this matter to me.) Dr. Weizmann also showed me a personal telegram he had received from Mr. Churchill through Lord Halifax on the 25th anniversary of the Balfour Declaration which stated in essence that his thoughts go with Dr. Weizmann on this anniversary and that Dr. Weizmann’s plans would win out in the end. This telegram was shown to me with the understanding that it would not be made public.

I would like to talk with you concerning this matter sometime early next week.

S[umner] W[elles]

23 President of the World Zionist Organization.

24 King of Saudi Arabia.

25 For his own account of this interview with Prime Minister Churchill, see Trial and Error, The Autobiography of Chaim Weizmann (New York, 1949), pp. 427 and 428.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 867N.00/604

[Document 662]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

The High Commissioner for Palestine26 has recently reported to London on the situation in that country. The High Commissioner states that it has been learnt that the Inner Zionist Council and the Executive of the Jewish Agency have accepted, in both cases by a majority vote, the so-called “Biltmore Resolutions”27 formulated at the American Zionist Conference in New York last May.

2. The most important of these resolutions are those calling for a Jewish commonwealth in Palestine and “unalterable rejection of the White Paper”,28 for the institution of a Jewish military force fighting under its own flag and under the high command of the United Nations, and for the control of immigration into Palestine by the Jewish Agency.

3. The Inner Zionist Council is reported to have accepted the resolutions by 21 votes to 9. In proposing the motion, Mr. Ben Gurion29 intimated that the words “Jewish State” should be substituted for “Commonwealth”. He is also said to have made it clear that acceptance of the “Biltmore programme” was not to be taken as a definition of ultimate Zionist aims. A new world order, he said, was about to be established and the Jewish problem would once again be before an international forum. The resolutions represented immediate aims for submission to that forum, as the demands of the Jewish people.

4. These developments mean that official Zionist policy has now been shown publicly to be maximalist. This should enable the long-discussed rapprochement with the Revisionists to take place, and the latter are in fact believed to have accepted the “Biltmore resolutions”. There would then be a strong Zionist bloc pledged to an extremist policy and unable, even if willing, to retract, in view of the publicity given to their acceptance of this policy.

5. The High Commissioner regards the situation as potentially dangerous. He reports having felt for some time that the critical period in Jewish politics would come when it became evident that the United Nations are winning the war but still had their hands full. It appears that the Zionist leaders have seen in the successes in Africa a sign that the end of the war is drawing near and that they should hurry ahead with the construction and consolidation of their Zionist platform in order to be in time for the Peace Conference. Nor are indications wanting that the extremist Zionists would welcome at this juncture some manifestations of Arab resentment that they could exploit for publicity value outside Palestine.

6. For the first time since the outbreak of the war the High Commissioner has noted a certain disturbance of Arab political feelings, not confined to a small section of the community. This is due to the intense publicity given by the whole of the Jewish press to statements made on the occasion of the anniversary of the Balfour Declaration by prominent personalities in the United Kingdom and the United States expressing sympathy with Zionist political aspirations. Particular notice has been taken of a message sent by Mr. Wendell Willkie30 to a mass meeting in New York City opening with the words “The doors of Palestine must be opened to the Jewish peoples of Central and Eastern Europe after the war.” This and other statements have evoked adverse comment in the Arab press, and numerous protests have been received from Arab bodies and individuals. The Emir Abdullah of Transjordan has also written to the High Commissioner on the subject. Typical comment on Mr. Willkie’s statement is that it is contrary to the declared principles of the United Nations, and that the Arabs do not ask for anything more than has been promised by the democracies to all of the countries of the world. The situation has not been improved by the publication in the local Jewish press of the “Biltmore Resolutions”, and there is a persistent belief in Arab circles that where the Palestine question is concerned, Jewish influence in the United States is extremely powerful.

7. The High Commissioner reports that while some of the protests received by him are from professional politicians, he has no doubt that there is also widespread and sincere concern in Arab circles. He states that while their positive help to the Allied cause has not been remarkable, it is the case that since the outbreak of war they have refrained from pressing their case, notably for the implementation of the constitutional provisions of the White Paper, because they genuinely do not wish to hamper the war effort. Now, however, there has been a hardening of hearts and it has even been reported that the Jewish activities mentioned in the earlier paragraphs of this memorandum have diminished Arab enthusiasm for the success in North Africa. The argument used in Arab circles is that there is little point in supporting the Allies if their victory is to result in Palestine being handed over to the Jews.

8. The High Commissioner is not apprehensive that this resentment will be expressed in more active or violent forms unless there is further and more intense provocation. Arab opinion will, in his opinion, be satisfied to have ensured by their protests that His Majesty’s Government have been reminded that the Arabs as well as the Jews have rights in Palestine. Some of the protests conclude by asking for an official declaration by His Majesty’s Government to counter Mr. Willkie’s statement and reassure the Arabs. Apart from the objections to attempting to make any precise declarations at the present time, the High Commissioner does not take such requests very seriously, and regards them as no more than an attempt to take advantage of the situation to extract fresh promises for post-war use.

Washington , December 16, 1942.

26 Sir Harold MacMichael.

27 For text of the program adopted in a resolution of May 11, 1942, by an extraordinary conference of Zionists at the Biltmore Hotel in New York City, see J. C. Hurewitz, Diplomacy in the Near and Middle East, A Documentary Record, 1914–1956 (Princeton, 1956), Vol. ii, pp. 234 and 235.

28 British Cmd. 6019: Palestine, Statement of Policy, 1939.

29 David Ben-Gurion, Head of the Jewish Agency in Palestine.

30 Republican candidate for President in 1940.

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 867N.01/12–442

[Document 663]

Memorandum by the Adviser on Political Relations (Murray) to the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] December 17, 1942.

Mr. Welles: Thank you very much for letting me have the information contained in your attached strictly confidential memorandum of your conversation with Dr. Chaim Weizmann on December 4.31 It is very interesting and very thought-provoking.

I note from Dr. Weizmann’s attached letter to you of December 932 that he has requested you to designate someone from the Department who under your guidance would discuss with him the problems of Palestine. Any of us whom you might wish to designate for this purpose is of course entirely at your and Dr. Weizmann’s disposal.

I would refer first to Mr. Churchill’s desire to make Ibn Saud “boss of bosses” in the Arab World, with the understanding that this would be accomplished if Ibn Saud were willing to work out with Dr. Weizmann a sane solution of the Palestine question. Three thoughts occur to me in this connection:

(1) I wonder whether it is possible to “make” Ibn Saud “boss of bosses” in the Arab World, since he has already become the master of the heart of the Arab World in the Arabian Peninsula by his own strong right arm and not by design of the British. As you will recall, the British experts on Arabia during the last World War picked out Hussein, Sherif of Mecca, as the coming man and the leader in the Arab World. Hussein was made the King of the Hejaz, and this position of prestige and authority among the Arabs was very soon challenged by Ibn Saud, then merely the Emir of the Nejd. The British experts had assumed that Ibn Saud could be kept quiet on British subsidy and would be content to rule over his Wahhabi Brethren in the heart of Arabia and would not interfere with the protégés either along the Persian Gulf or in the Holy Cities and along the Red Sea. This was a bad miscalculation. In 1924 Ibn Saud started hostilities against King Hussein, drove him out of Mecca and Medina and into exile at Cyprus, where he died in 1931.

In subsequent negotiations between Sir Gilbert Clayton and King Ibn Saud, resulting in the Treaty of Jidda,33 the King voluntarily renounced any British subsidy and was recognized as a fully independent sovereign over his present domains in the Arabian Peninsula.

In view of this sequence of events, it is doubtful whether Ibn Saud would relish a suggestion that the British could advance him to a position of primacy, which, as I have stated above, he secured without their aid or subsidy.

If by the term “Arab World” Mr. Churchill had in mind all lands inhabited by the Arab people, it seems to me that any plans for making Ibn Saud “boss” of all those areas is entirely out of the question and Ibn Saud would be the first to say so. The Arab World in the larger sense would include Iraq, Syria, the Lebanon, Palestine, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco, in addition to the Arabian Peninsula. Ibn Saud is a Bedouin king and has achieved mastery among the Bedouin Arabs. While he has extended his ascendancy to the more or less settled areas of the Hejaz and while he might conceivably consider an extension to include Trans Jordan, it is not believed that he would be receptive to so impractical a suggestion as would be involved in granting him the overlordship even over the Arab lands of the “fertile crescent”, including Iraq, Syria, the Lebanon and Palestine. Ibn Saud, though unsurpassed as a ruler of the desert Arabs, is not qualified to rule the more settled and developed portions of the Arab world where the art of government is infinitely more complex than it is in Central Arabia. Moreover, while the town Arabs can afford to admire Ibn Saud from afar, there is a deep gulf between the town and desert Arabs.

(2) As for the possibility of King Ibn Saud’s reaching an agreement with Dr. Weizmann for a sane solution of the Palestine question, it seems to me that that depends very largely upon what Dr. Weizmann, an ardent Zionist, would regard as “sane”. Unfortunately, the problem of the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jews has become an Arab question as well as a Jewish one, and the British themselves are largely responsible for having permitted, and even encouraged, the Arabs to establish a vested right in that burning question. Not only have the Arabs in neighboring Iraq, Syria, the Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, the Yemen, and Egypt been drawn into this unfortunate dispute, but even the sympathy of the Mohammedans of India for their coreligionists in the Arab World has become involved.

Ibn Saud is not only a great temporal but a spiritual leader of the Wahhabis, a fanatical Arab Moslem sect. It will be recalled in this connection that during the height of the disorders in Palestine, resulting from the Arab revolt in 1936, King Ibn Saud, after much meditation, decided to address a strong appeal to President Roosevelt34 urging that he give sympathetic consideration to the Arab claims in Palestine. This communication brought nothing more than a perfunctory acknowledgment.

In view of the above circumstances, and King Ibn Saud’s far-reaching fame and prestige as a leader of the Arab World, it is difficult to believe that he would be prepared, under the present circumstances at any rate, to acquiesce in any arrangement regarding the national home for the Jews in Palestine that would be acceptable to Dr. Weizmann and the Zionists in their present state of mind.

On the other hand, bearing in mind the very friendly discussions and apparent understandings reached during the Paris Peace Conference between King Feisal and Professor Frankfurter, which unfortunately failed to materialize because the Arabs felt that promises made to them at that time had not been fulfilled, I see no reason why a fresh start at such conversations might not again be undertaken between King Ibn Saud and Dr. Weizmann, if important assurances of a political nature could be given in advance to the King. These assurances would almost certainly entail an undertaking to renounce political Zionism in the future and any thought of Jewish control over any large section of Arabs resulting from unlimited Jewish immigration into the area. Moreover, it would be dangerous to assume that Ibn Saud’s writ will run in Iraq, Syria and Egypt, where prominent public men have long since taken their stand on the Palestine question. Those leaders would have to be brought into the picture, as in the past, unless it is the intention to impose Ibn Saud on the Arab World.

By the above I do not wish to give the impression that I do not believe a practicable solution could be reached whereby greatly increased immigration into the Arab World might not be facilitated with the consent of the Arabs themselves. I am, on the other hand, convinced that such a modus vivendi could only be worked out along the lines suggested by Dr. Magnes of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem; namely, that in any area of the Arab World where the Jews might be admitted in large numbers, the Arabs will always be in the majority and consequently there must be established between these two Semitic races full confidence and a mutual give-and-take, rather than any thought that Jewish ascendancy can be achieved or maintained either by foreign bayonets or by the power of Ibn Saud himself.

(3) We are in possession of very precise information furnished by competent observers in the field in Saudi Arabia that Ibn Saud would not be disposed to enlarge his present dependence upon Great Britain. During the present war, he has been hard-pressed for money due to the disruption of the pilgrim traffic, and has been obliged to accept subsidies from the British which now total around ten million pounds sterling. The Arabian Peninsula is already entirely surrounded by areas under British control. Along the Arabian Gulf we have the Arab sheikdoms in close treaty relations with Great Britain. To the north we have Iraq, Transjordan and Palestine also in treaty relation with Great Britain. Along the entire western coast of the Red Sea all the areas are under British control. Along the Gulf of Aden the British are entrenched in the Aden Protectorate and in the Hadhramaut.

There are clear indications that Ibn Saud would welcome a far greater American participation in his country than exists at the present time. American oil companies have obtained and are exploiting as 100 percent American enterprises, the rich oil concessions on the island of Bahrein and at Dhahran nearby in Saudi Arabia itself.

We have at present under consideration the possibility of obtaining landing rights incidental to the present military operations in that area. Since the air routes of the future must necessarily take Saudi Arabia into account and since American civilian aviation will certainly be one of the most important in the post-war world, that is another reason why we should seek closer relations and understanding with Ibn Saud.

All in all, therefore, it seems to me that in any effort to facilitate an understanding between the Zionist and Arab leaders, such an undertaking should be a joint American-British one in order to realize any measure of success. Our reputation in the Arab World is solidly established on confidence and good faith in our motives. This is an asset no longer possessed by the British and one which they should therefore be glad to exploit jointly with us.

Wallace Murray

31  Ante, p. 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661].

32 Not printed.

33 Treaty of friendship signed at Jidda, May 20, 1927, League of Nations Treaty Series, Vol. lxxi, p. 131.

34 Dated November 29, 1938; for text, see Foreign Relations, 1938, Vol. ii, p. 994; for correspondence regarding President Roosevelt’s reply in January 1939, see ibid., 1939, Vol. iv, pp. 694–696.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. W. Leonard Parker of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 867N.00/614

[Document 664]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. W. Leonard Parker of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 22, 1942.

Participants: Mr. Paul West, OWI Office at Cairo.

Mr. Herrick, OWI.

Mr. Huston, CI/L.35

Mr. Murray, PA/M.

Mr. Alling.

Mr. Merriam.

Mr. Parker.

Mr. Paul West, in Chargé of the Office of War Information organization in Cairo, who has just returned to the United States for consultation with his superiors, called to convey to the Department his impression of conditions in Egypt and other areas of the Near East.

Mr. West stated that there are two questions which people in the Near East are constantly asking: (1) what is the attitude of the United States toward Zionism, and (2) what are the post-war aims of the United States in the Near East. Mr. West said that his organization has avoided any discussion of, or propaganda activities concerning, Zionism because as far as he knew this Government has not indicated to him what its policy toward Zionism might be. Feeling on the part of the Arabs against Zionism is strong in the whole Near Eastern area, particularly Palestine, Syria and Iraq, and noticeably in Egypt. He fears that if this feeling is allowed to spread and become intensified there is grave danger that General Eisenhower’s forces may be threatened from the rear by the Arab population in North Africa.

Mr. West stated that people in the Near East are very anxious to know what policy the United States is going to pursue in the Near East after the war. The Near Eastern peoples, he declared, are sick of the British and the French and do not want them around. They realize, however, that they are going to need some help and support, but wish that such help and support should be forthcoming from a distinterested power without imperialistic ambitions. For this reason the Near Eastern peoples desire that the United States should remain as a powerful influence in the Near East after the war.

After alluding to antipathy on the part of Near Eastern peoples toward the British, Mr. West declared that there is a great deal of bad feeling between British and American military forces and that even officers are involved. There have been so many fights in Palestine between British and American personnel that members of the American armed forces there now go about armed to protect themselves from the British. There have been cases where American officers have been badly beaten by British military personnel and he said that on the plane on which he returned there was an American officer with his jaw fractured in three places as the result of a fight in Palestine between British and American troops. Mr. West recounted another amazing incident: quite recently an American Army Douglas DC–3 transport plane, flying in daylight on the radio beam from Khartoum to Cairo, was shot down by British Hurricane fighters and all the occupants of the American transport plane were killed. Mr. West did not know whether this was accidental or deliberate. He was somewhat at a loss to explain this hard feeling between the British and Americans but was inclined to attribute it to differences in customs and to early schoolbook training of an anti-British character of Americans in their youth.

Returning to the subject of Zionism, Mr. West stated that he expected to see the President in a few days and hoped he might have an opportunity at that time to mention to the President the situation being created in the Near East by Zionist activities. Mr. Murray suggested that it might be well also for Mr. Elmer Davis to discuss this matter with the President in order to secure a directive if possible from the President on the OWI line on Zionism. It was brought out in the conversation that the three agencies of the Government primarily concerned with the grave situation created in the Near East by Zionist activities are the State Department, the War Department and the Office of War Information. It was suggested that all three agencies might make their views known to the President. Mr. Herrick suggested that he would endeavor to see that this matter should be discussed between the War Department and the Office of War Information. Mr. Murray stated that it was expected that Mr. Welles would discuss the matter with the President shortly. Mr. Murray suggested also that it might be well for Mr. West to see Mr. Welles before Mr. Welles goes to the President. This, Mr. West said, he would be very glad to do.

35 Liaison Branch, Division of Current Information.

Saudi Arabia:Saudi Arabia:

Contents

Establishment of an American Legation at JiddaEstablishment of an American Legation at Jidda

[665] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] February 12, 1942.

124.90F/24

[666] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, March 3, 1942—8 p.m.

124.90F/22a: Telegram

[667] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, May 1, 1942. [Received July 2.]

123 Moose, James S./376

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) 124.90F/24

[Document 665]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] February 12, 1942.

Mr. Murray: I have noted that Mr. Kirk1 is due soon to leave for Saudi Arabia to present his letters of credence.

The President expressed to me two days ago his desire to establish a permanent legation in Saudi Arabia, presumably at Jidda. It was his thought that Mr. Kirk would remain as Minister accredited to both Saudi Arabia and to Egypt, but that we would have a Chargé d’affaires with a small legation staff at Jidda permanently on the spot.

Please let me have your suggestions as to appropriate Foreign Service officers to act in that capacity so that I may speak to Mr. Shaw.2

S[umner] W[elles]

1 Alexander Kirk, Minister in Egypt and also accredited as Minister to Saudi Arabia.

2 G. Howland Shaw, Assistant Secretary of State.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 124.90F/22a: Telegram

[Document 666]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, March 3, 1942—8 p.m.

178. Department has decided to establish Legation at Jidda, Saudi Arabia to be a combined office performing diplomatic and consular functions. Minister Kirk will continue being accredited to Saudi Arabia. James S. Moose, Jr., now at Tehran, has been assigned second secretary and consul at Jidda and directed to proceed as soon as practicable stopping en route at Cairo for consultation and to receive detailed instructions being sent to Cairo by air mail. Should these instructions not be received when Moose ready to proceed to Jidda he should go on, and instructions be forwarded to him upon their receipt. Moose will serve as Chargé, Jidda.

Please ask Government of Saudi Arabia if establishment of Legation performing diplomatic and consular functions is agreeable to it, and request provisional recognition for Moose as Consul at Jidda.

You will please ship to Jidda one of the five safes now in Legation which is suitable for safe-guarding codes, reporting inventory number to Department. Replacement will be sent to Legation at earliest opportunity.

Welles

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 123 Moose, James S./376

[Document 667]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

No. 1 Jidda, May 1, 1942.
[Received July 2.]

Sir: I have the honor to refer to my telegram of April 23 [24], 1942, 6:00 p.m.,3 and to report my arrival in Jidda on the afternoon of Wednesday, April 22, 1942, on board the S. S. Taif.

Shaikh Ibrahim Ibn Al-Mu’ammar, Qaimaqam (Governor) of Jidda, and Saudi Arabian Chargé d’Affaires in Baghdad during the four years I served there, was at the boat landing and escorted me to the staff house of the California Arabian Standard Oil Company where I was temporarily lodged. A military guard of honor was drawn up at the boat landing.

Messrs. A. L. Wathen and J. G. Hamilton, members of the Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia,4 who were also passengers on the Taif, were installed in the staff quarters of the Saudi Arabian Mining Syndicate. As the Department is no doubt aware, there is no hotel in Jidda.

On the following day, April 23, 1942, Shaikh Yusuf Yassin, Secretary to King Ibn Saud, telephoned to say that he had just arrived in Jidda, and that he would be glad to receive me that day. While I was calling on Shaikh Yusuf, he suggested that since the Saudi Arabian Minister of Finance, Shaikh Abdullah Sulaiman, was in Jidda at that moment, it might be appropriate for me to call on Shaikh Abdullah. Naturally, I followed his suggestion.

Since the Saudi authorities had not then replied to the Note of March 6, 1942, by which the Legation in Cairo announced the intention of the United States Government to open a Legation in Jidda, I called on the Qaimaqam on April 26, 1942, and inquired whether or not a reply from the Saudi Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be expected. The Qaimaqam, who from time to time represents the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Jidda, replied that in view of the friendly relations existing between the Governments of Saudi Arabia and the United States, the approval of the Saudi Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the establishment of an American Legation in Jidda was too obvious to question, and that, in his opinion, no reply was necessary. He added, however, that he would be glad to look into the matter.

Two days later, the Legation received a note dated April 27, 1942, addressed to the Honorable Alexander Kirk by Shaikh Hamid Sulaiman, Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs, assenting to the establishment of an American Legation in Jidda, and approving my designation as Chargé d’Affaires ad interim during the periods of Mr. Kirk’s absence. A translation of the note is attached hereto as an enclosure.5

As already stated in the Legation’s telegram No. 1 of May 1, 1942, 11:00 a.m.,5 the Legation has been opened to-day, and appropriate notification has been sent to the Saudi Arabian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and to diplomatic missions in Jidda. The Legation does not have supplies and equipment sufficient to permit it to perform consular functions such as passport and visa services, notarials, certification of invoices, etc., and the opening of a combined office will necessarily await the arrival of necessary supplies.

Respectfully yours,

James S. Moose, Jr.

3 Not printed.

4 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669] ff.

5 Not printed.

5 Not printed.

American agricultural mission to Saudi ArabiaAmerican agricultural mission to Saudi Arabia6

6 For previous correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, Vol. iii, pp. 651 ff.

[668] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 3, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 6:22 p.m.]

890F.61A/2: Telegram

[669] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, February 6, 1942—9 p.m.

890F.61A/2: Telegram

[670] The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt

Washington, February 12, 1942.

890F.001 Ibn Saud/30

[671] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, February 26, 1942—10 p.m.

890F.61A/9: Telegram

[672] The Secretary of State to the Chief of the United States Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia (Twitchell)

Washington, March 19, 1942.

890F.61A/24a

[673] Press Release Issued by the Department of State, March 25, 1942

March 25, 1942

890F.61A/12

[674] The King of Saudi Arabia (Ibn Saud) to President Roosevelt

Al Riad , 27 Rabee El Thani 1361 (13 May 1942).

123 K 632/447

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890F.61A/2: Telegram

[Document 668]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk)7 to the Secretary of State

Cairo, February 3, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 6:22 p.m.]

190. My 2049, December 30, 11 a.m., and my 189, February 3, 9 a.m.8 Has the Department any information as to the appointment of an agricultural expert to Saudi Arabia.

Kirk

7 Also accredited as Minister to Saudi Arabia.

8 Neither printed.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890F.61A/2: Telegram

[Document 669]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, February 6, 1942—9 p.m.

115. Your 190, February 3, 10 a.m. Department of Interior irrigation expert has been selected and choice of Department of Agriculture expert lies between two officials. It is planned to send Twitchell8a as head of this mission, which has received the President’s informal approval. It is hoped that the President will send a letter to Ibn Saud and that you will find it possible to present in person this message, which would offer the Mission as an evidence of good will. For your strictly confidential information, the Army Air Corps is considering the desirability of establishing one or more airfields in Saudi Arabia on the basis of a suitable quid pro quo but has not yet made a decision of principle. You may, therefore, be requested to take this matter up at the time of your visit.

As soon as these matters take definite form, which should occur in the near future, you will be promptly advised.

Hull

8a Karl S. Twitchell, American mining and hydraulic engineer, long associated with roadbuilding, well-drilling, and development of mining interests in Saudi Arabia as a representative of American and British capital, and for some time the informal agent of King Ibn Saud in the United States in respect of projects for economic development.

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt 890F.001 Ibn Saud/30

[Document 670]

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to President Roosevelt

Washington, February 12, 1942.

My Dear Mr. President: I enclose for your consideration and signature, if you approve, a message to the King of Saudi Arabia. It is intended that this letter be handed to His Majesty when the American Minister at Cairo, who as you know is accredited to Saudi Arabia as well as to Egypt, presents his credentials in the near future.

As you will note, the letter presents to King Ibn Saud an Agricultural Mission from this Government under Mr. K. S. Twitchell, who was recently presented to you by Colonel Donovan.9 The Saudi Arabian Government recently requested a mission of technical experts to assist in the agricultural development of Arabia, and I understand that the gift of such a mission has already received your approval. The appointment of Mr. Twitchell as its director would seem appropriate in view of his experience and knowledge of Saudi Arabia and the confidence reposed in him by King Ibn Saud.

I believe that your message, and the gift of this Mission, will produce a thoroughly favorable effect upon the King, who as you know is the most influential figure in the Arab and Moslem world generally, in and through which a very important part of the war effort is taking place. More specifically, Saudi Arabia lies between the field of activity of the United States Army North African Mission under General Maxwell based on the Red Sea, and that of the United States Army Iranian Mission under General Wheeler based on the Persian Gulf. The Army Air Corps now has under active consideration the desirability of requesting the permission of the Saudi Arabian Government for the installation of airfields. It is entirely possible that as the result of military developments in the Middle East it will be necessary for our armed services to obtain, sooner or later, rather extensive facilities from the King of Saudi Arabia.

Faithfully yours,

Sumner Welles

[Enclosure]

Draft of Message From President Roosevelt to the King of Saudi Arabia (Ibn Saud)10

Your Majesty: I have been informed of the desire of Your Government, as communicated to Mr. Kirk, American Minister accredited to Your Majesty’s Government, to obtain the services of American irrigation and agricultural experts to cooperate in making surveys and plans for the further development of Saudi Arabia.

I am convinced that Your Majesty’s well-known endeavors to bring about increased agricultural production are of fundamental importance to the welfare of Your country. I realize also that the normal economy of Saudi Arabia has been disturbed for various reasons arising from the war.

Accordingly, I am sending two technical experts of the United States Government under the direction of Mr. K. S. Twitchell, who I understand is favorably known to Your Majesty and familiar with Your country and its problems. The salaries, and traveling expenses of the Mission from this country to Saudi Arabia and return are at the Chargé of the Government of the United States. I bespeak for the members of this Mission the hospitality and cooperation of Your Majesty’s Government and sincerely trust that their labors will prove fruitful.

I avail myself of this opportunity to send my greetings and best wishes, and those of the Government and People of the United States of America, to You and to the Government and People of Saudi Arabia, who have a long and noble history, and whose love of liberty finds a particularly warm response in our hearts at this time.

As Your Majesty is doubtless aware, my countrymen, in association with the other peoples comprising the United Nations, have pledged their lives and their fortunes to the eradication of the evil forces of Germany, Italy, and Japan, which seek to destroy the world’s liberties in accordance with an utterly selfish plan, pursued in a cruel and dishonorable manner. However bitter the struggle may be, the final outcome is not in doubt, and, in view of the bonds of civilization and the common aims which unite our Peoples, I am confident that Your Majesty will assist in the attainment of freedom, security and progress in such manner as Your wisdom and judgment may determine.

Your Good Friend,

Franklin D. Roosevelt

9 William J. Donovan, Coordinator of Information.

10 Apparently approved and signed by the President, February 13, 1942.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890F.61A/9: Telegram

[Document 671]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, February 26, 1942—10 p.m.

165. Further to the Department’s 115, February 6, 9 p.m., funds have now been authorized for a “United States Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia” headed by K. S. Twitchell and having Albert Lee Wathen, Department of the Interior and James Guy Hamilton, Department of Agriculture, as members. It is hoped that the Mission will depart by air about March 15. It will proceed via Cairo and its work in Saudi Arabia will occupy a minimum of 3 months.

The Saudi Arabian Legation at Cairo should be informed of the foregoing with an expression of hope that the Saudi Arabian Government will furnish food, lodging, transport and such local personnel as may be required. You should also state that the President has addressed a letter to King Ibn Saud which will be delivered at the time of the Mission’s arrival.

For your strictly confidential information, the War Department desires in principle to establish airfields in Saudi Arabia11 and expects to designate an officer in Cairo to accompany you when you present your credentials, the President’s letter above mentioned, and the Agricultural Mission. The War Department desires the officer in question to make a survey and to prepare definite recommendations. The method of approach in this matter is left to your discretion after you consult with General Maxwell and, if you consider it desirable, with the British. It may be best to have the officer designated accompany you as a member of your staff and bring up the question of airfields after you reach Saudi Arabia.

In connection with the establishment of a combined office at Jidda, in regard to which a separate message is being sent, it is hoped to bring Moose12 to Cairo in time to accompany you on your journey.

Welles

11 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675] ff.

12 James S. Moose, Jr., assigned as Second Secretary and Consul at Jidda, February 28, 1942.

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the United States Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia (Twitchell) 890F.61A/24a

[Document 672]

The Secretary of State to the Chief of the United States Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia (Twitchell)

Washington, March 19, 1942.

Sir: Reference is made to the Department’s communication to you of February 27, 1942,13 in regard to your appointment as Chief, United States Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia, and to communications of like date addressed to Mr. Albert L. Wathen and Mr. James G. Hamilton, respectively, in regard to their appointment as Members of this Mission.

As you are aware, the Mission has been created in response to a request from the Government of Saudi Arabia, in order to be of service to the Government and people of that country, and to promote good will between them and the Government and people of the United States. The principal duties of the Mission are to investigate the agricultural and related resources of Saudi Arabia, to conduct such experiments as may be possible in view of the limited time and funds at the Mission’s disposal, and to furnish friendly counsel to the Saudi Arabian Government. The Department is convinced that the personal relationships which the Mission’s personnel establishes with Saudi Arabian officials and individuals in civil life can play an important part in the success which the Department sincerely trusts will attend the Mission’s work, and believes that these relationships should be carefully cultivated.

You are requested to inform the Department by telegraph of the Mission’s arrival at Cairo and in Saudi Arabia. You should also report briefly by telegraph, if possible, at least once a month, after the Mission reaches the scene of its activities, in regard to its welfare, progress and plans. All telegraphic reports, as well as originals or copies of all reports or recommendations made to agencies of this Government or to the Saudi Arabian Government, as the case may be, copies of memoranda of important conversations, et cetera, should be transmitted by the nearest American consular or diplomatic officer. You should request the officer concerned to transmit written material under cover of transmitting despatches and to indicate therein the distribution of originals or copies to other interested agencies of the Government, as desired by those agencies or by the members of the Mission.

If you consider that the Department’s instructions are necessary or desirable in any contingency, instructions should be requested, if practicable, through the channel above mentioned. You and the members of the Mission may, of course, feel free at all times to consult with the nearest American consular and diplomatic officer regarding any problems which arise.

You should so arrange matters that the Mission’s work and its return to the United States will be carried out within the limitations of the funds now authorized. While the length of time during which the Mission will pursue its work is left to your discretion, subject to unforeseen or urgent contingencies which may arise, your decision in this regard will, of course, be governed by the foregoing consideration.

Very truly yours,

For the Secretary of State:
A. A. Berle, Jr.
Assistant Secretary

13 Not printed.

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, March 25, 1942 890F.61A/12

[Document 673]

Press Release Issued by the Department of State, March 25, 1942

March 25, 1942

United States Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia

The Government of Saudi Arabia having inquired of the Government of the United States whether the services of two American experts in irrigation and agricultural matters could be made available, this Government has organized an Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia. The Mission will examine and report to the Government of Saudi Arabia upon the water and agricultural resources of that country and the possibilities of their development. It will also conduct experimental plantings. The personnel of the Mission, which has already departed, is as follows: Chief: Mr. K. S. Twitchell;

Members: Mr. Albert L. Wathen, Acting Chief, Engineering Branch, Indian Bureau, United States Department of the Interior;
Mr. James G. Hamilton, Regional Agronomist at Albuquerque, New Mexico, Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture.

Mr. Twitchell is an American citizen who has had extensive technical experience in Saudi Arabia. The other members are, as indicated, government experts familiar with conditions in a section of this country which are similar to those prevailing in Saudi Arabia.

This Government is pleased to have been able to respond in this way to the inquiry of the Saudi Arabian Government.

[The mission arrived in Saudi Arabia on May 10 and was presented to the King on May 11. After traveling a distance of 10,793 miles the mission completed its investigation on December 5, 1942. The reports of the mission are not printed.]

The King of Saudi Arabia (Ibn Saud) to President Roosevelt 123 K 632/447

[Document 674]

The King of Saudi Arabia (Ibn Saud) to President Roosevelt 14

[Translation]

In the Name of Allah The Compassionate, the Merciful.

Your Excellency: The Minister of the United States to My Government, Mr. Kirk, carried to me Your Excellency’s letter which was issued from the White House—Washington—on February 13, 1942. I was greatly pleased by its contents.

I thank Your Excellency for having delegated the agricultural mission—under the supervision of Mr. K. S. Twitchell—to help in the survey of the lands and to prepare projects for the improvement of agriculture in the lands of Saudi Arabia. My Government has accepted with thanks the decision of Your Excellency’s Government to bear the expenses of this mission. The members of this mission will be accorded all hospitality by my Government and will find all means of help in the execution of their mission which is vital for my country.

I received with pleasure Your Excellency’s greetings and the greetings of the people and the Government of the United States of America, to my person, my Government and to the people of the Arab countries. I beg in turn that you should accept my hearty greetings and the greetings of my people and Government to Your Excellency, your dear people and your Government with whom we share—as we share with the American people—the high feelings which Your Excellency expressed and which clearly show that the love of liberty and its seeking are among the most important objectives of our two peoples and Governments.

This war, as I personally believe, started at its beginning because of certain factors the most important among which was probably the engagement of some of the Governments and people in purely material life and their forsaking the spiritual and religious life which, among other things, necessitates working for the establishment of long peace and even of a permanent peace in this world—which I hope will be realized by the result of the bloody battles which are taking place in most parts of the world today. There is no doubt that every responsible person has a duty for the attainment of this high and honorable aim.

Please accept [etc.]

Abdel Aziz al Saud

Al Riad , 27 Rabee El Thani 1361 (13 May 1942).

14 Transmitted to the Department by the Minister in Egypt in his despatch No. 8, Saudi Arabian Series, May 18; received May 28.

Negotiations regarding air transit rights over certain parts of Saudi Arabia for American planesNegotiations regarding air transit rights over certain parts of Saudi Arabia for American planes

[675] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, April 15, 1942—9 p.m.

890F.7962/3a: Telegram

[676] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 19, 1942—7 p.m. [Received May 21—5:51 p.m.]

890F.7962/8: Telegram

[677] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, July 7, 1942—8 p.m.

890F.7962/11a: Telegram

[678] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 14, 1942—5 p.m. [Received July 15—5:47 p.m.]

890F.7962/13: Telegram

[679] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, July 18, 1942—7 p.m.

890F.51/51: Telegram

[680] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 24, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 6:09 p.m.]

890F.7962/16: Telegram

[681] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 31, 1942—10 p.m. [Received July 31—6:03 p.m.]

890F.7962/18: Telegram

[682] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose)

Washington, August 4, 1942—10 p.m.

890F.7962/20: Telegram

[683] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, August 12, 1942—1 p.m. [Received August 14—2:01 a.m.]

890F.7962/24: Telegram

[684] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, August 29, 1942—6 p.m. [Received August 31—9:02 a.m.]

890F.7962/27: Telegram

[685] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, September 1, 1942—6 p.m. [Received September 3—9:39 a.m.]

890F.7962/29: Telegram

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890F.7962/3a: Telegram

[Document 675]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)15

Washington, April 15, 1942—9 p.m.

326. Department’s 258, March 26, 10 p.m.16 Following summarizes the Department’s communication of March 23 to the War Department: Begin summary. On learning of the War Department’s interest in establishing one or more airfields in Saudi Arabia, this Department, to ensure the most favorable possible reception of a request for air facilities, took certain steps and made certain plans, i. e. visit of Minister to present credentials and President’s letter to King Ibn Saud,17 organization and despatch of Agricultural Mission,18 and opening of Legation at Jidda.19 It is now necessary to telegraph instructions for the Minister’s guidance in forthcoming conversations with the King regarding air facilities desired. According to Americans having intimate knowledge of Saudi Arabia, permission to establish airfields will be denied unless a definite offer is made when matter is first broached. While War Department may naturally desire to make offer contingent upon extent of facilities ultimately decided upon, from the King’s viewpoint neutral status of his country and liability to involvement in the war would be seriously affected regardless of magnitude of facilities granted. His anticipated initial repugnance to the idea must be overcome. Thus offer to be effective should be adequate, concrete, and made when matter is initiated. While Saudi Arabia has severed relations with Italy, it more recently declined to agree to British suggestion to declare war on the Axis. To assist in formulation of offer, copy of Legation’s despatch of February 28 enclosed.20 Advisability of making Saudi Arabia available for Lend-Lease aid now being considered by this Department which would welcome War Department’s views in this regard. End of summary.

War Department’s reply of April 11 states in summary that if it is possible to establish route across Saudi Arabia, ferrying distance for short-range aircraft between Khartoum and Karachi will be materially reduced, also Arabian route more secure than present one via Cairo. Moreover areas near Jidda and Fort Duwadamie seem more suitable with respect to terrain and communications than areas further south. However, final selection of airfield sites is subject to spot investigation by qualified officer in Cairo assigned to your staff. It is felt that any agreement with Saudi Arabian Government, for installation, defense, and operation of airfields should be negotiated by United Kingdom, since Saudi Arabia lies within area of British military responsibility. Therefore it is proposed to request British Chiefs of Staff to take necessary action if establishment of airfields in Saudi Arabia is found practicable. War Department does not favor Lend-Lease assistance to Saudi Arabia in the form of war material, but has no objection to such financial aid as State Department considers necessary or desirable.

In view of the foregoing, the Department considers that you should proceed to Saudi Arabia as soon as possible in order to present your credentials and the President’s letter, accompanied by Moose,21 the Agricultural Mission, the Army officer assigned, and such other personnel as you consider necessary or desirable for the purposes of the journey.

It would appear that for the time being, the War Department desires only to determine whether the establishment of airfields in Saudi Arabia is practicable. It is presumed that the Army officer in question will be able to conduct his investigation whether or not the Saudi Arabian Government is informed thereof, and the Department leaves to your discretion whether the subject of airfields should be mentioned to the King or to others in Saudi Arabia, at this stage. As the matter is a delicate one, you may wish to consult Mr. Twitchell22 and others with long experience of the country and its personalities.

If the appropriate United States Army authorities decide that airfield sites in Saudi Arabia should be obtained, the question naturally will then arise as to the best means of acquiring them. Please consider this question with great care in cooperation with the United States Army authorities concerned and, in your discretion, with other qualified persons, with a view to the preparation and transmittal of agreed recommendations by you and the Army authorities. The utilization of the British Chiefs of Staff for negotiations and arrangements with the Saudi Arab Government seems broadly logical in view of the division of the war effort into general spheres of responsibility. However, the United States Army has been making its own supply arrangements for the Middle Eastern theater for some time, and in view of the important political factors which would undoubtedly occur to the Saudi Arabs in connection with a proposed British military establishment in their country, the question arises whether, if the plan for obtaining airfields is to have a reasonable chance of success, it should not be put forward and worked out purely and simply as a United States project.

With reference to your 342, February 28, 5 p.m.,23 final paragraph, the Department is unable to state what financial and economic assistance can be rendered to Saudi Arabia in the absence of investigations on the spot and recommendations from its own representatives. Please look into this matter and communicate your views. Presumably these will be formulated in connection with compensation for airfields, if it is concluded that the latter is a matter which should be handled by this Government. After you depart from Saudi Arabia, the Department will of course rely mainly upon the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim for information and recommendations concerning the foregoing as well as other matters relating to Saudi Arabia.

The Department sincerely hopes that you and your party are in a position to proceed promptly.

Welles

15 Also accredited as Minister to Saudi Arabia.

16 Not printed.

17 See draft of message from President Roosevelt to the King of Saudi Arabia, p. 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 670].

18 See pp. 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669] ff.

19 See pp. 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666] ff.

20 Not printed.

21 James S. Moose, Jr., Second Secretary and Consul at Jidda.

22 K. S. Twitchell, Chief of the American Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia.

23 Not printed.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/8: Telegram

[Document 676]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 19, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received May 21—5:51 p.m.]

812. Department’s 326, April 15. In view of fact that ostensible purpose of my visit to Saudi Arabia was formal one of presenting letter of credence and as no detailed instructions were received from War Department outlining specific proposals for air routes over and airfields on that territory I avoided raising those particular questions in my talks with the King during my visit.

Just before leaving Cairo, however, I learned British Minister to Jidda had approached the S[audi] A[rabian] Finance [Minister]24 on subject of air routes and airfields on that territory and I also heard that Casoc25 had addressed a letter to the King requesting a permit on behalf of Panair for an “experimental” flight over S A territory. From foregoing and indirect hints dropped in talks during my visit at Riad it was clear Saudi Arabs were assuming that United States Government was considering these air problems and that I must be aware of what had transpired to date. In the interest, therefore, of a system of straightforwardness which I consider essential in our dealings with the Saud’s Government I took occasion during a conversation with Finance Minister to so direct our talk that without actually stating problem of air routes et cetera, I made certain he would take the occasion to mention the matter itself or to show his disinclination to do so by deliberately ignoring the lead. After a lengthy preamble the Minister to my surprise volunteered the statement that there was no objection to flight of United States planes over S. A. or even to establishment of airports on the coast provided certain zones were respected and in this connection he specifically mentioned El Birkeh in the south and Dhaba in the north, the former being on a fairly direct line from Khartoum to Bahrein and the latter offering a curtailment of the routes to Iraq, Iran and India.

As I was not in a position to enter into any discussion of details of this matter I merely thanked the Minister for this information in the interest of the speedy ferrying of aircraft to points from which they could best be used to strike against Axis forces and stated that any forthcoming observations on the matter would be communicated to him.

Upon my return to Cairo I talked with Stonehewer Bird, British Minister to Jidda, who stated that the remarks of Saudi Arabia Finance Minister went beyond any statements made to him by that Minister and that they might be regarded as marking an advance which the Minister felt justified in making following conferences with the King on the basis of Bird’s previous approaches on this general subject. He agreed with me that principal step now was to ascertain the precise views of air services of our respective Governments on this particular phase of air routes in order to determine whether matter should be carried further and negotiations be initiated with a view to ascertaining the definite attitude of the Saudi Arabia Government in the premises and to effecting the Iran agreement or some provisional understanding with that Government. To that end I ask that War Department furnish me through Department or direct to air section of Maxwell Mission to which I understand General Fitzgerald is being attached as air officer a definite statement of its views and desiderata in relation to foregoing.

In general I wish to state that I believe any further approach to Finance Minister on this matter should be made by your Chargé in Jidda [apparent omission] what other influences there are which it may be deemed advisable to mobilize during negotiations and that as a matter of principle we should apprise the interested British authorities of our intentions irrespective of whether as a matter of procedure we join with the British in our negotiations or decide to present and negotiate this matter solely as an American project.

I suggest pending a complete clarification of the question instructions be sent to me rather than direct to Chargé at Jidda.

Kirk

24 Abdullah Suleiman.

25 California Arabian Standard Oil Company.

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890F.7962/11a: Telegram

[Document 677]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, July 7, 1942—8 p.m.

689. Communication dated June 29 has been received from the War Department suggesting that efforts be made to obtain defined non-stop Ferry Command routes across central Arabia from Khartoum to Bahrein and from Khartoum to Basra, both routes to avoid restricted areas and to include the right to forced landings. It is also suggested the question of landing fields for short-range aircraft be explored.

Bearing in mind enclosure No. 9 to your despatch No. 11 Saudi Arabian Series of May 23, 1942,26 as well as the recent reverses in the Western Desert,27 we presume that there is probably no use in approaching Ibn Saud on this matter unless an adequate offer is made to him of financial or other economic assistance and unless the King is convinced that in some way his country will be made secure from Axis attack.

Before replying to the War Department we should like to know whether you agree with the foregoing presumption and to have your ideas as to what a suitable offer should include.

Hull

26 Not printed.

27 For correspondence regarding this subject, see pp. 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78] ff.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/13: Telegram

[Document 678]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 14, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received July 15—5:47 p.m.]

1233. I referred to Moose at Jidda Department’s 689, July 7, 8 p.m. and have received the following comments from him: “18, July 11, 2 p.m. Permission for non-stop routes should be obtainable. Securing forced landing fields will be more difficult but I am hopeful they too can be had. Probably the King will impose conditions relative to protection but I have no idea what.

British Government now subsidizes Saudi Arabia up to 3 million pounds this year, while it is understood that Casoc will make no further advances. Basis for beginning negotiations should be that present subsidy and desired facilities are both parts of common war effort and that no further compensation will be expected. If British assistance remains at present level however Saudi Government may still have a deficit of as much as 750,000 pounds sterling per year of which our Government might consider compensating all or part if requested. In that event, and [it?] should preferably be in form of needed commodities, or failing that, in newly minted silver rials and only as a last resort in gold. An alternative would be for us to assume part of aid now given by British.

In my opinion negotiations should be conducted through Abdullah Suleiman now in Alkharj … This means that person Charged with negotiation should go to Riyadh.”

I recommend that Moose be instructed to sound out the Saudi Arabian Government as to its definite attitude regarding the specific routes and facilities which would meet the requirements of the War Department and that he initiate negotiations with Suleiman, Minister of Finance, who discussed this matter with me at Riyadh without, as the Department knows, reaching any conclusion. These conversations between Moose and Suleiman would clarify the position of the Saudi Arabian Government in the premises and would also elicit indications of conditions which it might wish to impose. Such conditions or compensation might be more appropriately linked with the concession of landing fields rather than with the permission for non-stop flights over Arabian territory.

American Legation Jidda informed.

Kirk

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890F.51/51: Telegram

[Document 679]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, July 18, 1942—7 p.m.

761. Your 1233, July 14, 5 p.m. You are requested to inform the Chargé at Jidda that the Department instructs him to approach the Saudi Arabian Government in accordance with your recommendations.

War Department is being informed of your telegram under reference, and of the present instructions.

Casoc estimates the value of British assistance to Saudi Arabia this year at nearly 4 million pounds sterling and states that the Company is furnishing 3 million dollars at the rate of 500,000 every 2 months.

Hull

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/16: Telegram

[Document 680]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 24, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 6:09 p.m.]

1308. Department’s 761, July 18, 7 p.m. In view of the special position of the British in Saudi Arabia, the personal prestige of the British Minister and the fact that he has in the past discussed with Saudi Arabian officials the matter of air routes and fields in the country, I have recommended to Moose that he cooperate closely with Bird in the pending negotiations on this matter. Any other course would result in confusion and delay.

Minister of State Casey is sending appropriate instructions in the premises to the British Minister at Jidda.

Repeated to Jidda.

Kirk

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/18: Telegram

[Document 681]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 31, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received July 31—6:03 p.m.]

1359. My 1308, July 24, 5 p.m. Following telegram is repeated for Department’s information from Jidda: 26. “July 25, 5 p.m. Your 30, July 22, 4 p.m., and my 25, July 23, 5 p.m. In a very satisfactory conversation with Bird and myself this morning the Finance Minister expressed his belief that non-stop air routes can be had and said he will remain in Jidda until he can obtain the King’s reply. He still thinks fields can be secured near Dheba and Birkeh irrespective of grant of inland fields but advises that fields not be mentioned to King until routes have been approved.

Thus far there has been no mention of compensation or request for commercial operation though I have purposely given openings both to Finance Minister and to his assistant, not in Bird’s presence. Further openings will be given when inquiry develops into negotiation. Moose.”

And number 27. “July 29, 6 p.m. Continuing my 26, July 25, 5 p.m. On July 28 the King’s reply was reported verbally to British Minister by Minister of Finance with request that it be repeated to me. The King is willing to grant to the British, routes for non-stop flights from Khartoum to Bahrein passing north of direct line from Birkeh to Bahrein and from Khartoum to Basra passing north of direct line from Dheba to Basra, and he will not object if American planes utilize the facilities so granted. He asked that the matter be treated with utmost secrecy.

The following day in conversation with Bird and myself, the Finance Minister confirmed the foregoing and stated that in his opinion it would be appropriate for Bird and myself to present a joint oral request for air routes following procedure used in making recent inquiry. The Finance Minister advised that any request should be delayed for at least a week to allow him an opportunity to reach Riyadh and to discuss matter with the King first. Bird also favors joint request after a week’s time.

It is, therefore, suggested that I be instructed to make such request. On advice of Finance Minister, no mention of forced landing fields was made to the King and Finance Minister thinks it also inadvisable to refer to fields in initial request. Moose.”

Kirk

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) 890F.7962/20: Telegram

[Document 682]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose)

Washington, August 4, 1942—10 p.m.

29. Your 26, July 25, 5 p.m. and 27, July 29, 6 p.m. to Cairo.29 You are instructed to make request jointly and in other respects as you suggest.

Hull

29 For texts, see telegram No. 1359, supra.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/24: Telegram

[Document 683]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, August 12, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received August 14—2:01 a.m.]

45. My 44, August 11th, 4 p.m.30 Shaikh Yusuf Yassin, Foreign Ministry representative, has returned to Jidda and this morning the request was presented orally and jointly with British Minister.

A reply is expected in about a week.

Repeated to Cairo.

Moose

30 Not printed.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/27: Telegram

[Document 684]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, August 29, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received August 31—9:02 a.m.]

55. Referring to Legation’s 49, August 20, 10 a.m.,31 the King’s reply was delivered verbally by Shaikh Yusuf Yassin this morning. After expressing a desire to be helpful to the American Government the King assented to nonstop flights across Saudi Arabia along the following routes:

(Firstly) From the Red Sea to Bahare in passing south of Birk and Bisha thence in a northeasterly direction leaving Suleil to the south and east thence in a more easterly direction passing midway between Suleil and Aflaja and thence in a more northerly direction to Bahare in leaving Hauta Hofuf and Oqair to the north; (secondly) from Aqaba passing over midpoint of the Wadi Sirhan passing north of Jauf and south of Qariyat thence in a more or less direct line to Wadi Basra. He suggested that planes be sent over singly or in small groups and that they fly as high as practicable.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Shaikh Yusuf said that flights could begin at once.

He could give no plausible explanation of the material alteration of northern route and slight change in southern route from those suggested by Finance Minister. In my opinion those changes are Shaikh Yusuf’s contribution to the negotiations.

In the King’s reply the American and British Governments were treated on the same basis and the distinction formerly made was not mentioned.

Repeated to Cairo.

Moose

31 Not printed; it explained the delay in the King’s reply pending determination of localities over or near which routes would pass (890F.7962/25).

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 890F.7962/29: Telegram

[Document 685]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, September 1, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received September 3—9:39 a.m.]

56. My 55, August 29, 6 p.m. In further conversation with British Minister Shaikh Yusuf stated that route specified between Birk and Bahrein is merely the northernmost of permissible routes to Bahrein and that planes may choose their own routes south of that alignment so long as they do not pass near Suleil, also written Sulaiyl.

Repeated to Cairo.

Moose

Consideration by the United States of means for protection of oil fields in Saudi Arabia and for denying the enemy the use of themConsideration by the United States of means for protection of oil fields in Saudi Arabia and for denying the enemy the use of them

[686] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 16, 1942.

890F.6363 Standard Oil Company/139

[687] Memorandum by the Liaison Officer (Wilson) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 29, 1942.

890F.6363/34

[688] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 19, 1942—6 p.m. [Received May 22—4:12 p.m.]

890F.6363/25: Telegram

[689] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, June 5, 1942—1 p.m. [Received June 7—11:35 a.m.]

890F.6363/26: Telegram

[690] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, July 3, 1942—2 p.m. [Received July 5—10:42 a.m.]

890F.6363/28: Telegram

[691] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 13, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 9:45 a.m.]

890F.6363/31: Telegram

[692] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Merriam)

[Washington,] July 13, 1942.

890F.6363/28

[693] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, July 15, 1942—1 p.m. [Received July 16—7:33 a.m.]

890F.6363/32: Telegram

[694] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, July 20, 1942—10 p.m.

890F.6363/31: Telegram

[695] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, July 22, 1942—midnight.

890F.6363/28: Telegram

[696] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, August 16, 1942—4 p.m. [Received August 17—9 a.m.]

890F.6363/37: Telegram

[697] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 20, 1942—9 p.m. [Received August 20—4:27 p.m.]

890F.6363/38: Telegram

[698] The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, August 28, 1942—10 p.m.

890F.6363/40: Telegram

[699] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, September 2, 1942—6 p.m. [Received September 4—8:26 p.m.]

890F.6363/42: Telegram

[700] The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, September 14, 1942—2 p.m. [Received September 15—12:55 p.m.]

890F.6363/44: Telegram

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 890F.6363 Standard Oil Company/139

[Document 686]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 16, 1942.

Mr. Lenahan32 stated that he was calling at the request of Mr. Fred Davies, President of the California Arabian Standard Oil Company. Mr. Lenahan said that some fifteen of their employees who had recently arrived from Saudi Arabia had stressed to Mr. Davies the vital necessity of finding some means of protecting the oil installations in that country. At the present time the only protection consisted of a moderate number of Saudi Arabian troops who are armed only with rifles. The considerable number of American employees in Saudi Arabia felt very strongly that the installations would be subject to attack from the air at almost any time, and there was absolutely no means at present of defending the properties against such an attack. The company had spent several hundred thousand dollars in building concrete reenforcements around the installations, but, although these would help probably in reducing damage from air attacks, what was really needed was anti-aircraft protection.

I asked Mr. Lenahan what proportion of the oil being refined in Bahrein was obtained from the Saudi Arabian field, and he replied that of the 37,000 barrels refined daily 17,000 barrels came from the mainland. I asked him what Mr. Davies had in mind in the way of protection, and he replied that apparently Mr. Davies envisaged American troops with anti-aircraft guns and possibly one or two fighter planes being stationed near the field. I told Mr. Lenahan that this was a military problem, but that I would be glad to bring it to the attention of the appropriate authorities with a view to seeing what could be done.

32 Of the California Arabian Standard Oil Company (Casoc).

Memorandum by the Liaison Officer (Wilson) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 890F.6363/34

[Document 687]

Memorandum by the Liaison Officer (Wilson) to the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] April 29, 1942.

Mr. Alling: At the meeting of the Liaison Committee33 held on Monday, April 27, the protection of the oil installations in Saudi Arabia was considered. The representative of the War Department stated that that Department had at present no plans to send any forces or equipment to the region in question. It is the belief that while a possibility of an air raid on the oil fields of that region exists the danger to the refineries on Bahrein Island is much greater.

Orme Wilson

33 Composed of the Chief of Staff, Chief of Naval Operations, and the Under Secretary of State.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/25: Telegram

[Document 688]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk)34 to the Secretary of State

Cairo, May 19, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received May 22—4:12 p.m.]

811. F. W. Ohliger, representative of Casoc at Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, is proceeding Washington where he proposes to present to War Department certain considerations relating to measures essential to the defense of the oil properties in that country as well as eventual denial operations. From my conversations with the Americans connected with Casoc and Bahrein Petroleum Company, I am impressed with importance of these problems and I hope Department will facilitate Ohliger’s representations to War Department.

Kirk

34 Also accredited as Minister to Saudi Arabia.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/26: Telegram

[Document 689]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, June 5, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received June 7—11:35 a.m.]

14. Referring to cable May 1935 and despatch May 22 from Cairo.36 Should Department discuss with Ohliger problem of defense and denial operations at Dhahran, sight should not be lost of desirability of utilizing American military forces if needed and practicable and of protecting insofar as possible oil concession rights and oil company personnel by inducting active American participants into United States Army and by giving timely notice to Saudi Government through this Legation of Army’s intentions.

Repeated to Cairo.

Moose

35  Supra.

36 No. 10, not printed.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/28: Telegram

[Document 690]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, July 3, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received July 5—10:42 a.m.]

27. My 14, June 5, 1 p.m. Casoc’s cable 375 to San Francisco office raises question of possible evacuation Dhahran. To protect insofar as possible valuable concession rights the Government should assume responsibility for evacuation by requesting company to protect lives of Americans by temporary withdrawal from Saudi Arabia. The Legation might transmit request to company representative here and should supply copy to local government before evacuation begins.

If desirable a skeleton crew inducted into military service could remain for possible denial operations though evacuation would greatly increase threat of interference from local officials.

Circumstances necessitating evacuation might make impossible rapid communication with Department or Minister Kirk and it is therefore respectfully suggested that Department, company, and military officials formulate request together with pertinent instructions leaving to discretion of Legation actual time of delivery to company and local government. Legation is in constant touch with local company representative.

The foregoing is based on assumption that Army has no plan for taking over defense and perhaps operation of Dhahran.

Repeated to Cairo.

Moose

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/31: Telegram

[Document 691]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, July 13, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 9:45 a.m.]

1221. General Maxwell37 informs me that he has suggested to War Department that General Spalding38 who is proceeding to this area be requested to cause a survey to be made of possible defense and denial measures applicable to the oil companies at Bahrein and in Saudi Arabia which have recently been the subject of an informal investigation by Lieutenant Commander Lockard, United States Naval Observer at Basra.

As Department is aware this question has been the subject of messages from this Legation and the Legation at Jidda and in view of fact that any action along this line may involve presence in Saudi Arabia of American experts I urge that Moose be kept informed of developments in order that he may be in position to give advice and recommend measures with a view to minimizing danger of arousing Saudi Arabian susceptibilities at this time.

Repeated to Jidda.

Kirk

37 Maj. Gen. Russell L. Maxwell, in command of American Forces in the Middle East with headquarters at Cairo.

38 Brig. Gen. Sidney P. Spalding.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Merriam) 890F.6363/28

[Document 692]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Merriam)

[Washington,] July 13, 1942.

Mr. Lenahan came in at my request to discuss the substance of Jidda’s telegram No. 27, July 3, 2 p.m., since with the exception of five persons all of the Americans now in Saudi Arabia are employees of the oil company.

Mr. Lenahan agreed that immediate evacuation was apparently not contemplated by the representatives of Casoc in Saudi Arabia, but that preliminary steps were felt to be desirable at this time. In response to questions he stated as follows:

The Company’s concession does not stipulate in detail the circumstances under which the concern may withdraw its personnel from Saudi Arabia and cease operations without loss or impairment of the concession rights. There is a force majeure clause which, of course, is open to interpretation by the Saudi Arab Government as well as by the Company. It would assist the Company, if it should become necessary to invoke force majeure, if our Government should order or advise American citizens to leave Saudi Arabia, and if our Chargé at Jidda should inform the Saudi Arab Government of his action. If for any reason the Department could not direct Americans to leave but only advise them to do so, that would be entirely satisfactory to the Company, which had no thought of asking us to do in Saudi Arabia more than we had done elsewhere.

I told Mr. Lenahan I felt sure that the Department would be glad to instruct the Chargé at Jidda at the proper time to advise American citizens to depart, and that offhand I could see no objection to the Chargé’s informing the Saudi Arab Government of his action. I reminded Mr. Lenahan that such advice was commonly issued well in advance of actual necessity to move out, citing the case of Egypt where American citizens had been advised to leave more than a year ago. I then raised the question whether, in view of the special conditions in Saudi Arabia, it would be advisable to issue an advice at this time, or to give the Chargé discretion in the matter.

Mr. Lenahan stated emphatically that it would be most inadvisable to issue such an advice at this time, as the Saudi Arab Government would be thoroughly upset in the conviction that evacuation would be carried out forthwith. He also believed, and it was the belief of his principals, that it would be undesirable to make the Chargé at Jidda responsible for timing the issuance of the warning. In that connection, Mr. Lenahan stated that the question of ceasing operations and evacuating the Company’s employees was closely bound up with strategic considerations of the highest importance, that the War Department considered Bahrein and Dhahran might continue in operation even after the oilfields and installations in Palestine, Iraq and Iran went. If they did go, nothing except Bahrein and Dhahran would be left in that part of the world and they would undoubtedly be continued in operation to the last moment. Therefore, the decision to evacuate would be a highly important one in which the military authorities would probably play the leading part, and should not be left to the discretion of any one official.

As regards denial operations, Mr. Lenahan said that a full account of preparations to date had been communicated about two months ago by Mr. Davies, President of Casoc, to Mr. James Terry Duce, Chief of the Foreign Division, Office of the Petroleum Coordinator, who in turn had informed General Pyron, the Army’s number one man on oil. General Pyron had expressed himself as entirely satisfied with the measures which had been taken and had advised that no further steps be taken for the present. It had been agreed that final denial operations would be undertaken purely as a military operation, by the British or United States forces or both. The Company felt that it would be most inadvisable to bring its employees temporarily into military service for the purpose.

Mr. Lenahan considered it highly unlikely that communications between this country and Saudi Arabia would be entirely disrupted. He pointed out that if the ordinary cables were eliminated, the Company’s own communication system would be available to us, and there was also the possibility that by the time matters became acute the War Department would itself have undertaken activities in Saudi Arabia and set up its own communication system.

It appeared clear from recent exchanges of information with the War Department that while various possibilities were being explored, that Department had no matured plan for taking over the defense or operation of Dhahran.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/32: Telegram

[Document 693]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, July 15, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received July 16—7:33 a.m.]

30. My telegram No. 14, June 5, 11 [1] p.m. and Cairo’s No. 1221, July 13, 9 a.m. In response to British inquiry from Cairo, British Minister and I on July 1st conferred on advisability of mentioning possible denial operations to Saudi Government. We agreed that such mention would create needless alarm and harm standing of United Nations with local government. Mr. Bird opined that recent German advances in Egypt made present time particularly inopportune.

In my opinion no favorable time will occur to mention denial alone though it might be linked with defense in a more palatable phrase such as “maintenance of military detachments, establishment of antiaircraft defenses and other military measures designed to prevent the oil installation from falling into enemy hands”.

Cairo has been informed.

Moose

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890F.6363/31: Telegram

[Document 694]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, July 20, 1942—10 p.m.

772. Your 1221, July 13, 9 a.m. Department is informed that General Spalding left Washington on July 14. The War Department is understood to have considerable information in addition to that furnished by Lockard regarding denial activities and plans respecting the oilfields under reference but the General was unable to acquaint himself with them prior to departure.

You and the Legation at Jidda are requested to facilitate General Spalding’s work in every possible way.

Local representative of Casoc has been informed and states that Dhahran will be advised to expect this visit.

Inform Jidda.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890F.6363/28: Telegram

[Document 695]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, July 22, 1942—midnight.

788. Jidda’s 27, July 3, 2 p.m. At the proper time the Department will instruct its representative at Jidda to advise Americans to evacuate Saudi Arabia. If and when that is done, the Saudi Arab Government should be officially informed. However, no such warning or advice should be issued at this time or any other time except on specific instructions from the Department because it is undesirable to alarm the Saudi Government and because evacuation will be advised only after consultation with the War Department in view of the paramount strategic considerations involved.

Final denial operations are understood to be the subject of agreement between the company and responsible officials here whereby action would take place as a strictly military operation in which company employees would not take part.

Department will of course bear the question of communications in mind but due to strategic considerations above mentioned desires to retain responsibility for issuance of evacuation warning in its own hands.

While the War Department is considering various possibilities, it apparently has no present intention of taking over defense or operation of Dhahran.

Repeat to Jidda as Dept’s. No. 23.

Hull

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/37: Telegram

[Document 696]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, August 16, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received August 17—9 a.m.]

47. Department’s 772, July 20, 10 a.m. [p.m.] to Cairo. Captain Bale, a British officer, Tenth Army, has been in Bahrein over 3 weeks awaiting permission to visit Khahron [Dhahran] in furtherance of British plan for denial operations there. British Minister in Jidda has been requested to facilitate Bale’s entry into Arabia but sees little point in visit so long as Casoc officials have instructions to give no aid to denial plan until company has assurance from American Government that the Government assumes responsibility for damage or prejudice to concession rights resulting from military action.

This Legation has no information about General Spalding’s activities or any United States Army plans for defense or denial of Dhahran oil. British denial scheme appears to be at a standstill until oil company receives desired assurance or Saudi Government assents to active preparations for denial operations. I still adhere to opinion expressed in my 30, July 15, 1 p.m. The British Minister here is reporting the situation to his Minister of State in Cairo and the Department might be prepared for a possible British inquiry about the desired assurances.

Repeated to Cairo.

Moose

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/38: Telegram

[Document 697]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 20, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received August 20—4:27 p.m.]

1466. The substance of Department’s 772, July 20, 10 p.m. was brought to attention of General Spalding upon his arrival in Cairo and prior to his departure for Iran and Iraq. He has now returned to Cairo en route to Washington and informs me that owing to his other duties it was impossible for him to investigate denial operations and plans affecting Casoc oil fields.

I have shown him telegram No. 47 from AmLegation Jedda and he states that he sees no reason why Casoc should not facilitate preparation of plan for denial operation without regard to matter of possible active preparation for such operations.

Kirk

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890F.6363/40: Telegram

[Document 698]

The Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, August 28, 1942—10 p.m.

990. The substance of Jidda’s 47, August 16, 4 p.m., your 1466, August 20, 9 p.m. and Jidda’s 51, August 22, noon,39 has been discussed with Lenahan, who has shown us a telegram dated August 17 from Lebkicher to his principals in San Francisco. It is stated in the message last-mentioned that both our Chargé and the British Minister agree that they do not wish to take up the question of Captain Bale’s entry with the Saudi Arabian Government, that London concurs, and that the British Minister has recommended to Cairo that Bale be returned to Basra without visiting Saudi Arabia.

As regards Jidda’s no. 47, Lenahan states that Casoc officials have no such instructions and that the company has made no request that the United States Government assume responsibility for damage or prejudice to concession rights resulting from military action.

He states further that the company has already carried out a denial program at Dhahran which cost it $200,000. However, the question of demolitions or final denial if such should be necessary has reached an impasse for the following reasons: (1) The United States Army still considers Saudi Arabia as an area of British military responsibility, consequently the War Department is making no plans either to assume responsibility for or resulting from demolitions or to carry them out; (2) The British could hardly carry out demolitions without in effect invading Saudi Arabia; (3) The Company could not demolish the wells and installations without jeopardizing the concession. In the circumstances, Lenahan does not expect further developments on the demolition question unless and until the matter becomes more urgent than it is at present.

The Department concurs in the Chargé’s opinion as expressed in his 30, July 15, 1 p.m. His despatch no. 29 of July 2140 has been received but the British denial plan enclosed therewith was inadvertently forwarded to Casoc head office without a copy having been made. Casoc has been asked to furnish a copy which will be brought to the attention of the War Department together with the numbered points in the preceding paragraph.

Repeat to Jidda as No. 35.

Hull

39 Telegram No. 51 not printed.

40 Not printed.

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/42: Telegram

[Document 699]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, September 2, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received September 4—8:26 p.m.]

59. Department’s 35, August 28, 10 p.m.41 Lenahan has been misinformed or not informed at all. When Bale’s entry into Arabia was referred to him indirectly and informally the British Minister replied that he would take up matter when so requested through the proper channel i. e., through his Minister of State in Cairo who has close contact with high military authorities. He added that Bale was wasting time in Bahrein waiting for entry to be arranged informally, implying that Bale might as well be in Basra. The Minister asked if I agreed with the procedure he outlined and I did. The Minister intended to report the matter to Cairo and nothing more. No suggestion was made that I take any action.

Owen, Casoc’s Jidda representative, informed me not once but several times company’s instructions from San Francisco are in substance as described in my 47.42 As indicated therein company’s policy is to make Government assurances a condition to active participation in denial program. No request was mentioned. Lenahan’s third numbered point tends to confirm this policy.

Owen repeated the sense of these instructions to the British Minister in my presence and has exhibited corroboratory correspondence. He confirmed the policy yesterday both before and after a telephone conversation with Dhahran.

He likewise confirmed that Casoc has taken no denial measures unless permitting certain British officers to survey Dhahran last May can be construed. Lenahan may be confusing denial operations with protective works such as air raid shelters, splinter walls, invisible flares, camouflage, et cetera. It would be interesting to know at what point Lenahan will consider the matter urgent enough to justify further developments.

To protect relations between Legation and Casoc please use this wire with caution.

Repeated to Cairo.

Moose

41 See last paragraph of telegram No. 990, supra.

42 Dated August 16, 4 p.m., p. 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697].

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State 890F.6363/44: Telegram

[Document 700]

The Chargé in Saudi Arabia (Moose) to the Secretary of State

Jidda, September 14, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received September 15—12:55 p.m.]

64. Latter part Department’s 35, August 31 [28], 10 p.m. British authorities in Cairo asked for comment on possible request to Saudi Government to permit installation of anti-aircraft batteries and maintenance of about 100 American troops at Dhahran to protect oil properties. After consultation with King’s advisers, probably meaning Yusuf Yassin,43 the British Minister is giving his opinion substantially as follows: 1. That the King will agree to installation of AA defenses and presence of American troops.

2. That King’s attitude will be that he is defending Saudi territory with American aid and although generous in admitting United States Army personnel he might stipulate that they should leave after they have properly trained a sufficient number of Saudi troops. The training period might take a long time.

3. That British Minister understood that there is a plan to train certain Casoc employees for defense duties and that the number of necessary military personnel would be reduced thereby.

4. That in training Saudi troops for AA defenses, it might be necessary to employ Egyptian-Arabic-speaking AA specialists as interpreters.

5. That this Legation should approach the King in the matter while British Minister would communicate British approval of plan.

British Minister and Yusuf Yassin are spending the current fast of Ramadhan in Taif and the foregoing was obtained from British Legation First Secretary. I know nothing of plan mentioned in paragraph 3 above and cannot readily confirm it due to absence of Casoc representative from Jidda. However, it does not affect the essence of the problem.

Repeated to Cairo.

Moose

43 Representative of the Saudi Arabian Ministry for Foreign Affairs.

Syria and Lebanon:Syria and Lebanon:

Contents

Concern of the United States regarding British-Free French differences in Syria and Lebanon; attempts to effect settlementConcern of the United States regarding British-Free French differences in Syria and Lebanon; attempts to effect settlement1

1 For previous correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 725 ff.

[701] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 15, 1942—3 p.m. [Received April 16—12:54 p.m.]

890E.00/101: Telegram

[702] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 18, 1942—4 p.m. [Received April 19—1 p.m.]

890E.00/102: Telegram

[703] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 20, 1942—8 p.m. [Received April 21—3:24 a.m.]

890E.00/104: Telegram

[704] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 21, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 2:43 p.m.]

890E.00/105: Telegram

[705] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] April 22, 1942.

890D.01/610

[706] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, April 24, 1942—5 p.m.

890E.00/105: Telegram

[707] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , 27 April, 1942.

890D.01/592

[708] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] April 28, 1942.

890E.00/112

[709] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, April 28, 1942—10 p.m.

890D.01/592: Telegram

[710] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 29, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 4:12 p.m.]

890E.00/107: Telegram

[711] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, May 1, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 3:11 p.m.]

890D.01/593: Telegram

[712] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, May 5, 1942—10 p.m.

890D.01/593: Telegram

[713] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, May 6, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 2:18 p.m.]

890D.01/594: Telegram

[714] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, May 30, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 4:43 p.m.]

890D.01/600: Telegram

[715] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, July 13, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 1:12 p.m.]

890D.01/614: Telegram

[716] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 15, 1942—9 p.m.

890D.01/614b: Telegram

[717] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 18, 1942—2 p.m. [Received July 18—noon.]

890D.01/615: Telegram

[718] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, July 22, 1942—1 p.m. [Received July 23—2:56 p.m.]

890D.01/617: Telegram

[719] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 25, 1942—midnight.

890D.01/617: Telegram

[720] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 28, 1942—8 p.m.

890D.01/619: Telegram

[721] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 30, 1942—10 p.m. [Received July 30—6:24 p.m.]

890D.01/622: Telegram

[722] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 10, 1942—10 p.m. [Received August 11—6:15 p.m.]

890D.01/626: Telegram

[723] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 12, 1942—noon. [Received August 13—1:26 p.m.]

890E.01/141: Telegram

[724] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 12, 1942—1 p.m. [Received August 13—3:19 p.m.]

890E.01/142: Telegram

[725] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 12, 1942—4 p.m. [Received August 13—2:38 p.m.]

890E.01/143: Telegram

[726] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 14, 1942.

890D.00/906

[727] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 16, 1942—9 p.m. [Received August 17—4:11 p.m.]

890E.01/144: Telegram

[728] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 18, 1942.

890E.01/144

[729] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, August 19, 1942—9 p.m.

890E.01/142: Telegram

[730] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 21, 1942—2 p.m. [Received August 22—12:10 p.m.]

890E.01/145: Telegram

[731] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 21, 1942—4 p.m.

890E.01/144: Telegram

[732] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 23, 1942—7 p.m. [Received August 24—9:07 a.m.]

890E.01/147: Telegram

[733] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 23, 1942—9 p.m. [Received August 24—9:09 a.m.]

890E.01/146: Telegram

[734] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 24, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 5:01 p.m.]

890E.01/151: Telegram

[735] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 25, 1942—2 p.m. [Received August 25—12:12 p.m.]

890E.01/152: Telegram

[736] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 28, 1942—8 p.m. [Received August 29—12:42 a.m.]

890E.01/157: Telegram

[737] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 1, 1942—1 p.m. [Received September 1—9:47 a.m.]

890D.01/642: Telegram

[738] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, September 1, 1942—9 p.m.

890D.00/911a: Telegram

[739] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 1, 1942—10 p.m. [Received September 2—4:02 p.m.]

890D.01/637: Telegram

[740] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 3, 1942—3 p.m. [Received September 3—1:07 p.m.]

890E.01/160: Telegram

[741] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, September 3, 1942—9 p.m.

890D.01/637: Telegram

[742] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 4, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 7:10 p.m.]

890D.00/910: Telegram

[743] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, September 8, 1942—11 p.m. [Received September 10—11:41 a.m.]

890D.00/913: Telegram

[744] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 12, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 1:28 p.m.]

890E.01/644: Telegram

[745] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 14, 1942—8 p.m. [Received September 15—1:51 p.m.]

890D.01/647: Telegram

[746] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 18, 1942—11 a.m. [Received September 18—9:47 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24339: Telegram

[747] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, October 4, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 3:02 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24629: Telegram

[748] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 8, 1942—10 p.m. [Received October 8—10 p.m.]

890D.01/660: Telegram

[749] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 21, 1942—11 p.m. [Received 11:30 p.m.]

890D.01/661: Telegram

[750] The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth)

Washington, December 2, 1942—5 p.m.

800.0146/50: Telegram

[751] The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, December 22, 1942—11 a.m. [Received December 23—1:26 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/26680: Telegram

[752] The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth)

Washington, January 2, 1943—4 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/26680: Telegram

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890E.00/101: Telegram

[Document 701]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 15, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received April 16—12:54 p.m.]

135. Last week President Naccache2 told me General Spears3 was in favor of holding elections or at least fixing definite date for them within the next 6 months or so while he, the President, was opposed because of the turmoil it would cause throughout the country at a time when it was most essential that party strife and personal ambitions should be eliminated and nobody knew what the spring and summer held in store for the Middle East. He said General Catroux4 felt as he did but perhaps chiefly because he feared an election would bring out a good deal of latent pro-British sentiment and thus weaken the position of Free French.

This morning the President sent for me and referring to our previous conversation said he wanted me to know that he was seriously thinking of that. He explained then that Spears and Catroux did not get along at all—see also my telegram 121, April 35 —and that the situation was reaching a point where the dignity of his own position was being affected by the constant squabbles between the two Allies. He said that Catroux was undoubtedly afraid Spears was merely using the threat of elections to increase British influence and in order to counter this move Catroux was about to resume friendly contacts with the Maronite Patriarch who had boycotted both the Free French and the Naccache government since last November. See my telegram 468, November 27, 1941,6 and my despatch 270, January 30, 1942.5 Catroux was planning to reduce the Lebanese Cabinet to 5 members but to appoint a council of some 25 or 30 members representing various regions and religions who would function in lieu of an elected assembly. And to please the Patriarch and win him over to the French side he would doubtless appoint many of the Patriarch’s candidates which might well hamstring the Government and render his (Naccache’s) position intolerable.

I replied that I did not take as tragic a view of the situation as he did. In the first place if the British Minister proposed holding elections he was only suggesting something all Anglo-Saxon peoples instinctively believed in and were now fighting for. However, I personally was inclined to agree that the present moment might not be a propitious one for elections and I would gladly talk it over informally with Spears. Elections could perhaps be postponed if not until the end of the war at least until the Levant was no longer threatened with invasion.

As for Catroux’s alleged desire to effect a reconciliation with the Maronite Patriarch, I thought it might be a good move provided no vital principles were sacrificed. After all the Maronites constituted 30% of the population and their active participation in the Government might prove a source of strength to Naccache as well as to the Allies. Besides it would silence Axis propaganda about distrust and dissensions in the Lebanon. As a stopgap measure even [the suggested?] appointed council might not be a bad thing but it would have to be picked with scrupulous care and fairness.

Naccache agreed that this would be an ideal solution but he did not seem to have complete confidence in the good faith of Catroux.

I am acquainting Spears with the substance of the above omitting of course anything that might hurt his feelings.

Repeated to London.

Engert

2 President of Lebanon.

3 Maj. Gen. Sir Edward Spears, Head of British Military Mission, and British Minister in Syria and in Lebanon.

4 Gen. Georges Catroux, Delegate General of the Free French in Syria and Lebanon; for an account by General Catroux of the question of elections in Syria and Lebanon in 1942, see his Dans la Bataille de Méditerranée: Egypte-Levant-Afrique du Nord: 1940–1944 (Paris, 1949), pp. 255 ff.

5 Not printed.

6  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 806.

5 Not printed.

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890E.00/102: Telegram

[Document 702]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 18, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received April 19—1 p.m.]

139. I have spoken to the British Minister regarding my 135, April 15. He would prefer to mention date for the elections but admitted that it would look a little foolish if in the meantime Syria were attacked by Axis. On the other hand he feels that to promise elections only for after the war is too vague and does not satisfy natives who, he says, are constantly accusing the British of having done little or nothing to oblige Free French to implement their declaration of independence.

I then informed him that the Prime Minister told me some time ago that a fresh census should be taken before any elections are held because the last census was 11 years old and many changes in the population had occurred since then. I said I thought an announcement to the effect that census was being taken to prepare the ground for elections would make an excellent impression and it would not be necessary to set a time for the elections themselves. Spears agreed this might be a possible way out and said that the Prime Minister had already mentioned it to him too.

Spears believes that Catroux is planning to oblige Naccache to resign and to put in somebody like Grimes Harakoury [Beshara el Khoury],8 who would be acceptable to the Maronite Patriarch, and then appoint through the President a kind of Senate which he could fill with followers of the Patriarch while the Chamber could remain in abeyance until after the war. To this scheme Spears is unalterably opposed.

Spears is an able man and we get along extremely well together but he is obsessed with the idea that Catroux is constantly trying to double-cross him by insisting on upholding French prestige at the expense of the British. Truth is that French realize they are disliked by most natives and are, therefore, very touchy regarding everything affecting their position. Catroux if tactfully handled is far more reasonable than most Frenchmen and I am trying to impress upon Spears danger of giving Frenchmen here less wholeheartedly devoted to our cause than Catroux an excuse for wavering at a time when our relations with Vichy are entering upon such a critical stage.

Repeated to London.

Engert

8 A former Prime Minister of Lebanon.

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890E.00/104: Telegram

[Document 703]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 20, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received April 21—3:24 a.m.]

141. My 139, April 18. President Naccache has just informed me in the presence of his Minister of Foreign Affairs9 that he has definitely determined to resign unless the British and Free French authorities can agree on a fair and reasonable implementation of Lebanese independence. As Spears and Catroux are at present in Cairo and will probably not be [back] before the 23rd or 24th I expressed the hope that he would not do anything rash until both returned.

In the meantime I consider it of the utmost importance in the interest of common war objective that the present conflict be not permitted to degenerate into a crisis. Naccache is a very decent person and utterly devoted to the Allied cause. Until conditions are more normal and elections can be held it would therefore be absurd to make a change which would only encourage Axis to believe that the Allies hopelessly disunited and had been unable to gain confidence of native population despite their high sounding promises. We are probably on the eve of grave military events compared to which local politics are of but little interest.

I venture to suggest that this unsatisfactory state of affairs be brought to the attention of the British Government and of de Gaulle10 with an intimation that we would regret it if lack of collaboration between the British and Free French in the Levant were to endanger security (please see in this connection again my 313, July 27 and 323, August 5, 194111 ). Surely 9 months should have sufficed to produce some working agreement.

Repeated to London.

Engert

9 Hamid Frangie.

10 Gen. Charles de Gaulle, President of the National Committee of Free French at London.

11  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 778 and 780, respectively.

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890E.00/105: Telegram

[Document 704]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 21, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 2:43 p.m.]

142. In connection with my 141, April 20, I should mention that Catroux has telegraphed de Gaulle that he would no longer permit Spears to intervene in any internal matters; that he would only inform Spears of his decisions but would reserve complete liberty of action.

2. The British of course look upon entire situation largely from the point of view of military security. They believe with some reason that many of the Free French—especially those who joined or merely remained behind after the Allied occupation of Syria—are thoroughly unreliable and should be rendered as powerless as possible before any military operations begin. They also feel instinctively that in the event of an Axis incursion natives would be much more loyal to the British than to the French and this is probably correct. Besides it is obvious that morale of the Free French troops has suffered and that factions have arisen within both military and civilian circles.

3. On the other hand with the removal of bulk of Free French forces to Palestine and Libya (see my 112, March 2812 ) only about 1,500 Free French regulars remain so that Catroux is in no position to assert himself in any physical sense. He is, therefore, tightening his grip on the administrative machinery in the vain hope of impressing the people with the power and prestige of France. It is also obvious that like de Gaulle he feels he must not expose the Free French to Vichy accusations of having allowed the position of France in the Levant to be impaired.

4. Without going into unnecessary details and without reflecting anybody’s opinion but my own I believe the following would represent a common sense solution of the present impasse: (a) The British should insist that as they are ultimately alone responsible for the defense of the Levant State[s] they must be sole judges as to which measures of military security are now or may in future become necessary.

(b) But they should make it quite clear that they have no intention of taking advantage of the present abnormal conditions by substituting British authority and influence in any permanent sense.

(c) Free French should take steps to make independence of Levant States more of a reality. Their present attitude gives the impression that they are far more interested in perpetuating the mandatory principle than in the loyal execution of joint British and French promises. Little or nothing has been done to transfer even minor administrative functions from the French to native hands.

(d) President Naccache should be made to strengthen his Cabinet which is admittedly weak and inefficient. Maronite Patriarch could easily be persuaded to collaborate if he were told the United States favored harmony and unity between all elements, see incidentally my telegram 413, October 15, 1941,13 a Maronite acceptable to both Catroux and Spears should be included in the Cabinet. Elections could be promised to take place as soon as the military situation permits but a preliminary census could be taken now.

5. But so long as personal relations between men like Spears and Catroux are governed by mutual mistrust and suspicion instead of confidence and good faith everybody else will take their cue from them with the result that a situation will be created whose potentially deleterious effect on strategic problem of the Middle East can hardly be exaggerated.

Repeated to London.

Engert

12 Not printed.

13 Not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 890D.01/610

[Document 705]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] April 22, 1942.

The British Ambassador14 called to see me this morning at his request.

The Ambassador again raised the question of the recognition by the United States of the independence of Syria. I replied that, in view of the events in France in the past few days, I felt that the time would soon come when this Government would wish to give further consideration to this question. I took occasion to communicate to the Ambassador the substance of Mr. Engert’s telegram of this morning15 indicating the complete discord between the Free French representative in Syria and the British representative, General Spears. …

S[umner] W[elles]

14 Viscount Halifax.

15 Presumably telegram No. 142 of April 21, supra.

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert) 890E.00/105: Telegram

[Document 706]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, April 24, 1942—5 p.m.

51. Your 142, April 21, 10 a.m. and preceding. You are authorized, on your discretion, to inform General Spears and General Catroux that the American Government is disturbed by reports from Beirut and particularly by the evidence of native dissatisfaction indicated by President Naccache’s statement to you on April 20.16 You may say that this Government would be very pleased to assist in any way it may in bringing about a better understanding among the British, the Free French and the people of Syria and the Lebanon.

The four suggestions made in your telegram no. 142 are constructive and you may urge, on behalf of this Government, that they be adopted.

Your telegram under reference has been brought to the attention of the British Ambassador here. Consideration is being given to the feasibility of discussing the subject with the Free French authorities in Washington.

Hull

16 See telegram No. 141, April 20, 8 p.m., from the Consul General at Beirut, p. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703].

The British Embassy to the Department of State 890D.01/592

[Document 707]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Memorandum

In the opinion of His Majesty’s Government one of the principal causes of uneasiness in Syria and the Lebanon has been the failure of the Free French to implement their promises of independence. This and the Free French persistence in keeping in office governments with little local support have affected the security of the British forces in the Levant and the situation was consequently considered by the Middle East War Council on the 20th April, who made the following recommendations: (a) that the Syrian and Lebanese Presidents should shortly announce that in both countries elections will take place before the end of 1942, and that they should add that measures to improve the economic situation are being taken;

(b) that the Free French Administration should be converted to a purely advisory role by: (i) The transfer to the State Governments of the legislative and executive powers to the greatest possible extent compatible with military security; General Catroux would still have the right to propose particular legislation but would no longer issue administrative decrees;

(ii) The reduction of the numbers of French officials in the Departments of the State Governments and the limitation of their functions to the giving of advice;

(iii) the abolition of the title of “délégué”; the functions of the délégué to both State Governments and of the local governments would become purely advisory and would be exercised preferably by civilians.

These recommendations have been accepted by His Majesty’s Government and in view of the importance of the questions involved the Acting Minister of State has been asked to arrange with the Commander-in-Chief Middle East for them to see General Catroux together and put their recommendations to him.

Washington , 27 April, 1942.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 890E.00/112

[Document 708]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] April 28, 1942.

The British Ambassador called to see me at his request this afternoon. The Ambassador handed me a paraphrase of a telegram he had received from Mr. Eden17 on April 26 which related to a conversation I had some days ago with the Ambassador concerning the increasing bitterness developing between the Free French authorities in Syria and General Spears, the British representative there. I asked the Ambassador to thank Mr. Eden for his message and to say that immediate consideration would be given to his suggestion.

[Enclosure]

Telegram Received by the British Embassy From the Foreign Office, Dated April 26, 1942

Sir E. Spears has high opinion of United States Consul General and we have reason to think latter shares Sir E. Spears’ views about need for internal changes in Syria and Lebanon. If the United States Consul General is really anxious that Catroux is near breaking point I hope he will speak frankly to Sir E. Spears with whom he has always co-operated closely up to date. We had not heard things were as bad as this and we should expect to be told soon enough by de Gaulle if they were so. But I am warning Minister of State to keep his eyes on this and meanwhile you will note that we have expressly laid down that acting Minister of State and Commander-in-Chief of the Middle East should themselves put their recommendations to Catroux.

Please explain this to Mr. Sumner Welles and thank him for his message. The fact is that Sir E. Spears has most difficult role to play and fundamentally I do not think it can fairly be said that the fault lies on his side when he is carrying out a policy which has been approved by His Majesty’s Government and with which we understand United States Consul General himself agrees. This personal aspect shows clearly that support of United States Government would be most helpful over this question and I hope you will be able to get the State Department to send the necessary instructions to United States Consul General.

17 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert) 890D.01/592: Telegram

[Document 709]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, April 28, 1942—10 p.m.

57. The British Embassy here has handed to the Department a memorandum dated April 27, 1942, stating that the British Government considers that one of the principal causes for unrest in the Levant states has been the failure by the Free French to implement their independence promises. Consequently, the British Government has instructed the British Minister of State in Cairo and the Commander-in-Chief Middle East to recommend the following measures to Catroux in person:

[Here follows text of paragraphs (a) and (b) and subparagraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) of the British memorandum of April 27, printed on page 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707].]

The British Embassy has requested this Government to support the above policy through representations to the Free French, and has expressed the view that our support would carry considerable weight.

Before deciding upon the action to be taken by this Government, the Department desires your views.

Hull

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890E.00/107: Telegram

[Document 710]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, April 29, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 4:12 p.m.]

151. Department’s 51, April 24. Under date of April 25 I addressed a personal and confidential letter to General Spears embodying gist of four points made in my 141 [142], April 21,17a adding that it would be regrettable if the present situation were permitted to furnish Axis propaganda an excuse for assertions regarding mistrust and dissensions among the Allies and that only the utmost frankness and good faith on the part of everybody would further common interests of the Allies and would make possible implementation of the promises which had been made to the people of the Levant States.

Spears replied yesterday also informally and confidentially “Let me say at once that I find myself substantially in agreement with all the points enumerated in your letter.” In connection with the first item, i. e., re security, he says “Should the occasion arise here or in Washington it might well serve a useful purpose that the United States representative or spokesman should indicate to Free French that the United States Government would take a grave view of any obstruction or lack of cooperation on the part of Free French at all likely to impede or obstruct the British authorities in the discharge of their unavoidable and heavy duty. This duty is after all only undertaken as an essential step toward winning the war, an object of the same overwhelming importance to the French as it is to the British.”

After commenting at some length on all the other points he concludes “In view of the friendly interest taken by your Government in these questions I wished to make it clear that we are already in entire agreement on all essential points. Should you find an equal measure of agreement amongst the other authorities concerned I have no doubt that this would contribute materially to a better understanding and to the achievement of those aims which we both have in view. I fully appreciate and share the desire of your Government to remove all pretext for Axis propaganda on the theme of our lack of unity and can see no reason to doubt that this could be accomplished by a general acceptance of the basis which you yourself have suggested.”

Now that I have assured myself of British support I shall informally but only orally approach General Catroux, the Presidents of Syria and the Lebanon and the Maronite Patriarch and explain our point of view, stressing of course the considerations and advantages which should respectively be of special concern to each. I believe the mere fact that the Department has expressed an interest will encourage all elements to help create a situation which the American Government could view with approval. Copies of the letters exchanged with Spears will be forwarded by next pouch.18

Engert

17a See paragraph numbered 4 in telegram No. 142, p. 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704].

18 Despatch No. 379, May 23, not printed.

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/593: Telegram

[Document 711]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, May 1, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 3:11 p.m.]

155. Department’s 57, April 28. I do not consider it desirable that we commit ourselves to support a specific program such as the one outlined or any other proposed by one of interested parties. It is precisely because our support would be practically decisive owing to local desire to please us that we should avoid assuming responsibility for details which may be acceptable only because suggested by us. We would naturally later bear the entire onus if any of the suggestions should not work satisfactorily.

Personally I feel the measures recommended are quite good and shall be glad to lend my support informally if occasion arises. But as they may be subject to bargaining and compromise I do not think we should give them weight of our official support at this stage.

Since my 151, April 29, I have talked to Catroux and Naccache and both expressed genuine pleasure that American Government had authorized me to assist. I shall see President of Syria and Maronite Patriarch in few days.

My impression is that Catroux merely wants to safeguard some French rights in the Levant until end of war as he feels he is trustee for France. He does not seriously believe French will ever again be able to impose any terms not acceptable to the people themselves. But he bitterly resents, and has told me so, attitude of Spears whom he accuses of deliberately thwarting him and discrediting everything he does. Catroux, therefore, fights back and is unwilling to yield even on matters he does not really feel strongly about.

It is here I think we can be most helpful and I am doing my best but details should be settled between themselves. Of course, if they should ask my personal opinion regarding some particular point, I shall give it but without committing Department.

Engert

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert) 890D.01/593: Telegram

[Document 712]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, May 5, 1942—10 p.m.

62. Your 155, May 1, 10 a.m. The Department concurs with your recommendations, and requests you to proceed along the line you have indicated.

Hull

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/594: Telegram

[Document 713]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, May 6, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 2:18 p.m.]

158. Since my 155, May 1, I have seen President of Syria and his Foreign Minister in Damascus. Also Maronite Patriarch in Lebanon. Their response was most encouraging and all agreed when I told them we must forget all personal ambitions and petty political rivalries in order to defeat common foe as quickly as possible.

Incidentally Spears has not yet heard from London about memo in your April 28.19 I have briefly mentioned to him some of my reasons for preferring not to give it our official support immediately.

Engert

19 See telegram No. 57, April 28, 10 p.m., to the Consul General at Beirut, p. 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709].

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/600: Telegram

[Document 714]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, May 30, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 4:43 p.m.]

195. Developments since my 158, May 6, have been more satisfactory than I dared anticipate and may be summarized as follows: 1. Catroux and Spears have adopted more conciliatory attitude toward each other. Spears realizes that the personal equation is an important factor and Catroux no longer resents everything Spears says to him. Catroux told me yesterday that Spears had become “much more reasonable”.

2. Several promising steps have been taken toward a reconciliation between the Maronite Patriarch on the one hand and President Naccache and General Catroux on the other.

3. The most important tangible result has been the creation of the Wheat Office referred to in my 189, May 27, noon.20 Negotiations had been in progress for nearly 2 months and had several times reached a complete deadlock as it had been difficult to reconcile conflicting views of Spears, Catroux and the Syrian and Lebanese Governments. Highest authority will be committee of two consisting of Catroux and Spears with powers not only to ratify or modify the decisions of the Wheat Commission but also to act on its own. It is understood that if the present plan should fail, General Catroux will agree to have recourse to the British Army of Occupation and will delegate to the Commander in Chief the necessary powers to act.

4. As anticipated in the second paragraph of my telegram number 155, May 1, the proposals mentioned in the Department’s 57, April 28, were modified. Catroux tells me that when he was in Cairo recently he found Casey21 anxious to establish a friendlier tone in the relations between the British and the Free French in the Levant. To help matters along Catroux agreed to elections before the end of the year subject to approval by de Gaulle, although he was personally still convinced that no real popular demand for elections exists. I am inclined to agree with him.

5. In return for this concession Casey and Spears did not insist on numbered items 2 and 3 under b. As regards item 1 Casey admitted that Catroux had a right to issue decrees concerning “reserved subjects” but suggested that such legislation be limited to the strictly necessary. Catroux maintained he was justified in legislating on all subjects which interested both Syria and the Lebanon, especially on economic matters, as the two States had so far not been able to agree on formula for handling such questions jointly. Catroux has promised, however, to inform Spears in advance of any important decrees he proposed to issue.

6. The following procedure has provisionally been agreed upon in connection with the elections but Casey and Catroux are to meet again re details. a. At Catroux’s request the announcement of elections will be [delayed] until about July 1, so as to make the interval between the announcement and the elections as short as possible.

b. Catroux will then issue a general preliminary statement announcing that the time had come for a return to a more constitutional or at least democratic regime. This statement will make it clear that it was being issued in full agreement with the British Government.

c. The statement will be followed immediately by an announcement by the Presidents of Syria and the Lebanon that elections would be held before the end of the year.

7. The above compromise has avoided the showdown which has been threatening for some time and which would have been very unpleasant for everybody concerned. If the present atmosphere can be maintained it should be helpful in the solution of future problems as well.

Repeated to London.

Engert

20 Not printed. For General Catroux’s account of the establishment of the Wheat Office, see his Dans la Bataille de Méditerranée, pp. 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306] ff.

21 Richard G. Casey, British Minister of State Resident in the Middle East.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/614: Telegram

[Document 715]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, July 13, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 1:12 p.m.]

246. I beg to request elucidation of various declarations made by Department, particularly of those given in Radio Bulletin 161, July 9,22 concerning relations between United States and Free France as applied to these territories under mandate. This I should like to have if possible for my guidance in dealing with Free French, Lebanese and Syrian officials as well as with British civil and military authorities.

Do declarations mean we will continue to deal with Free French officials here or less to exclusion of others. I ask this question as Lebanese and Syrian officials are most anxious to have [us?] recognize their “independence” and are persistently attempting to get into contact with this office on official matters without going through Delegation General of Free France, while French maintain they alone are qualified to deal with foreign officials until such time as authority to do so shall have been transferred to local governments.

Syrian and Lebanese officials are being urged by British Minister Spears to press their claim for independence and ignore so far as possible Free French. In public pronouncements he appears to take independence of two countries seriously but in private conversation he laughs at the idea. I feel convinced his object is to take advantage of present feeble condition of French to eject them from these territories with view to having English take their place, as real independence for Levant States is out of question. His actions have convinced General Catroux that such is his design.

These actions are many and characteristic. He has built up a “Spears Mission” with a personnel so numerous that a British substitute could easily be found on the spot for each French official displaced and he has a British “political officer” in every locality of importance in these territories. He has forced himself into a position of equality with Catroux in the all important Wheat Office (see telegrams 189, May 2723 and 195, May 30, and despatch 418, July 324 ) by threatening to withdraw British credits from Free French; which might be interpreted as an opening wedge toward a condominium. He had made determined attempt to have railway now being built by British Army from Nakoura to Tripoli24a recognized as British property and to have land which is being expropriated for that purpose registered in name of the British Government. He is behind move to have elections held in near future though there is no popular demand for them and the time seems most inappropriate. He has been urging Syrian Government to insist on services of Surete Generate being turned over to it, that is, control of movements of persons into, within and out of Syria, in spite of fact that it is generally admitted that vast majority of Syrians and Syrian officials are strongly pro-Axis in their sympathies. This was done without knowledge of General Wilson.25

Most of these actions are recent and have done nothing to improve relations between Spears and Catroux to which reference has been made in a number of telegrams, and the “showdown” to which reference is made in the last paragraph of number 195 of May 30, 10 a.m. may have to take place soon.

These actions of the British Minister do not appear to be at all in consonance with the repeated declarations of responsible officials in London concerning their war aims and their relations to France and particularly to the Free French. They must be motivated by a personal policy or be in accordance with views not publicly stated. This unavowed policy might subsequently be approved by London if it proved successful. …

Spears has overplayed his hand as far as the Lebanon is concerned. President Naccache who is a quiet man expressed himself to me recently as concerns Spears with the utmost violence saying he would refuse to have anything further to do with him unless he ceased his continuous intriguing and dictating. There have been a number of manifestations recently indicating that the Lebanese mean to make quite clear that their friendship for France remains fundamentally unaltered. This will be the subject of a despatch.

What the reaction in Syria has been I have as yet had no opportunity to determine. It is certain that the French are not liked there. It is probable that the Syrians, as Arabs, dislike the English more than the French.

General Wilson in a conversation on July 8 indicated that he has no sympathy with Spears. He considers that all the bad blood and confusion resulting from his actions are most dangerous from the point of view of the security of the territory. He spoke in the highest terms of Catroux.

Under these conditions it would appear to me most inexcusable that the United States go beyond its statement of November 29, 194126 as concerns the independence of Syria and the Lebanon (please see my 227 June 25, 10 a.m.27 ) and thus become implicated in a policy the objects of which are not clear or avowed. However the Department’s telegram 72 [78] of June 2, 9 a.m. [p.m.]28 indicates that further action is contemplated. If that is the case I should appreciate being advised so as to be able to adapt my actions as closely as possible to the Department’s views.

I think our position will not suffer but will ultimately gain by our being extremely reserved in our declarations as concern this part of the world until the present extremely confused situation shall have been somewhat clarified.

Gwynn

22 See Department of State Bulletin, July 11, 1942, p. 613. For further correspondence on relations of the United States with the Free French Forces, see vol. ii, pp. 502 ff.

23 Not printed.

24 Despatch No. 418 not printed.

24a In Lebanon.

25 Gen. Sir Henry Maitland Wilson, Commanding British Ninth Army.

26  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 807.

27  Post, p. 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 763 and Doc. 764].

28  Post, p. 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762].

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 890D.01/614b: Telegram

[Document 716]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 15, 1942—9 p.m.

3272. Department has been increasingly concerned about the situation in Syria and Lebanon and its concern is heightened by reports that air-borne forces are being concentrated at Rhodes. There is the possibility of a combined fifth-column and air-borne attack analogous to, but more strongly supported than, the Gailani rebellion in Iraq last year.29 In view of our common concern in this area, Department believes a strong endeavor should be made to clear up the situation.

The following is the text of a cable received from Beirut, dated July 13:

[Here follows text of telegram No. 246, printed supra.]

For many months Department has received reports indicating acute friction between Spears and Catroux, and between Spears and the local authorities, as well as occasional differences of opinion between Spears and our own people. This three-cornered fight plainly produces an impossible situation, especially now when the principal forces in the area are the Free French brigades. It is difficult to see, at the moment, how this situation can be remedied without replacing Spears by someone able to work either with the Arabs or with the Free French, if not both, to say nothing of ourselves.

You are requested to discuss this matter promptly on an informal and confidential basis with those authorities of the British Government whom you consider most appropriate.

Please telegraph the results of this conference and any suggestions growing out of it.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Text of Beirut’s telegram should be kept strictly confidential in the Embassy, though in your discretion the facts stated may be used.

Welles

29 For correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 486 ff.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/615: Telegram

[Document 717]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 18, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received July 18—noon.]

3975. Personal for the Secretary. Your message number 3272, July 15, 9 p.m. After making inquiry, I have decided it best to take this matter up with Mr. Eden which I shall do on Monday. General Spears was Mr. Churchill’s military contact officer with the French during the time when Mr. Churchill was Prime Minister and the French nation was still engaged on the European front. He is also an old personal friend. Because of other matters that are under consideration here at this time, I hope you will give me a little time to try to work out a satisfactory solution.

Winant

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/617: Telegram

[Document 718]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, July 22, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received July 23—2:56 p.m.]

258. Reference my 246, July 13, especially to part concerning British Free French relations in this territory. Iraqi Consul General29a has spoken to me on this subject on several occasions and at some length. He thinks situation most serious and that French and British by constant quarreling and bickering are preparing ground here perfectly for action by fifth column, when their vital interests would require them to present solid front. In his opinion British officials here wish ultimately to force French out of Levant and then take their place under one guise or another; however, they can’t act openly toward this end as they must consider reaction which would ensue in other parts of world particularly in France and England itself. They are therefore pushing Lebanese and Syrians to insist on independence as means of diminishing French position here without disclosing their hand too openly. This however they do only spasmodically as their policy is not settled but seems to go by fits and starts. Consul General thinks British don’t want to make any real decision re this country at present time but wish to keep all possibilities open for later period when sailing may be smoother. … he judges policy now being followed by local British, or rather their lack of fixed policy, most severely. He would prefer British rather than French have dominant position here but thinks it of paramount importance that they make up their minds at once as to what they want, that they work together and that one person be given unquestioned authority to act. At present country is in state of anarchy and anything can happen.

The Consul General is anxious to have me undertake campaign to convince British that policy they are pursuing, including as it does a series of promises of independence to which they themselves do not take seriously and which local people see through, can only lead to disaster. He thinks I might also serve as useful intermediary between British and French. While naturally most anxious to help I am very hesitant about putting myself forward until I have a clearer idea than at present of Department’s attitude as to future of Levant States. I am aware that United States Government has consistently refused to place these territories in same category as French colonies and surmise that recent declaration of our policy as regards Free France does not necessarily apply to Levant States.

I should also hesitate to interject myself into Franco-British quarrels unless definitely asked to do so. As Department is aware Mr. Engert shortly before leaving here30 went to considerable lengths in trying to patch up their affairs, see his telegrams especially 151, April 29, but I fear without concrete or favorable results.

Relations between Catroux and Spears seem worse than ever. I think things have reached such a pass that no satisfactory arrangement can be reached while they are both here. They see each other seldom and their correspondence is only superficially polite. Their differences are taken up by subordinates and not even simple problems can be solved satisfactorily as political consideration is always present. Catroux told me July 14 he would ask me to call soon for long talk. He has not yet done so, probably being occupied with recent riots.

Same day I visited President of Lebanon at his request. He wished to know if it might not be possible for United States Government to do something to restore order in this country. His complaints were all against Spears who is making visits to local, particularly religious, authorities in effort to overthrow Naccache government. President said he had refused to see Spears for last 2 months and he thought spectacle of Minister of foreign power engaged openly in overthrowing Government to which he is accredited must be unique in history. I told President whom I have known for years that situation was so complex I should prefer to have written documents before sending such request to Department. He said he would send me communication so secret it would be in his own writing but it has not arrived yet.

I may add parenthetically that Naccache told me that Spears speaking of the Free French had asked him “What are you waiting for to kick them out of the country, they are living at our expense and cost us a lot. Give them a little something in the way of an indemnity and they will leave content”.

For the last week all of the attention of the French and Lebanese officials has been given to the question of bread. The riots and strikes reported in my 255 of July 18, noon [8 a.m.],31 came to an end on Sunday the 19th, the authorities having scraped together enough wheat to satisfy the most urgent needs of Beirut for a few days but the situation remains most grave and much more serious trouble is to be expected very shortly.

The Wheat Office is apparently going to be a failure. I am told by a source who is certainly trustworthy that a large part of the wheat crop has already been smuggled out of Syria into Turkey where prices are four times as high as the officially established prices here. The frontier is uncontrollable, it being chiefly the railroad itself, and once the wheat is on the north side of the tracks it is Turkish wheat. The same person said that the Germans have established purchasing officers along the frontier. Wheat is also smuggled into Iraq and shipped by rail to Turkey as Iraqi produce. Word has been spread from Damascus to the villages that the English and French wish to store all the country’s wheat in large centers so that it can easily be destroyed when they evacuate the country and “scorch the earth” and the peasants are advised to keep their wheat at any cost. The large land owners and big merchants are of course opposed to any governmental interference in their money making and these persons are very powerful in Syria. The Minister of Ravitaillement in that country, Hikmat Vey Haraki, owns 30 villages in northern Syria and is known to be combatting the Wheat Office in an underhand manner. He and many others are possibly more interested in their own fortunes than in public welfare.

The population thinks of little but its daily food which among the poor is normally almost exclusively bread, and the fear of a famine winter has become a general obsession particularly among the Lebanese where the memory of mass starvation during the last war is still most vivid.

Every thinking person here is agreed that very hard times are ahead. To face the situation there should be one person in charge whose authority is recognized and unquestioned. That will not be the case I think until the relations between the British and the French are satisfactorily settled and I doubt whether this can be done at Beirut as long as both Catroux and Spears are here. I should think it would have to be done in London and it is quite possible that our influence could make itself very usefully felt there.

At the risk of repetition I should like to emphasize that there seems to be nothing but good feeling and mutual respect between General Catroux and General Wilson, head of the Ninth Army. I do not think that the high French officials here are systematically anglophobe. They appear most reasonable but to have decided that there is no getting along with Spears. They speak highly of his Counselor of Legation, John Hamilton, a Foreign Office career man with whom things went smoothly during Spears’ long absence last winter. He, however, has been allowed to do nothing since Spears’ return. It has come to my knowledge that some of Spears’ assistants have no sympathy with him and speak most disparagingly about him.

The Free French personnel and administration are not above criticism and General Catroux may be weak. I am told that he appears to dislike being assailed with the many difficulties that are forced upon him. However he is very generally and highly respected as a gentleman and soldier. It is [agreed by?] most that he and his staff could give a better account of themselves if they did not have to face constantly the opposition of certain Britishers and that instigated, encouraged or condoned by them.

If the British and the French could sincerely agree, the opposition displayed by a part of the Lebanese and Syrians would probably ebb to comparative insignificance unless the military position takes a decided turn for the worse. In any case the situation will be serious.

Gwynn

29a Tahsin Qadri.

30 Mr. Engert relinquished charge as Consul General at Beirut on June 13, 1942, and went to Afghanistan to take up his duties as Minister there.

31 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 890D.01/617: Telegram

[Document 719]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 25, 1942—midnight.

3484. Department’s 3272, July 15, 9 p.m. Consul at Beirut, in further telegram regarding relations between Spears and Catroux, reports that the Iraqi Consul General in Beirut … concurs in imminent danger of action by fifth column in Syria because of deplorable conditions resulting from constant quarrels between British and Free French. Iraqi official is convinced British policy as directed by Spears is to supplant French with British influence in Syria.

Gwynn reports relations between Spears and Catroux worse than ever. President of Lebanon also reported bitter against Spears. Relations between Catroux and Wilson said to be good. Hamilton, Counselor of British Legation Beirut, also well liked and local relations were smooth during Spears’ long absence last winter, but Hamilton permitted to do nothing since Spears’ return. Spears’ assistants are said to speak disparagingly about him.

Gwynn recognizes that Free French officials are also not above criticism. It has been demonstrated, however, that working with them is possible in Spears’ absence.

The source of the above information should be kept strictly confidential, though in your discretion the facts stated may be used. In view of this clear evidence of a further deterioration in Syria, the Department would be glad to receive from you at the earliest moment a report of your discussion of the matter with the British authorities.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 890D.01/619: Telegram

[Document 720]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, July 28, 1942—8 p.m.

3515. Department’s 3484, July 25, midnight. Consul at Beirut has reported that Lebanese Ministry resigned July 23, severely criticized for failure to supply bread. Cabinet was weak, Foreign Minister listening exclusively to Spears while President Naccache worked closely with Catroux.

On July 24 President Naccache handed Gwynn for transmission to Department a letter dated July 18 which he sent to Eden complaining about Spears. Complaint alleges principally that Spears had interfered in internal Lebanese affairs and visited religious communities to stir up trouble. Naccache expressed the hope United States Government would aid in obtaining transfer of Spears.

Gwynn believes General Wilson has recommended Spears’ removal but cannot state this for a fact.

Spears was expected to leave Beirut for Cairo July 27 and Catroux the next day, and an attempt to bring them together may be made.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/622: Telegram

[Document 721]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, July 30, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received July 30—6:24 p.m.]

4259. After further discussing with Mr. Eden your 3484 July 25, Mr. Eden confirmed the statement in the last paragraph of your message 3515 July 28, 8 p.m., that General Spears leftBeirut for Cairo July 27 with General Catroux and a meeting will be held with others in Cairo at which I understand Minister of State Casey will sit in. He assured me that the British have no other than their publicly declared policy with regard to Syria and the Lebanon. He took up the question of General Spears’ services in this field with the Prime Minister but was unable to convince the Prime Minister that General Spears was not doing a good job. As reported in my telegram number 3975 July 18, 2 p.m. there is a close personal friendship between the Prime Minister and General Spears which will make it very difficult to bring about a change in this area. I hope that the conference in Cairo may lead to some improvement.

Mr. Eden also told me they have agreed that General de Gaulle go out there with the idea of further clarifying the situation. He leaves here next Tuesday and also plans to visit Brazzaville. He expects to be away from London about a month.

Winant

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/626: Telegram

[Document 722]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, August 10, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received August 11—6:15 p.m.]

1421. My 1388, August 5, 7 p.m.32 Ministry of State advises as follows regarding developments in Syria and Lebanon, action contemplated and effect of possible recognition by United States: 1. Following discussions in May and June between British and Free French, it was decided that in event military situation permitted announcement would be made by Catroux early in August of intention to return to democratic institutions in Syria and Lebanon, that in so doing mention would be made of British approval and that holding of elections would be concurrently announced by Syria and Lebanese President[s] who would also submit their resignations at appropriate moments. In implementation of these declarations and provided the military situation still permitted announcement of date of elections would be made in September or October and elections held several weeks thereafter. In conference between Casey and Catroux on July 3, however, latter expressed opinion that military situation was such that proposed announcement might cause unrest and that he believed advisable to defer.

2. In note to Catroux dated August 4, Casey recapitulated foregoing and stated that after careful consideration, he believed it desirable to proceed with election plans since they were already known to Syrian politicians who might well interpret delay as indicating a change of intention and thus afford ground for greater potential unrest than would the holding of elections. Casey said that Eden and British military were in agreement. He also mentioned interest of Arab world in the matter and suggested that policy of Iraq and Egypt as well as possibly of the United States in respect of Levant States might be affected by the decision reached.

3. No reply to foregoing has yet been received and in meantime British have discussed matter here with de Gaulle whose first reaction was one of violent opposition on the basis of his estimate of the military situation but who was eventually prevailed on to take a more favorable view. The reelection matter now rests.

4. Recognition of Syria and Lebanon by the United States would be most welcome and would be particularly helpful in respect of both those and other Arab countries if tied up to the holding of elections. In the meantime, the British would appreciate any help the American Government might afford in prevailing on Free French to go through with election plans. Furthermore, our recognition would effect desirable broadening of diplomatic representation in Beirut and Damascus and might assist in mitigating friction between Catroux and Spears which is less noticeable since their Cairo visit [but] may be recurrent. (See my 1369 August 3, 9 a.m.)33

Following are my personal views on this subject in elaboration of previous observations.

1. Assuming that we are prepared to overlook legalistic considerations insofar as Vichy is concerned, the establishment of American diplomatic representation in Syria would not only serve as a gesture of Allied solidarity at a critical time and possibly as partial panacea for Anglo-Free French irritation, but it would also put us in a position to exploit more effectively, both in our own interests and that of our Allies, the legacy of good will which we enjoy in that area. I concur, however, in the suggestion that such a step would best be taken on the occasion of some act indicative of the inauguration of a more democratic regime, such as the holding of elections.

2. Given the appropriate occasion for recognition, it is submitted that our diplomatic representatives should have the rank of Minister or at least Minister Resident as in the somewhat parallel case of Iraq in its evolution from a class–A mandate to independence. Any lesser denomination would be an obvious half-measure, carrying with it implied disparagement of the regime in the Levant States and lack of solidarity. It would, furthermore put our representative in a disadvantageous position, vis-à-vis his colleagues, and to that extent hamper, as from the very outset, such constructive activity as it might be desired to have him undertake.

3. While favoring the elaboration of a more positive American policy in respect of the Near East, I submit that any statement attendant on the inauguration of diplomatic relations with the Levant States should be limited to a general expression of good will since the act of recognition should in fact speak for itself, and that any commitments for which we are not in a position to assume entire responsibility in our own right or specific assurances regarding the post-war period should be scrupulously eschewed.

Not repeated to Beirut.

Kirk

32 Not printed.

33 Not printed.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/141: Telegram

[Document 723]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 12, 1942—noon.
[Received August 13—1:26 p.m.]

280. 1. General Holmes of the Ninth Army34 (see paragraph 6 of my 275, August 7, 10 a.m.35 ) called on me yesterday and asked me to discuss quite frankly the political situation in this territory. I exposed the views many of which I have set forth in recent telegrams to the Department; that is, firstly, the absolute necessity of establishing and maintaining authority in these countries in view of the great potential strength of the fifth column, the inborn propensity of the local population to intrigue and agitation, the very serious situation and perhaps grave disturbances sure to arise from the shortage of food and the appalling prices of living; secondly, the need of Franco-British cooperation not only in the war effort but in view of the postwar period when Great Britain in particular and the United States will need as many and as powerful friends on the Continent as possible, the first of which should of necessity be France; thirdly, the folly, to my way of thinking, of compromising Franco-British understanding and confidence for a possible gain in influence in this relatively [apparent omission] region; fourthly, the fact that the French no longer trusted the British in any move they made here as they were convinced that an ulterior political motive was always present. He said that he was pretty well aware of these views from conversations with General Wilson and Minister Kirk, that he had spent a week trying to find out what the situation really was and had reached the conclusion that it was appalling. He indicated that he agreed with me entirely.

2. He seemed most interested in finding out my view as to the advisability of holding elections at this time. I expressed the opinion that no greater folly could be imagined than to attempt to hold elections at a time when no one dared to express his mind for fear of an English or French concentration camp or a Lebanese or Syrian prison,—when nothing could be published that had not passed several censors, when public meetings were illegal, when the public was profoundly dissatisfied with all of the Allies on account of supply shortages, when the fifth column appeared to be much better organized and more powerful than civil government in this region, when there was no popular demand for elections, the population thinking of nothing but bread, and when, finally, no elections were being held in Iraq, Palestine, or England itself. He said he quite agreed. I asked him if he could explain why then General Spears was so insistent on having them held in the immediate future. He replied that the insistence came from London, but could not explain why.

3. I asked General Holmes if he would be good enough to make clear to me who, he or General Spears, was the Britisher responsible for the security of the Army. He seemed surprised at the question. I explained that General Wilson had told me that this was his affair but that every time Spears intervened in what appeared to be a question of purely local politics, he advanced the argument of security and that this had profoundly disturbed the French and the Lebanese. He replied that he could scarcely answer, theoretically the Ninth Army was responsible for military security, Spears for political security, that in wartime it was practically impossible to draw the line between them. He appeared to me greatly interested in the question.

4. General Holmes then asked me what possible solution I saw to the situation. I replied that it seemed to me at the present time the Free French, in this territory, at least, had absolute need of British assistance for any number of reasons, financial, military, shipping, the immediate proximity of states where British influence is dominating; but the British should exercise their influence in a way comparable to that of a conscientious guardian caring for the interests of a minor, and not of one inclined to appropriate the minor’s inheritance; that it should be possible to find a Britisher capable of fulfilling such a role and in whom the French as well as the Lebanese and Syrians could have implicit confidence; that at present such was not the case and could not be as long as Spears remained here.

5. Holmes strikes me as an absolutely honest and straightforward person. He appeared to be quite in agreement with me, but rather embarrassed to know what to do. I gained the impression that he had been charged with the mission of reporting to headquarters in Cairo at least, and possibly London. He had, I think, just returned from Cairo when he phoned on Friday, the 7th, for an appointment on the 11th. He thanked me cordially on leaving and departed, apparently, the best of friends.

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

34 General Holmes succeeded General Wilson as Commanding Officer of the British Ninth Army.

35 Not printed.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/142: Telegram

[Document 724]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 12, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received August 13—3:19 p.m.]

281. Reference paragraph 2 of my 280.

1. Monsieur Baelen, Catroux’s Chef du Cabinet Politique told me that a letter has just been received from Casey urging the necessity of holding elections in the immediate future in Syria and Lebanon and that Casey had said the United States Government had indicated that it too desired these elections. I asked Baelen if he could give me a verbatim extract of Casey’s letter. He said that he would have to ask Catroux’s permission but thought it would not be refused. I will wire it immediately if obtainable.

2. In view of the ideas I have expressed, I should greatly appreciate being informed if there is any basis of truth in Casey’s reported statement.

3. If elections should be held, I think it a foregone conclusion that they will be not only anti-French but anti-Ally unless they are very actively manipulated.

Gwynn

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/143: Telegram

[Document 725]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 12, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received August 13—2:38 p.m.]

283. Department’s 122, August 4.36

1. Following lunch at Catroux’s at which Spears was present I had a long but fragmentary talk with de Gaulle.36a He at once launched into subject of political situation here and of British-Free French relations in particular.

2. He repeated substance of his declaration reported in my 27936 to effect that France’s position here is far from desperate. He added France meant remain in Levant, not as in past in mandatory capacity but with possibly very few minor changes on basis of treaties drawn up in 1936,37 this to be settled after war.

3. He said he was determined to settle now questions [of Great Britain’s?] position in Levant States and he means to make clear that its place is second and not equal to that of France. He said he saw no possible solution unless Spears were recalled and stated he had angered both Casey and Churchill in Cairo by saying so. He said Churchill had said “Know Spears has many enemies but he has one friend and that is I” to which de Gaulle replied “If he is your friend that is your affair but there is no reason for you to inflict him on me”. I asked him what he would do if Churchill refused to agree to Spears’ removal. He said the reply was simple, it would be the end of all collaboration.

4. I informed him of substance of Department’s 122 to effect that high British authorities have assured us that Britain has no other than its publicly declared policy in these territories.

He dismissed the assurances as of little interest and said he had many assurances from the engagements and were continually bringing up for discussion questions long since settled.

5. I exposed British thesis as I understand it that they must take interest in what happens here as their security may be involved (see my 280,38 ) and all that happens here is of interest to British as it has immediate reaction in nearby Arab countries where British have primary interests.

He at once replied that British used first argument, as cloak to cover intervention into every minor incident of local politics which was of no legitimate concern to them and if events here caused reactions in other countries, events in other countries caused reactions here and it had not occurred to him to intervene in Iraqi or Palestine affairs.

6. I tried to outline views expressed in paragraph 4 of my 280. They appeared to be not at all to his taste and I felt he resented the implications. I suggested he might find talk with Holmes of interest. De Gaulle said he had never refused to see any general and I understood he felt it was not for him to seek views of acting head of Ninth Army. After a little parrying I asked if he would authorize me to tell Holmes that de Gaulle would be pleased to see him. He willingly assented and I have just returned from Brumana [Brummana] where I left verbal message for Holmes.

7. De Gaulle made clear both Churchill and Casey had insisted on elections (see my 280 and 28139 ) and he had told them they were talking of something that was none of their business. He added, and pointedly insisted, there would be no elections at least not this year. It thus appears my assumption, as previously expressed, particularly in my 246, July 13, that Spears was responsible for English drive for elections, was wrong. Elucidation as to motive behind this drive must be sought if anywhere in London.

8. De Gaulle said he meant to stay here until situation was cleared up, 2 weeks or longer if necessary. I think he is determined to settle Franco-British controversy now and to care little what consequences may be. I feel efforts should be made to aid in effecting settlement that would have no seriously detrimental effect on relations between two parties but am unable suggest where efforts should be made unless it be thought possible to move British in London. I think I could have no effect on Spears and that no useful purpose would be served were I able to.

9. De Gaulle asked me to call soon; I said I was always at his disposal and would at once answer a call from his aid-de-camp. In any case I think [apparent omission] to be able to keep myself currently informed of any important developments here.

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

36 Not printed.

36a General de Gaulle describes his visit to Syria and Lebanon at this time in The War Memoirs of Charles de Gaulle, vol. ii, Unity: 1942–1944 (New York, 1959), pp. 20 ff.

36 Not printed.

37 Franco-Syrian Treaty of December 22, 1936, and Franco-Lebanese Treaty of November 13, 1936; for texts, see France, Ministère des Affaires Étrangères, Rapport à la Société des Nations sur la situation de la Syrie et du Liban (année 1936), pp. 201 and 229, respectively. These treaties were never ratified by France.

38 Dated August 12, noon, p. 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723].

39 Latter dated August 12, 1 p.m., p. 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725].

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 890D.00/906

[Document 726]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 14, 1942.

Sir Ronald Campbell40 called to see me this morning at his request.

Sir Ronald discussed in a desultory fashion the general war picture. I spoke to him of the general nature of the reports the Department had recently been receiving from Syria and of my fear, as repeatedly expressed to Lord Halifax and, through Ambassador Winant, to the British Foreign Office, that conditions were going to get worse in Syria unless the British Government made some effort at adjustment of the controversy raging between the French and British representatives in that country. Sir Ronald said he was familiar with the views of this Government as so expressed and that he feared, in view of the attitude of Mr. Churchill, that there was little likelihood of any change being made for some time to come in the British representation in Syria.

S[umner] W[elles]

40 British Minister in the United States.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/144: Telegram

[Document 727]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 16, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received August 17—4:11 p.m.]

289. My 283, August 12.

1. At his request I called on General de Gaulle yesterday. He stated that he wished to outline the position of Fighting France in the Levant and thought that his views might be of interest to the American Government. He thereupon spoke calmly and uninterruptedly for about an hour giving what amounted to a carefully prepared lecture on the subject. I cannot attempt to do more than summarize the principal points he made and do not think more is necessary as his ideas are those frequently expressed by French officials here which have already been set forth at considerable length in recent telegrams.

2. He said that Fighting France as well as France was determined ultimately to fulfill the terms and purpose of the mandate and to grant when possible independence to Syria and Lebanon but that this can be done only when the peoples are prepared for it, that time has not come and may not for many years. There would be great danger in granting independence prematurely, grave internal troubles due to religious, ethnographic and regional differences would result which would be exploited by our enemies and our common war effort be seriously compromised. It is indispensable that some great power remain at present in these territories to guarantee internal and external peace.

3. Fighting France cannot cede any portion of French patrimony of which it has custody until France itself has been able to resume its legitimate place in the world and relieved Fighting France of its responsibility at which time a regularly constituted French Government may see fit to make certain concessions. An important item in that patrimony is the French position and influence in the Levant.

4. Therefore the mandate remains in force (see my 279, August 12,41 ) in spite of what others may have said or may say until France is able to relinquish it in due form.

5. At that time France will make treaties which in all probability will be very similar to those negotiated in 1936, which treaties de Gaulle considers on the whole quite satisfactory, and in accordance with which France will enjoy a privileged position in Lebanon and Syria.

6. For reasons that are not clear the English apparently held very different views when they together with the Free French occupied these territories last year. They seemed to think the occasion good to eliminate the French from Levant. As soon as he had understood their purpose he had felt obliged to discuss the situation very frankly with them (see Engert’s 32 [323], August 5, 1941, 11 p.m.42 ) and as a result agreements had been reached in July and October 1941 which formed the legal basis of Franco-British relations in the Levant. The object of these agreements was to grant the British all possible aid and facilities in this territory to pursue their war effort but at the same time to safeguard France’s present and future position here; the French had attempted loyally to fulfill their obligations but the British had continued to go their way with the design now patent of expelling the French from this part of the world; they think the occasion favorable in that their prestige is higher in that they know the Arabs better and are more capable of handling them in that they are better liked by the Arabs than are the French; all of which assumptions are false. Things had reached such a pass that he had decided that the situation must be reestablished immediately and he meant to stay in Levant until that had been accomplished. He hoped that some 2 weeks would be sufficient time but would remain much longer if necessary.

8. [sic] He therefore had just sent a telegram to Churchill a copy of which he handed me to read. At my request he immediately had prepared a paraphrase a copy of which will go forward by next pouch and which in translation reads as follows: “1. Since my arrival in the States of the Levant under French mandate I have the regret to observe that the agreements signed by the French nation the subject of Syria and Lebanon are not always respected. The engagement undertaken by Great Britain to pursue no political aim in the States of the Levant and not to attempt to encroach thereon the positions of France, as well as the assurance given by the British Government that the mandate would be maintained until a decision should have been taken by the League of Nations, which alone is entitled to put an end to it, form the bases of the Lyttelton–de Gaulle agreements of July 194143 and of the exchange of letters between the French National Committee and the British Government of October 1941.

2. I am obliged to state that a great number of the manifestations of British policy in Syria and in Lebanon do not appear to me to agree with these principles.

3. The constant intervention of the representatives of the British Government in the international politics and administration of the States of the Levant and even in the relations between the Governments of these States and the representatives of mandatory France cannot in my opinion be compatible either with the political disinterestedness of Great Britain in Syria and Lebanon or with the respect of the position of France or with the regime of mandates.

4. I think furthermore that the interventions and the reactions they produce lead the populations in all the Arab East to think that grave discords compromise here the good understanding between Great Britain and Fighting France, who are nevertheless Allies. This is a situation that can ultimately profit only our enemies.

5. I must tell you lastly that these encroachments on the rights of France and on the attributions of the Governments of the States of the Levant are profoundly resented by all the French people and by the Syrian and Lebanese populations, and this more especially as we have facilitated here by all our means and often under conditions morally painful for us the military work of the British Command of land, sea and air, and have placed at the disposal of the British Command in the Orient all the forces we can dispose of to assist in the battle of Libya and Egypt.

6. I thus find myself led to request you to reestablish in this country the application of the agreements we have concluded in order to assure here our military cooperation and to manifest in all the Orient the union of Great Britain and France. Aside from other reasons, that appears to be necessary, the better to unite our efforts in this hard period of the war we are making in common.”

9. At my request for further elucidation de Gaulle stated that the present British policy in regard to this territory must be immediately and fundamentally changed and that its representative here General Spears must leave. He added that he expected and feared determined opposition from Churchill. I again asked him what he expected to do if Churchill refused to cede. He repeated that it would be the end of all collaboration. I said that it seemed to me impossible that things should go so far. He replied that he quite agreed but that he was determined to see this thing through, that it might lead to conflict and that the Fighting French might be beaten but they preferred that rather than to cede without being defeated in an open fight.

10. He ended his prepared talk by saying that the situation being as he had described it he thought the American Government should be informed though it was not directly a party to the quarrel. I answered that we are very much interested in anything that might affect our common war effort, that I thought recent statements and actions had shown clearly that the American Government had great sympathy with Fighting France and I did not doubt that the threat of breach in its relations with our British Allies would receive its most serious attention. He assented but again repeated that he was determined at all costs to force the British to respect French rights and to live up to the agreements they had signed with him.

11. He has gone to Damascus and expects to spend the entire week in a tour of Syria and then to remain in Beirut to await developments.

12. I asked if General Holmes had called to see him (see paragraph 6 of my 283). De Gaulle replied that he had not heard from him and conjectured that Spears had instructed Holmes not to see de Gaulle.

13. The situation appears to me most grave. Something doubtless should be done but I doubt if anything can be accomplished here. I should like to be able to present more comprehensively the British side in this difference but am unable to do so as neither Spears himself nor his collaborators appear willing to talk as freely as do the French; their fundamental thesis is I think fairly set forth in paragraph 5 of my 283.

14. Should any serious incident occur between the British and French we might find ourselves seriously embarrassed by the presence of our aviators at Rayak where they are expected in the immediate future (see my 28444 ).

15. General de Gaulle said I would certainly see him again before he left this region and I will attempt to keep informed day by day at the Delegation General. I have not discussed the above with the British here.

16. Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

41 Not printed.

42  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 780.

43 Exchange of letters dated August 7, 1941; for texts, see British Cmd. 6600, Syria No. 1 (1945): Statements of Policy by His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom in Respect of Syria and the Lebanon, 8th June–9th September, 1941, pp. 3–4. For correspondence regarding the background of the Lyttelton–de Gaulle exchange, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 780–783.

44 Not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 890E.01/144

[Document 728]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 18, 1942.

Sir Ronald Campbell called to see me this morning at his request.

I informed Sir Ronald of the contents of a telegram received this morning from the American Consul General at Beirut, No. 289 of August 16, 9 p.m. I said that it seemed to me that this situation was reaching proportions of great gravity. I stated that I could not understand how General de Gaulle’s presence in Syria at this time could be regarded as conducive towards smoothing out an already highly inflamed situation, and that it appeared to me that under present conditions obtaining in Egypt and in Syria, the knowledge on the part of the native population that the British and French were at daggers drawn would make much more likely subversive activities and other activities gravely prejudicial to the common war effort. I inquired whether Mr. Churchill was directly intervening in the situation which had grown up in Syria. Sir Ronald said that he did not know and that his belief was that Mr. Churchill was already on his way back to England from Cairo. I concluded by saying that I felt the situation had reached a point where the interests of the United States were directly involved and that I believed some radical remedial measures ought to be undertaken without delay.

S[umner] W[elles]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) 890E.01/142: Telegram

[Document 729]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, August 19, 1942—9 p.m.

134. Your 281, August 12, 1 p.m. The Department has issued two instructions which bear on the subject of elections in Syria and Lebanon. On April 21 [24] (Department’s no. 51) the Department authorized Engert to urge on behalf of this Government the adoption of four measures which Engert felt would assist in improving the local situation. A part of one of these measures was: “Elections could be promised to take place as soon as the military situation permits but a preliminary census could be taken now.”

On May 5 (Department’s no. 62) the Department approved Engert’s recommendation in his telegram no. 155, May 1, in which he had suggested (1) that the American Government refrain from supporting officially the British Government’s policy regarding Syria and Lebanon, which included inter alia a call for elections during 1942, (2) that he might lend his support informally to the general British policy, when occasion arose, (3) that details should be settled between the British and Free French themselves, and (4) that if his opinion were asked about some particular point he would give it without committing the Department. It is not evident, from the Department’s records, whether the suitable occasion ever arose or whether Engert’s personal views were specifically requested regarding elections.

The Department’s two instructions were drafted in the light of Engert’s telegrams nos. 135, 139, 142 and 155,45 which had given the clear impression that he did not consider elections advisable while the Levant was threatened with invasion. Since that time the military situation in the Near East has not improved. It is true that one of the considerations which has caused the Department to hesitate to comply with British and Free French requests that we extend recognition to Syria and Lebanon has been that the Governments we were asked to recognize could not claim to represent the expressed wishes of the peoples of the area. We have not intended to imply by this position, however, an opinion that elections should be held at any particular time or while the military situation was threatening. Your own views, as expressed in the second paragraph of your 280,46 have been noted with interest.

Hull

45 Dated April 15, 3 p.m., April 18, 4 p.m., April 21, 10 a.m., and May 1, 10 a.m., pp. 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 701], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], and 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711], respectively.

46 Dated August 12, noon, p. 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723].

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/145: Telegram

[Document 730]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 21, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received August 22—12:10 p.m.]

297. My 289, August 16, 9 p.m. I am to meet de Gaulle again on August 26 and should like to be able to inform him at least that his message is receiving the consideration of the competent American authorities or to deliver any communication the Department may wish to make to him. It may be of importance to do what we can to keep him from taking some too hasty and grave action.

Two incidents are interesting as showing Spears reaction to the engagement undertaken by the British recently not to interfere in purely local matters of politics or administration (see paragraph 3 of my 275, August 7, 10 a.m.47 ) and which will probably make more sparks fly.

De Gaulle spent Sunday, Monday and Wednesday in Damascus having been Tuesday in Jebel Druze and left Damascus Thursday morning for Aleppo. My interview with the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs on Thursday in connection with the Department’s 111, July 21, 11 p.m.48 had to be cut short as he apologetically explained that the whole Syrian Government had been convoked to the Serail at noon to meet General Spears. I have not yet been able to find out the purpose of his visit but hope to soon.

The Free French and the Maronite Patriarch have been at odds for many months because Catroux has kept Naccache as President of the Lebanon against the Patriarch’s well-known and repeatedly expressed wishes. An attempt at a reconciliation is being made. De Gaulle and Catroux took tea with the Patriarch at his summer residence at Diame on Saturday August 16, all the local papers featured the event. The Patriarch is to make the 3-hour trip next Sunday to lunch with them at the Beirut “residence”. Spears has [been?] invited [to?] the tea that day and the Delegation General is making active inquiry to find out who the other guests are to be. Apparently no Consuls were invited.

These seemingly minor events may be important in de Gaulle’s reaction to them or they may indicate that Spears is preparing serious measures to counter the grave action that de Gaulle indicated he was prepared to take.

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

47 Not printed.

48  Post, p. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 890E.01/144: Telegram

[Document 731]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)49

Washington, August 21, 1942—4 p.m.

3970. Since his arrival in Beirut, De Gaulle has repeated to Gwynn several times, with emphasis, his determination to force a show-down now regarding British Free French relations in Syria. De Gaulle has complained that the British, by intervening through Spears in internal affairs, have violated their promises to acknowledge Free French predominance in local affairs. De Gaulle has declared firmly that if the British do not agree to remove Spears, it will be the end of all collaboration.

De Gaulle seems convinced that the British are trying to eliminate the French from the Levant, and dismissed as of little interest Gwynn’s statement, based on your 4259, July 30, that Britain has no other than its publicly declared policy in these territories.

As regards the granting of independence, De Gaulle informed Gwynn that Fighting France, as well as France, was determined ultimately to fulfill the terms and purpose of the mandate and to grant when possible independence to Syria and Lebanon but that this could be done only when the peoples were prepared for it, and that the time had not come and might not come for many years.

De Gaulle has not specifically requested American mediation but he has pointedly kept our representative in Beirut fully informed. While he has agreed with Gwynn that it would be unthinkable for a complete rupture between the British and Free French to occur, his attitude is that if the British Government retains Spears and supports continued British interference in internal affairs in Syria, all collaboration will end.

The British Embassy in Washington has been given the substance of our recent telegrams from Beirut, in an effort to make certain that the seriousness of the situation is not minimized.

The Department has not undertaken to weigh the relative merits of the two contending positions. It nevertheless considers that De Gaulle’s statement that Syria and Lebanon may not be ready for independence for many years is not consonant with Free French and British statements on the eve of their occupation of Syria, when they announced, notably for its propaganda effect on the Arabs, that the Allies were bringing independence to the two areas, nor with Catroux’s subsequent proclamations that Syria and Lebanon had entered upon independent life. On the other hand, the British Minister in Beirut appears at least to have construed his duties to be more than those ordinarily devolving upon a foreign diplomatic representative.

Please discuss the subject again with Mr. Eden at an early opportunity, and assure him of our willingness and desire to contribute to a better understanding between the British and the Free French. You may inform Mr. Eden in all frankness that this Government is not able to support either the British or Free French positions in their entirety, nor does it believe a useful purpose would be served by our doing so. This Government can not remain indifferent, however, to a controversy which affects in an important manner the common war effort.

The Department is repeating this telegram to Gwynn for his guidance. He is being requested to express his appreciation to General De Gaulle for having kept us so fully informed. He is being requested to point out to General De Gaulle, with equal frankness, our serious concern, as a nation joined in the common cause against the Axis, that the assurances given the Syrians and Lebanese be scrupulously fulfilled. Without this, not only the Arab world but all peoples who are asked to place reliance in our sincerity will form justifiable doubts of the assurances of any of the nations or groups associated against the enemy.49a

Hull

49 Repeated on the same date to the Consul at Beirut as No. 136.

49a For correspondence regarding the concern of the United States at this time over the impact of Axis victories and propaganda on the political stability of the Near East, see pp. 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 17] ff.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/147: Telegram

[Document 732]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 50

Beirut, August 23, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received August 24—9:07 a.m.]

300. In paragraph 9 of my 289, August 16, I said “it might lead to conflict et cetera”. I put it that way as I was anxious not to go beyond de Gaulle’s thought though I suspected he really meant armed conflict. He having repeated the same thing today I asked him to explain frankly what his statement implied. He said clearly, that if Churchill refused to cede in this matter he would request the British to leave this territory and if they refused to leave he would take measures to force them out.

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

50 Repeated to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom as No. 4017, August 24, 10 p.m.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/146: Telegram

[Document 733]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 23, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received August 24—9:09 a.m.]

302. I left with de Gaulle today a paraphrase of the Department’s 136, August 21.51 De Gaulle will soon address me a note containing his observations. He expressed his great satisfaction that the United States Government is taking an active interest in the present difficulty. He said he was somewhat pained that the Department appeared somewhat to doubt sincerity of the French spheres [promises of?] independence. It is quite possible that he will request American mediation.

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

51 See footnote 49, p. 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 731].

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/151: Telegram

[Document 734]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 24, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 5:01 p.m.]

306. My 302, August 23, 9 p.m. Under cover of a note dated today General de Gaulle has sent a memorandum containing his remarks on the Department’s 136 of August 21, 4 p.m.51 which in translation reads as follows: “1. General de Gaulle and the French National Committee can only practice war collaboration with the British in the States of the Levant under French mandate if the rights and the position of France there are effectively recognized and respected in practice by their Allies.

2. This irrefutable position in law is furthermore justified by essential reasons of a moral and political order: Firstly, the Fighting French can not consent at any point in the world to an alteration of France’s rights, lacking which the reason for being of their action would be destroyed as regards the French nation and as regards the other states. Secondly, every interference of the British in the French policy in the Levant takes on immediately in the eyes of the local populations and in world opinion the appearance of a rivalry of interests which denatures and compromises the general situation of the Allies in the whole of the Orient and in the world. Thirdly, the participation of France in the war on the side of the Allies and as concerns the future maintenance of France on the side of the democracies in the peace imply that France be treated wholly as an ally by the Allies. Any other formula of collaboration is unacceptable; it would justify the criticisms and insinuations spread abroad by Vichy, by the German propaganda and by that of Germany’s accomplices.

3. But it is a fact in spite of these principles and notwithstanding signed promises the British continually exercise an interference in the political activities of France.

4. They attempt to justify this interference by British military security which however is not distinct from French military security but blended with it. Franco-British military collaboration in the Levant is founded furthermore on bases clearly denned by the Lyttelton–de Gaulle agreements, agreements strictly respected on the French side.

5. The British furthermore attempt also to justify their interventions by invoking promises, guarantees, speeches or programs which emanate only from themselves and bind only themselves.

6. Fighting France is not in the position of a political minority and is capable of understanding alone the extent of its engagements. She makes claim to fulfill them without receiving foreign directives.

7. General de Gaulle, and General Catroux, in the name of the National Committee, have proclaimed the independence of Syria and the Lebanon. They have established governments which, after having accepted the terms of these proclamations, exercise effectively the prerogatives of independence under the sole reserves which the state of war imposes.

8. Such is the fact.

9. There remains to put in place the constitutional mechanics which will regulate the internal policy of the States of the Levant. This putting into place should imply naturally elections in the first place. They will take place as soon as the circumstances of the war permit it, which is presently not the case.

10. In the meanwhile France can not admit that British agents scattered in great number in the Levant should practice, under different pretexts and in different capacities, in the upper ranks or in subordinate posts, interventions which ruin the very possibility of a collaboration.

11. In these conditions General and the French National Committee judge the time come, at the present phase of the war, to clarify this situation.

12. They firmly hope that this settlement may be obtained. In the contrary case there would remain for them but to note with regret the impossibility of a sincere and efficacious collaboration with the British in the Levant and to draw the necessary inferences (en tirer les conséquences).

13. Beirut August 24, 1942.”

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

51 See footnote 49, p. 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 731].

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/152: Telegram

[Document 735]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 25, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received August 25—12:12 p.m.]

309. Department’s 134, August 19, 9 p.m., and my 281, August 12, 1 p.m. I have now received a copy of Casey’s letter to Catroux concerning elections which will go by pouch. The sentence concerning the United States reads as follows: “As you are aware the recognition of the independence of both states by Egypt and Iraq is likely to depend on elections being held and there is reason to believe that the United States Government take a similar view.”

Gwynn

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/157: Telegram

[Document 736]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 28, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received August 29—12:42 a.m.]

4820. I have discussed with Eden on several occasions in the light of your unnumbered telegram of August 24, 10 p.m.,52 and previous, the serious situation which has arisen in Syria and the Lebanon and its unfortunate dangers for the prosecution of the war. Eden promised to keep me posted on developments as the British see them, and has just sent me a memorandum which I am quoting below. In his brief covering letter he said that, in the light of recent exchange of telegrams between General de Gaulle and the Prime Minister “We do not seem to be getting any nearer to a solution and we shall therefore probably be asking the General to come back to this country as soon as possible for further discussion”.

The Foreign Office memorandum reads as follows: “In a letter to General de Gaulle dated the 25th July, 1941, covering certain agreements concerning collaboration between the British and Free French authorities in the Middle East, the Minister of State said: ‘Great Britain has no interest in Syria or the Lebanon except to win the war. We have no desire to encroach in any way on the position of France.’

Later, on the 9th September, the Prime Minister stated in the House of Commons: ‘We have no ambitions in Syria. We do not seek to replace or supplant France or substitute British for French interests in any part of Syria. We are only in Syria in order to win the war.’

The intention of these statements was to make it clear to the Free French that we did not seek any advantages for ourselves in Syria, that we did not propose to annex the Levant States or to attempt to expel the French and take their place ourselves. But they did not mean that we were content to allow the Free French to deal with the Levant States as they saw fit and confine ourselves to the role of spectators. On the contrary, Mr. Lyttelton’s letter to General de Gaulle continued: ‘Both Free France and Great Britain are pledged to the independence of Syria and the Lebanon. When this essential step has been taken, and without prejudice to it, we freely admit that France should have the dominant privileged position in the Levant among all European nations.’

Similarly, the Prime Minister’s statement continued: ‘However, I must make it quite clear that our policy, to which our Free French Allies have subscribed, is that Syria should be handed back to the Syrians, who will assume at the earliest possible moment their independent sovereign rights.’

It is made clear in these passages that Great Britain has a responsibility towards the Levant States in that she has guaranteed the fulfillment of the pledge of independence given to them by the Free French.

The Free French appear now to be taking their stand on the first statements quoted and to ignore the rest. They therefore resent any interference by British authorities in the affairs of the Levant States. General de Gaulle himself is afraid that if he accepts His Majesty’s Government’s point of view, the belief may spread in France that French interests in Syria are being abandoned by the Free French just as definitely as French interests in Indochina were abandoned by Vichy. In spite, therefore, of the statement in his letter of the 28th November, 1941, to the League of Nations, announcing the independence of the Levant States—‘L’indépendence et la souveraineté de la Syrie et du Liban ne comporteront en fait d’autres limitations que celles qui resultent des exigences de la guerre’, General de Gaulle has tended in recent months to lay more and more emphasis on the continued existence of the mandate and to insist that the policy to be followed in the Levant States is the sole concern of the Free French.

This view was set out in a telegram of the 14th August, addressed to the Prime Minister. Mr. Churchill replied to this telegram on the 22nd August pointing out that, while we did not seek to undermine the French position in the Levant, our principal concern was to win the war, and we must therefore be in a position to ensure that no policy is adopted which may jeopardize our military security. We had in addition the responsibility arising from our re-guarantee of the French guarantee of independence. General de Gaulle has replied to the Prime Minister’s telegram explaining that he is unable to accept our point of view. In these circumstances we think that the best course will be for General de Gaulle to return to this country as soon as possible for further discussion. A copy of the Prime Minister’s message and translations of General de Gaulle’s telegrams are attached.”

To this memorandum Eden has attached de Gaulle’s telegram of August 14 to the Prime Minister (in translation), the Prime Minister’s reply of August 22 and de Gaulle’s further telegram (in translation) of August 24. These telegrams read as follows:

Translation of General de Gaulle’s telegram of August 14 to the Prime Minister:

[For paraphrase of General de Gaulle’s telegram of August 14, see telegram No. 289, August 16, 9 p.m., from the Consul at Beirut, printed on page 613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 727].]

Text of Prime Minister’s reply of August 22: “I regret that I cannot accept your contention that our representatives have been interfering unduly in the affairs of the Levant.

Syria and the Lebanon are part of a vital theatre of war and almost every development there affects our military interests directly or indirectly. This involves constant consultation between our representatives and the French authorities and contacts with Syrian and Lebanese administrations to whom His Majesty’s Minister is accredited.

We are pursuing no political aims of our own in the Levant and we have not sought to undermine French position there. We fully recognize that in political matters the initiative must rest with the French authorities. Our principal concern in the political sphere is to ensure that no policy is adopted which may jeopardize our military security or interfere with our prosecution of the war. It is for this reason that we expect to be fully consulted beforehand on major political developments.

We are concerned to ensure that our guarantee that the proclamation issued by General Catroux on June 9, 1941, declaring the independence of Syria and the Lebanon and promising that the mandate should be terminated, is effectively carried out. To this we are committed in the eyes of both the people of Syria and the Lebanon and the whole Arab world.

Apart from this the only affairs of the Levant in which we concern ourselves are those directly affecting our military needs and local British commercial or other interests.

None of the above interests constitute a violation of the letter or the spirit of the de Gaulle-Lyttelton agreements nor of the letters exchanged between Foreign Office and French National Committee. As regards the mandate it is fully understood that its technical termination cannot be effected at present. Nevertheless in my speech in the House of Commons on September 9, 1941, I made it clear that the position of the Free French in Syria could not be that previously enjoyed by Vichy and you yourself in your letter to the League of Nations announcing your assumption of the responsibilities of the mandate stated that the independence and sovereignty of Syria and the Lebanon would not be circumscribed by any other limitations than those which were necessitated by conditions of war. I fully realize the importance of maintaining closest collaboration and unity of purpose between our respective representatives in the Levant and it is my sincere belief that with goodwill on both sides this can be accomplished. Our overriding object is to defeat the enemy and you can rest assured that any action by our representatives in Syria and the Levant is directed towards that end.”

Translation of General de Gaulle’s answer of August 24: “I have studied with great care the telegram of August 23, which was communicated to me on your behalf, on the subject of British policy in the Levant States under French mandate.

I regret that I am unable to accept your point of view according to which political interventions of British representatives in Syria and Lebanon are compatible with the engagements entered into by His Majesty’s Government in regard to respect for the position of France and the continuation of her mandate. I must add that in my opinion these interventions in the form which they have taken are in contradiction with the regime of independence which Fighting France has granted to Syria and the Lebanon in virtue of and within the framework of the mandate as well as with the Franco-American Treaty of 1924.53

The presence of British troops on the soil of the Levant cannot in my opinion justify these interventions. The conditions of our military cooperation in the Middle East and those of British troops in the Levant were laid down by the Lyttelton–de Gaulle agreements which on our side we are applying scrupulously. Relations between purely military British and French authorities both in the battle of Libya and of Egypt and in regard to the defense of Syria and the Levant are moreover very good. For this reason I have agreed up till now to maintain troops belonging to the French Command under the orders of the British Command in Syria and Lebanon in spite of the fact that the former are at the present time superior in number to the British belonging to the British Command. According to the Lyttelton–de Gaulle agreement this should result in the transfer of direction of the Allied military affairs in Syria and Lebanon to the French Command.

Furthermore insofar as the war effort of the United Nations and in particular common action of Great Britain and France is concerned, the sort of conditions of rivalry which interference and friction between British representatives has created here, seems to me to be harmful to both owing to its effects on the Arab world in the Middle East and on public opinion in the French nation.

I would press you strongly to be good enough to reconsider this affair which as far as Fighting France is concerned, is urgent and vital. During my stay at Beirut I am personally quite ready to discuss the matter with Mr. Casey if he could find time to come and see me.”

Winant

52 Actually the telegram was numbered 4017; see footnote 50, p. 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732].

53 Signed at Paris, April 4, 1924, Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. i, p. 741.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/642: Telegram

[Document 737]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 1, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received September 1—9:47 a.m.]

319. At his request I have just seen de Gaulle. He handed me copies of five messages between himself, Casey and Churchill which I will transmit as soon as physically possible.

Under date of today de Gaulle wired Casey.

“…54 it is incumbent on the French Command to assure the military direction of the Allied Forces in Syria and Lebanon. I propose to you that the change be effected as of September 10. Naturally the French Command is ready to discuss before that date with the British Command the modalities which might be useful.”

Franco-British relations here are at the breaking point. I will wire further as soon as possible. In the meantime I shall only say that in reply to my question as to how the United States might be useful, de Gaulle said in one way only, by bringing pressure to bear on the English in an effort to convince them that they should live up to their signed engagements.

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

54 Omission indicated in the original telegram.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890D.00/911a: Telegram

[Document 738]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, September 1, 1942—9 p.m.

1008. Will you please see Casey at as early a moment as possible and referring to the situation reported in Beirut’s no. 319 of September 1, 1 p.m. ask that he give you for the information of your Government as full an indication of his views in this connection as possible. Needless to add the policy of the American Government is directed towards preventing this threatened break in Franco-British relations.

Welles

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/637: Telegram

[Document 739]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 1, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received September 2—4:02 p.m.]

325. In amplification of my 319.55

1. After reading the five communications transmitted as my 320 to 32456 I remarked that we had made very little progress. De Gaulle replied we had made none as far as Franco-British relations were concerned which had seriously deteriorated. We then engaged in a long conversation which I hope will be thought of sufficient interest to justify another long telegram.

2. I asked him if he could not conceive of some less drastic manner than that indicated in his telegram of September 1 to Casey of settling this most unfortunate and untimely dispute, if for example he might not feel inclined to ask the American Government to use its good offices or mediate.

3. He replied that he would state frankly that he was not so inclined as he did not have confidence in the policy toward the Fighting French movement followed now by the Department of State. The latter had for a time seemed well inclined toward his movement and this attitude had culminated in the declaration by the Department that appeared in radio bulletin July 956a which was satisfactory to him. Since that time, however, he had perceived evidence of a change in the Department’s attitude, and this he attributed to projects entertained by the American Government to launch an attack or attacks on French Africa at Casablanca or Dakar or both in the near future and to its intention of doing so independently of him. He was to be disregarded because the American Government had been advised, mistakenly in his opinion, that the garrisons and populations of these regions would offer little resistance to the Americans alone but would resist bitterly if the Fighting French were a party to the attack. This he thought was a grave error: He would willingly admit that the French in Vichy, France and Colonies had much more friendship for the Americans than for the British; however, he had most reliable information that they looked to him as their real leader. The thing that would turn these French people definitely against the English and Americans would be the conviction or the mere suspicion that these latter were inclined to belittle him and his movement and to disregard or jeopardize the rights of France whose champion he is. Such an attitude would throw the French into the Vichy and German camp, and the Americans if they then attacked would be painfully surprised at the reception they would receive.

4. He went on to criticize most openly the American policy toward the Vichy Government. He would have us frankly break with Vichy and recognize him as the only legitimate spokesman for France. Our whole policy he said was badly inspired by the advice of Admiral Leahy,57 Bullitt58 and Donovan59 who were well intentioned but mistaken. I objected that we had, I thought, accomplished much in following the policy we had pursued. He interjected “What for example” I said that after all the French Navy had not attacked the British in the Mediterranean. He replied that if I thought our attitude had had any influence in the matter I was very much mistaken; the French Fleet had remained quiet because Laval60 and Darlan61 would never dare for fear of the French people order it to attack the enemies of Germany. I attempted to protest further but soon saw that it was vain.

5. He having spoken derogatorily of our maintaining an Embassy in Vichy and keeping a Vichy Ambassador at Washington I asked him if he did not think if [it] useful to preserve that means of communication and influence. He replied that certainly Hitler must find it advantageous, otherwise he would immediately have our Embassy closed.

6. He said that he was somewhat disappointed by the phrase in the Department’s telegram to London (136, August 21, 4 p.m., to Beirut62 ) to the effect that the time to grant independence to Syria and Lebanon might only come in many years. I told him that the fault if any was my own, that I had so understood him, and that I had purposely given him a paraphrase of the Department’s message so that he might make his observations, which he had done without raising that point (my 30663 ). He went into a long and complicated explanation of the independence which had been granted but which must be organized and protected later (see his broadcast speech of August 28).

7. He was thus not inclined to ask American help in settling his present difficulty with the British.

8. I then asked if he did not think that some such step as declaring that General Spears was no longer persona grata might not be sufficient to accomplish his purpose. He replied that he might do this in the near future but that this step would not be sufficient, the problem is deeper, it is the policy here of the British Government as exemplified in Churchill’s recent messages that must be changed.

9. He therefore felt that the step he had taken was necessary, that nothing less would do, and implied that more might be needed.

10. I then asked what he thought the British reaction might be. He cast his eyes to the floor, thought some time, and changed the subject with a malicious but not unpleasant smile. I asked him what he thought was to become of the British now in this territory. He replied that they might stay, that he would not interfere with them but added warmly “but they must not bother me”.

11. I of course said and repeated that it seemed to me inconceivable that the present friction should degenerate into an open conflict particularly at this time when the enemy has resumed his attacks in Egypt. De Gaulle said that no one could deplore more than he did the necessity which he found himself of adopting the attitude he had that he was the only champion of France and in the defense of her rights he would be uncompromising to the last. If this led to his fall he would go down with his banners flying, and one day, perhaps after many errors, the United States would realize that it is he whom it should support.

12. In concluding the long interview I assured de Gaulle that the correspondence he had just put into my hands would be immediately transmitted to the Department where it would doubtless be attentively considered and asked him in what way the United States might be most useful. He said in one way only, in supporting firmly his request to the British that they live up to their promises, which did not seem too much to ask.

13. I shall see him again in a few days at the dinner given for Mr. Willkie64 if not before.

14. I venture to refer again to the subject of our aviators at Rayak (paragraph 14 of my 289 of August 16, 9 p.m.). About 1,000 have arrived, more I understand are expected soon, there and possibly elsewhere (Mezze field near Damascus). Possibly the Department may wish to contemplate a statement along similar lines to that made in radio bulletin No. 190 of August 1265 concerning our forces in India, should worse come to worse.

15. Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

55 Dated September 1, 1 p.m., p. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737].

56 None printed.

56a See Department of State Bulletin, July 11, 1942, p. 613.

57 Fleet Adm. William D. Leahy, Chief of Staff to the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy; formerly Ambassador in France.

58 William C. Bullitt, former Ambassador in France.

59 William J. Donovan, Director, Office of Strategic Services.

60 Pierre Laval, French Chief of Government, Vice President of the Council of Ministers, and Minister for Foreign Affairs.

61 Adm. Jean Frangçis Darlan, Commander in Chief of all French Armed Forces.

62 See footnote 49, p. 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 731].

63 Dated August 24, 5 p.m., p. 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 733 and Doc. 734].

64 Wendell Willkie, Republican candidate for President in 1940, on his tour around the world.

65 See Department of State Bulletin, August 15, 1942, p. 697.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/160: Telegram

[Document 740]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 3, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received September 3—1:07 p.m.]

4909. With reference to our telegram number 4820, August 28, 8 p.m., we understand from the Foreign Office that Eden did suggest to General de Gaulle that it would be well for him to return to London to talk over pending problems but that de Gaulle does not seem willing to come back just now. De Gaulle merely states that there are a number of matters pending which require his presence in the Near East.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) 890D.01/637: Telegram

[Document 741]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, September 3, 1942—9 p.m.

146. The Department very much appreciates the full and complete reports you have sent, with particular reference to your 325, September 3 [1], 10 p.m.

The situation in Beirut however is but one phase of our necessary considerations of the British-Fighting French situation. Therefore while it is our hope you will continue to keep the Department fully informed, it is at the same time most desirable that you should not offer to undertake or accept any responsibilities in this situation without previous reference to the Department. In this particular connection paragraph 2 of your telegram under reference is cited.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/910: Telegram

[Document 742]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 4, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 7:10 p.m.]

4944. In talking with Mr. Eden this morning he told me that he hoped our representative at Beirut in talking with General de Gaulle would discourage him in an anti-British policy in Syria and the Lebanon.

Mr. Eden also said that he understood Wadsworth66 is being sent to Beirut which he very much approved and asked me if I would inquire how soon Wadsworth would reach his destination.

Winant

66 George Wadsworth, appointed American Diplomatic Agent and Consul General in Syria and in Lebanon; for correspondence on this subject, see pp. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753] ff.

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/913: Telegram

[Document 743]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, September 8, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received September 10—11:41 a.m.]

1604. My 1573, September 5, 11 a.m.67 In a conversation with Casey today he told me that the original of de Gaulle’s message quoted in Gwynn’s telegram September 1, 1 p.m.,68 reached him only 3 days ago and that a reply was being sent today. In brief this reply stated that he was at a loss to understand de Gaulle’s contention that the military direction of the Allied Forces in Syria and Lebanon be transferred to the French Command as from all information and statistics available the preponderance of forces lies with the British and that, consequently, the prerequisite to the contingency set forth in the Lyttelton–de Gaulle agreement is not established.

Casey added that the situation in that area was a source of serious preoccupation to him, but that so far no recent step with a view to settling Franco-British relations there basically had been initiated other than suggesting that de Gaulle proceed to London to see Churchill. To that suggestion de Gaulle has so far given an evasive reply and the matter of Casey’s visit to Beirut is still apparently regarded unfavorably in British circles partially on the basis of the question of prestige involved which would favor de Gaulle’s proceeding here instead.

I observed to Casey that the most immediately serious aspect of this matter, as I personally saw it, was that de Gaulle, in one of his most extreme flights of emotion might commit himself to a point beyond which there could be no turning back and that under the circumstances I did not see why considerations of prestige should preclude Casey from making a flying trip to Beirut in an effort to bring de Gaulle to reason before it is too late. I added, as my personal opinion, that it was high time to recall to de Gaulle that the efforts to [of?] Fighting France would be for naught unless its integration with the United Nations was maintained and that this stubborn insistence at this time on present, on post-war trend problems in the Levant States was only serving to jeopardize the Allied war effort and place him in the position of furthering the very designs which had caused him to break with the Vichy Government.

Casey said he had just sent one of his senior officials to Beirut “to feel out the situation”, but that as matters stood he himself could not go without London’s sanction.

Kirk

67 Not printed.

68 No. 319, p. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737].

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/644: Telegram

[Document 744]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 12, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 1:28 p.m.]

342. I saw General de Gaulle yesterday. He began by discussing again American policy as regards Free France on the one hand and Vichy France on the other. Little new developed beyond what I have already reported in my 325, September 1, 10 p.m., but my impression is that he wanted to call my attention to the passage in his broadcast speech of September 8 which was probably meant for United States and which in translation reads as follows: “Therefore France considers as false friends certain persons in the world who are pleased with her defeat and cultivate those who betrayed her; who instead should be shouting to her the only thing which might save her: Rise up, here are arms!”

2. As concerns English war operations in Madagascar,69 he said he was quite satisfied to have British act as they are doing if they lived up to the terms of an agreement very recently signed with French National Committee. He also said he had someone in mind to appoint as Free French Governor of the island as soon as all resistance is overcome. He had received advice from British 48 hours before actual operations began and said it was distinct improvement over past.

3. As to development of Franco-British conflict here de Gaulle was much less categoric than heretofore. His conversations with Willkie on 10th may have had their effect. (On these latter I shall not attempt to report as he is doubtless doing so himself and I was not present at all of them.) De Gaulle did indicate he envisaged solution satisfactory to himself as he thought British themselves would recognize their actions were indefensible now that they had been brought to light. He added that settlement must be reached. He said General Catroux who left for Egypt yesterday to visit Free French troops there would see General Alexander70 but probably would not see Caudy [Casey]. Latter’s principal assistant Hopkinson who was in Beirut on 9th and 10th saw no French officials. De Gaulle said that in any case he had no intention of returning to England in near future. I asked him if he would make his headquarters here. He replied either here or in Africa.

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

69 For correspondence on this subject, see vol. ii, pp. 687 ff.

70 Gen. Sir Harold R. L. Alexander, Commander in Chief of British Forces in the Middle East.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/647: Telegram

[Document 745]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 14, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received September 15—1:51 p.m.]

344. General de Gaulle left this morning at dawn by plane with intention of making no landing until he reached Fort Lamy this evening. He will proceed to Brazzaville where he will spend a week in what Catroux’s Chief of Political Cabinet Baelen described this afternoon as “administrative work”. He expects return to Cairo about 23d for discussions with Casey which will be continued in London where he expects arrive about end of month with view to settling Franco-English differences regarding this territory. I think he will return here for few days between Cairo and London but was not specifically told so.

2. Quite unexpectedly he made a broadcast last evening which will be separately reported. He made point that enemy would be unsuccessful in his attempt to drive wedge between Allies! Baelen says this does not in the slightest mean de Gaulle is capitulating to British but he had certain qualms of conscience when he learned enemy broadcasts had reported serious differences had arisen between British and French here. De Gaulle twice recently said as much to me and seemed seriously disturbed by effect these broadcasts might have on local populations. Baelen states de Gaulle’s fundamental position has not changed and that he still means to take a very stiff attitude in his discussions with British about Syria but said his request that military direction of Allied Forces here be transferred to French Command (my 324)74 would not be pushed at present.

3. De Gaulle and Baelen both told me Eden said Churchill was vexed that de Gaulle had informed us of his differences with British and both said they could see no reason for his taking this attitude and they found it quite natural for British to discuss such questions as occupation of Madagascar with the Americans. French feel this is but one more piece of evidence that British wish to consider them and their affairs as private game preserve and it is this attitude that so irks them.

4. Department’s 15374 and my 34275 crossed. I did not, of course, reveal I was aware of London’s 510274 but by discussing with Baelen (paragraph 2 of my [your] 153) made quite certain nothing here is yet known of London’s tentative change of mind on administration of Madagascar. It is, I think, certain that if de Gaulle gets impression [British] are now going to attempt to bargain Madagascar against Syria or vice versa, concerning both of which territories he claims to have agreements with them which he considers satisfactory if locally observed, he will break out with accusations of bad faith more virulent than ever.

5. I think it is certain that French National Committee’s telegram to de Gaulle had not reached here by 2 p.m. today. De Gaulle told me his telegram of September 1, (my 324) was not delivered to his representative in Cairo until the 6th and said that British systematically delayed transmission of his messages when they suspected they might gain by doing so. I was inclined to discount this but still think very curious the fact that my telegram September 7, 10 a.m. to Ankara, repeated as my 331 to Department74 was not received in Ankara until evening of 10th, that is just when Willkie’s consultations here were coming to an end. Results in this case were, I think, no more serious than some slight embarrassment but could easily have given rise to a very difficult situation for everybody with certain exceptions.

6. Catroux returned from Egypt last night where he is reported to have seen General Alexander.

7. Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

74 Not printed.

74 Not printed.

75 Dated September 12, 11 a.m., p. 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744].

74 Not printed.

74 Not printed.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24339: Telegram

[Document 746]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 18, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received September 18—9:47 a.m.]

352. My 319, September 11 [1]. I have just been informed by General Holmes, head of British Ninth Army, that first instance has occurred in which French have taken a military measure without consulting Army Headquarters and obtaining its prior approval. French battalion was moved from Beirut to Tripoli76 on September 30. While incident itself is of little significance Holmes takes serious view of it as indicating that the anarchy which has long reigned in civil affairs is now beginning to affect military questions. He is going to have serious talk with Catroux on 21st.

Holmes also says he has received reports from his area commanders, particularly at Aleppo and Deir ez Zor, to effect that relations between British and French officers in the field which have heretofore been excellent are deteriorating.

Holmes states, and it is evident, that some settlement of Franco-British differences regarding this area must be reached as soon as possible. He has recommended to Cairo that both General Spears and General Catroux be removed from this area and that a fresh start be made.

General Wilson on his way from Cairo to Baghdad to assume his new duties called on me yesterday. He expressed similar views and added that Spears was in his opinion a pathological case of megalomania. He also said “Cairo” was no longer going to attempt to settle this case which would be handled in London.

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

76 In Lebanon.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24629: Telegram

[Document 747]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, October 4, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 3:02 p.m.]

369. My 352, September 18, 11 a.m. General Holmes informed me yesterday that he had just had a most satisfactory talk with Catroux and that all questions of liaison between British and French military forces were being satisfactorily settled.

Catroux’s Chief of Military Cabinet said that de Gaulle’s request to take over the military command (my 324 September 1, 6 p.m.77 ) was apparently in abeyance.

Gwynn

77 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/660: Telegram

[Document 748]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 8, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received October 8—10 p.m.]

5615. Embassy’s 5102, September 11, 7 p.m.78 We have learned that shortly after General de Gaulle’s return from Syria about 10 days ago it was made very plain to him that if he continued in maintaining the attitude he did in Syria he would only be doing harm to the cause of the Fighting French. While his first reaction was violent and he retired to sulk in his tent, these words, we have been told by the Foreign Office, had a somewhat sobering effect on de Gaulle. He later sent Dejean79 to the Foreign Office with suggestions for a settlement of the Syrian question based in part on an announcement for the holding of elections next April and withdrawal of Fighting French claims to take over Allied Command in the Levant. We understand British Embassy has been authorized to convey substance of these suggestions to the Department. Discussions are proceeding satisfactorily.

The French National Committee had been given to understand that the opening of discussions on Madagascar was contingent on clearing up the situation in Syria. Any future discussions on Madagascar, the Foreign Office says, would be based on the understanding that military control of Madagascar is to remain in British hands, the role of the Fighting French being limited to civil administrative matter.

Winant

78 Not printed.

79 Maurice Dejean, Commissioner for Foreign Affairs, French National Committee.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/661: Telegram

[Document 749]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, October 21, 1942—11 p.m.
[Received 11:30 p.m.]

5897. We have been told by the Foreign Office that after the discussions with Dejean, mentioned in Embassy’s 5615 of October 8, 10 p.m., had progressed to the point where the general terms of an understanding had been drafted and agreed upon and the English and French drafts were merely being checked, General Catroux, on learning of the nature of the draft understanding, protested strongly to General de Gaulle. The protest, we have been given to understand, was directed not only against the terms of the proposed understanding but also of the discussions. On this latter score the argument was advanced that while something was being sacrificed so far as Syria was concerned nothing was being gained in respect to Madagascar. (It had, of course, as pointed out in the Embassy’s telegram 5615 of October 8 been made clear to the French National Committee here that discussions on Madagascar would not be initiated until the Syrian situation had been cleared up.)

Following Catroux’s protest to de Gaulle, Dejean resigned as Commissioner for Foreign Affairs. He has been succeeded by Pleven. Pleven the Foreign Office states now has the draft understanding in his possession and the Foreign Office is waiting for him to advise it of the final decision of the French National Committee regarding it.

We were told that a copy of the draft understanding has been furnished the Department through the British Embassy at Washington and that we here, when an understanding has been definitely reached, would be furnished with a copy of its text.

Winant

The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) 800.0146/50: Telegram

[Document 750]

The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth)

Washington, December 2, 1942—5 p.m.

262. Following telegram from London is repeated for your information: “6577, November 21, 9 p.m. Foreign Office informs us that it and French National Committee have agreed orally to drop plan of reaching what is termed an ‘interpretative agreement’ on Syria along the lines of the existing draft understanding.80 Instead, Helleu80a is to submit a letter to the Foreign Office stating: 1. That French National Committee is prepared to abandon plan of reaching an ‘interpretative agreement’.

2. That elections will, however, be held in Syria, as previously agreed upon, and

3. That French National Committee agrees to establish in London a joint British French Committee to deal with questions of importance affecting Syria.

Foreign Office is awaiting letter from Helleu in sense indicated above. It will let us know when it is received.”

London’s 6724, November 28, 5 p.m.81 confirms that letter in question has been delivered to British Foreign Office.

Hull

80 The text of a draft agreement of the nature referred to was supplied to the Department by a British official on October 27, 1942, not printed.

80a Jean Helleu, Acting Delegate for France in Syria and Lebanon (in the absence of General Catroux).

81 Not printed.

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/26680: Telegram

[Document 751]

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, December 22, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received December 23—1:26 p.m.]

532. General Catroux returned from London December 16. I talked with him at some length at Bairam celebration in Damascus December 18 and at his home here yesterday. Recapitulation follows:

His visit had been well worth while. His talks with Ambassador Winant were particularly helpful. He felt himself informed and in touch with major developments. His general views were those expressed at his London press conference of December 6.

He looks forward with special satisfaction to his forthcoming visit to Washington with General de Gaulle. There he hopes to contribute to the formulation of a program for uniting and strengthening French participation in the common war effort.

Darlan,82 he felt, would have to withdraw. That achieved, a united leadership truly representative of French aims and ideals could be formed.

He feared General de Gaulle was somewhat misunderstood in Washington, perhaps especially on the score of alleged autocratic leadership. He believed their visit would dispel any such misunderstanding.

I commented that I felt sure his participation in the Washington discussions would be welcome and helpful. Our radio news led me to believe that we too hoped for united French leadership, one which would lead to the formation of a provisional French Government which would take its proper place among the United Nations.

Turning discussion to the problem of Syria and Lebanon, I suggested that such a French war government would wish to sign the United Nations Pact.83 This would involve specific adherence to the principles of the Atlantic Charter.84

Our policy, as enunciated in my letters of credence and remarks, was a simple, direct application to that problem of the relevant principle of that Charter, namely “the right of all people to choose the form of government under which they will live.”

Might it not be well were he, while in Washington, to consider whether French policy could not be similarly oriented. He was the person most qualified to discuss the matter.

He replied that he would welcome such discussion. Our policy, though simple and clear, was perhaps too simple to meet a highly complicated situation. He had been told since his return that it had given rise to hopes among local nationalists that America would play a direct role in local affairs. This he understood we did not wish to do.

We should remember too that France had still to account for her stewardship under the mandate. Juridically the responsibilities assumed thereunder, as well as those in our 1924 treaty, subsist. Limited independence had been proclaimed, but these considerations were implied in the proclamations.

France had too, he said, its pre-eminent historical position to consider. This, as well as French institutions and investments, had been a natural consideration in the minds of those who had signed the 1936 Treaties of Alliance. The policy of Fighting France was based on the proposition that the entry into effect of such treaties would be considered at the peace settlement as an oral attendant of juridical termination of the mandate.

I commented that I believed this line of thought was well appreciated in the Department. Clearly it was one which we too had considered “normal” at the time of Iraq admission to the League. Today, however, a second line of thought also appeared to be taking form, namely, that such a treaty relationship was one not necessarily to be imposed on but rather to be sought voluntarily by a country emerging from mandate status. If so sought in the free exercise of sovereign power, it would seem to be compatible with the Atlantic Charter principle in question.

He welcomed this brief exposition of views which he might encounter in Washington.

General Catroux then confirmed the information kindly sent me in the Department’s telegram No. 274, of December 15, 2 p.m.85 He plans to announce before his return to London that the situation is now such that elections can be held.

Both Syrian and Lebanese leaders, he said, wish a return to constitutional government. This could be attained either by abrogation of the 1939 Puaux86 decrees suspending the constitutions and recall of the former chambers or by holding new elections. He favored the latter course. Some weeks would be required to conclude the preliminaries. Elections could be conveniently held next March.

I then broached the subject of Office of War Information activities which on the basis of the Department’s telegram No. 244 of November 23, 4 p.m.,85 I had discussed in his absence with officials of the Delegation General. He had already been informed of my arguments and suggestions. These were:

Our propaganda is designed to capitalize in favor of joint Allied war effort local good will for the United States. Distribution of printed matter will be far more effective if done directly by American agents. Its primary aims are to persuade that by the magnitude of such joint effort the defeat of our enemies is assured and that in the light of Axis record of international gangsterism our victory will be clearly to the advantage of the Syrian and Lebanese people. Further, we could not accept the principle of “proportion”, namely limitation of our effort to that of a less powerful ally, in this field of psychological warfare any more than on the field of battle.

It therefore seemed reasonable that we should be aided wherever possible, especially as we wished fully to cooperate with the local Allied authorities. Might it not be well to approach the matter empirically rather than to involve us in so complicated an agreement as that signed with General Spears? Perhaps this could best be done by assigning a special liaison officer to work with Britt. If any conflict of views arose it could be referred to the French press officer and me for consideration. I had been specifically instructed that all informational material should be distributed “under supervision of Chief of Mission”.

The General was obviously relieved to hear my final point. His assistants had gathered that Office of War Information wished to function as a wholly independent agency.

I added that I was hopeful that this matter could be settled before his visit to Washington. Elsewise it might trouble the waters of far more important relationships.

He thereupon accepted my suggestion that we proceed empirically, namely that Office of War Information begin its distribution activities so soon as details could be worked out with his press director, reservation being made that if grounds for objection should later appear they be referred to me and if necessary to the Department.

I was impressed by the General’s frankness and obvious sincerity of purpose throughout these talks; and I should appreciate the Department’s instructions by telegraph if any of my comments or suggestions are not fully in accord with its policies.

Wadsworth

82 After the invasion of French North Africa, Admiral Darlan had been designated High Commissioner for French North Africa.

83  Vol. i, p. 25.

84 Joint statement by President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, August 14, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. i, p. 367.

85 Not printed.

86 Gabriel Puaux, former French High Commissioner in Syria and Lebanon.

85 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) 740.0011 European War 1939/26680: Telegram

[Document 752]

The Secretary of State to the Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth)

Washington, January 2, 1943—4 p.m.

1. Your 532, December 22, 11 a.m. Department is gratified with results of your conversation with Catroux regarding activities of the Office of War Information in Syria and Lebanon, and welcomes the plans for the holding of elections at an early date.

As regards your statements in final sentence of Section 1 and first sentence of Section 2, following is given for your guidance:

While Department has worked for unity among all Frenchmen desirous of fighting the Axis, it has consistently avoided intrusion of political questions in what is regarded as primarily military question. We have never in any way indicated that provisional French Government would be welcomed but have frequently reiterated our view that French people should freely choose their own leaders after their liberation. You should therefore avoid questions of possible establishment of provisional French Government in North Africa and of such Government’s adherence to United Nations’ pact.

It would appear that you have already made it clear to Catroux that your observations in this respect were purely personal.

Hull

Limited recognition of Syria and Lebanon by the United States by the appointment of a Diplomatic AgentLimited recognition of Syria and Lebanon by the United States by the appointment of a Diplomatic Agent88

88 For previous correspondence regarding question of recognition, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 785 ff.

[753] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, January 16, 1942—3 p.m. [Received January 16—1:03 p.m.]

890E.01/119: Telegram

[754] Memorandum by Mr. Adrien Tixier of the Free French Delegation

[Washington,] February 4, 1942.

890D.01/581

[755] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, February 6, 1942—9 p.m. [Received February 7—8:59 a.m.]

890E.01/123: Telegram

[756] The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, February 20, 1942—11 p.m.

890E.01/123: Telegram

[757] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 2, 1942.

890D.01/586

[758] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 3, 1942—2 p.m. [Received March 4—10:22 a.m.]

890D.00/876: Telegram

[759] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 4, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 5:40 p.m.]

890D.01/585: Telegram

[760] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 10, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 6:24 p.m.]

890D.00/879: Telegram

[761] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 23, 1942.

890D.01/607

[762] The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, June 2, 1942—9 p.m.

890D.01/602a: Telegram

[763] The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, June 6, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 6:04 p.m.]

890D.01/603: Telegram

[764] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, June 25, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 12:11 p.m.]

890D.01/609: Telegram

[765] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, July 21, 1942—11 p.m.

890D.01/609: Telegram

[766] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, July 26, 1942—3 p.m. [Received July 27—2:04 p.m.]

890D.01/621: Telegram

[767] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, July 31, 1942—11 p.m.

890D.01/621: Telegram

[768] The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, August 1, 1942—4 p.m.

890D.01/619: Telegram

[769] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 4, 1942.

890D.01/626

[770] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, August 19, 1942—10 p.m.

890D.01/626: Telegram

[771] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 21, 1942—10 a.m. [Received August 22—1:25 p.m.]

890D.01/630: Telegram

[772] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 21, 1942—4 p.m. [Received August 22—5 p.m.]

890D.01/629: Telegram

[773] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 25, 1942—noon. [Received August 25—11:54 a.m.]

890D.01/631: Telegram

[774] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 31, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 1:14 p.m.]

890D.01/636: Telegram

[775] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 12, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 11:06 a.m.]

890D.01/649: Telegram

[776] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. George Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] October 3, 1942.

124.90D/4

[777] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. George Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] October 5, 1942.

124.90D/4

[778] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, October 22, 1942—2 p.m. [Received October 22—12:59 p.m.]

890D.01/663: Telegram

[779] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] October 22, 1942.

123 W 111/409

[780] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, October 28, 1942—10 p.m.

123 W 111/410: Telegram

[781] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard)

[Washington,] October 30, 1942.

851R.01/27½

[782] The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 16, 1942—5 p.m. [Received November 17—12:16 p.m.]

123 W 111/419: Telegram

[783] The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 18, 1942—9 a.m. [Received 3:49 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25817: Telegram

[784] The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 20, 1942—noon. [Received 5:14 p.m.]

890D.00/916: Telegram

[785] The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 24, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 7:20 p.m.]

890D.00/921: Telegram

[786] The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 24, 1942—noon. [Received 5:36 p.m.]

123 W 111/420: Telegram

[787] The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 24, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 6:58 p.m.]

890D.00/920: Telegram

[788] The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, December 3, 1942—5 p.m. [Received December 4—5:56 p.m.]

123 W 111/435: Telegram

[789] The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, December 5, 1942—10 a.m. [Received 4:22 p.m.]

890D.00/922: Telegram

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/119: Telegram

[Document 753]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, January 16, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received January 16—1:03 p.m.]

11. My 493, December 24, noon.89 I have just received a letter from the Lebanese Foreign Minister90 in which he states that his Government “has examined with the greatest attention the declaration made to the press November 29, 1941 by the Department of State91 defining the American attitude with regard to the independence of Syria and the Lebanon”.

He says he notes that the Government of the United States has in mind the conclusion of accords to take the place of the Franco-American Treaty of 192492 and continues “but pending the conclusion of such fresh accords and in view of the difficulties resulting from the present war conditions the Lebanese Government would be disposed to assume the obligations under the Paris Treaty and to assure to the United States and its nationals the enjoyment and benefits of all rights and advantages conferred upon them by that treaty.

A provisional accord in this sense would remain in force until the conclusion of new accords which would satisfy both parties and which would be negotiated as soon as the international situation makes such negotiations possible.

The Lebanese Government hopes that if its proposal is accepted there will be nothing left to prevent the recognition of Lebanese independence by the Government of the United States of America.”

The Foreign Minister has told me verbally that the acceptance of his suggestion would greatly strengthen the position of his Government and would be to the interest of the Allied cause especially now that the United States were also in the war.

Please see also the third paragraph of my telegram 426, October 24 and the numbered paragraphs of my 434, October 30.93

Repeated to London by mail to Cairo.

Engert

89 Not printed.

90 Hamid Frangie.

91  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 807.

92 Signed at Paris, April 4, 1924, ibid., 1924, vol. i, p. 741.

93  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 793 and 794, respectively.

Memorandum by Mr. Adrien Tixier of the Free French Delegation 890D.01/581

[Document 754]

Memorandum by Mr. Adrien Tixier of the Free French Delegation

[Translation]

[Washington,] February 4, 1942.

As a consequence of the events which took place during the summer of 1941, certain changes were effected in the status of Syria and Lebanon.

It appeared appropriate to General de Gaulle94 that the Government of the United States, a signatory power of the Franco-American Convention of April 7 [4], 1924, should be given full information as to the nature and extent of these changes. This was the aim of the letter sent by the General to Ambassador Drexel Biddle on December 1, 1941,95 and is the object of the present note.

The German attempt to use Syria and Lebanon as a military base led the Free French Forces, acting in co-operation with the British, to take in charge the defense of these territories, and General de Gaulle, on July 14, 1941, assumed the power and responsibility which belonged to France according to the Mandate Act of July 24, 1922.96

General Catroux, delegate general and plenipotentiary in the Near-East, was invested with the power hitherto attributed to the High Commissioner for the French Near-East States.

In conformity with the principles stated by the Mandate Act as well as with the traditional policy of France, General Catroux, acting on behalf of General de Gaulle, proclaimed the independence and sovereignty of the Syrian State on September 27, 1941. This action was taken according to and with due respect to the clauses of the Mandate Act. Sheik Tag Ed Dine assumed the presidency.

On the same basis, and taking into account the special character of Franco-Lebanese relations, General Catroux, acting on behalf of General de Gaulle, proclaimed on November 26, 1941, the independence and sovereignty of Lebanon, under the presidency of Mr. Naccache.

There will be no other limitations in fact to the independence and sovereignty of Syria and Lebanon, than those resulting from the present state of war.

The juridicial situation created by the Mandate Act will not be affected by the granting of their independence to Syria and Lebanon. Such a situation could only be modified with the assent of the League of Nations’ Council, of the Government of the United States, which signed the Franco-American convention of April, 1924, and the conclusion of treaties between the French, Syrian and Lebanese governments, which treaties would have to be duly ratified according to the laws of the French Republic.

94 Gen. Charles de Gaulle, President of the National Committee of Free French at London.

95 Dated November 29, 1941, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 809.

96 League of Nations Official Journal, August 1922, p. 1013.

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890E.01/123: Telegram

[Document 755]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, February 6, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received February 7—8:59 a.m.]

35. My 11, January 16. Lebanese Minister of External Affairs would be grateful if the Department could express an opinion as to the practicability of his proposal.

In this connection the President of Syria has just sent a verbal message to me to the effect that the Syrian Government was prepared to make any provisional arrangement we wished to safeguard all American interests until after the war. He states German propaganda is spreading reports that the only reason the United States refuses to recognize Syrian independence is that we are preparing a scheme for the extension of Jewish influence in these territories and therefore do not wish to tie our hands. Also because we have no confidence whatever in the stability of the Levant States.

Repeated to London. By mail to Cairo.

Engert

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert) 890E.01/123: Telegram

[Document 756]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, February 20, 1942—11 p.m.

25. Your no. 11, January 16, and no. 35, February 6, 9 p.m. The question of the recognition of Syrian and Lebanese independence continues to receive the Department’s very active consideration, and although there are certain inter-related problems which complicate the question, a further instruction to you should be possible in the near future.

Welles

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 890D.01/586

[Document 757]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 2, 1942.

The British Ambassador97 called to see me this morning at his request. He brought up again the question of the recognition by the United States of the new Government of Syria. He said that he realized that there might be certain circumstances involving the present relations between the Vichy Government and the United States which would make it seem undesirable for the United States to accord recognition at once. He said, however, that he thought some form of recognition could be extended which would not create any serious friction with the Vichy Government and he urged that this Government do so.

I said that I could not agree at this time to take any such step as that suggested. I stated that our relations with the Vichy Government98 had reached a very critical stage and that I did not wish at this moment to increase the number of problems which weighed upon our policy concerning the French Government at Vichy. I stated that once the present situation had been clarified, provided such clarification was satisfactory from our point of view, the question of our relations with the new Government of Syria could be taken up for further study.

S[umner] W[elles]

97 Viscount Halifax.

98 For correspondence on this subject, see vol. ii, pp. 123 ff.

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/876: Telegram

[Document 758]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 3, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received March 4—10:22 a.m.]

64. Nationalists in Damascus have recently greatly intensified their activities. One of their leaders Jamil Mardam called on me the other day and accused Syrian Government of being unconstitutional, corrupt and inefficient. I advised him to tell this to the British and French and he said he had already done so and that Damascus newspapers too had called attention to the shortcomings of the Government. I said I had observed that the press had rather freely criticised the Government for its alleged failure to solve food problem and to prevent exorbitant rise in prices but I had not seen any very constructive suggestions. He replied that question of cost and distribution of food supplies was fundamental and that unless Allied Powers especially Britain assumed complete control there might be serious trouble. See also second paragraph of my 53, February 19, and my 63, March 2.99

I pointed out that the British authorities had imported some 60,000 tons of wheat since last July which would have been ample but for the cupidity and perhaps even dishonesty of dealers who instead of selling to the hungry public were hoarding most of it in the hope of still higher prices.

German propaganda has taken fullest advantage of the situation by stating that Allied promises of food and prosperity were worthless, that most of the wheat has gone to the Jews in Palestine and that a corrupt clique was being kept in office by Allied bayonets to enable British and French officials line their pockets and to prevent the real patriots, i. e. Nationalists, from working for Arab solidarity.

Leader of Nationalist bloc, Shukri Kuwatly (see my telegram 365, September 15 [16], 19411 ), has been away for several months ostensibly on pilgrimage but chiefly to confer with Ibn Saud2 who is said to have advised him to cooperate with the British. This report coupled with Jamil Mardam’s recent visit to Cairo has given rise to the impression—which both Kuwatly and Mardam have always tried to convey to me—that the Nationalists are really not pro-Nazi and are now ready to support the Allies or at least the British. At the same time the Nationalists are spreading reports that they are already enjoying the confidence of the British Government.

Catroux does not trust Nationalists and has requested British to prevent Kuwatly’s return from Baghdad where he now is and large demonstrations were being prepared for his reception. British have prevailed upon Kuwatly to postpone his return few weeks but believe it would be great mistake to keep him out altogether. I thoroughly concur that he should be allowed to return. He and his followers may be given benefit of doubt while they behave themselves provided they be closely watched. However, they should not be allowed to hold office so long as an Axis threat of invasion exists for in that case they would be in a position to assist enemy if they were so inclined. I have since last July been urging upon British and French that the security problem is the paramount one and today more than ever. I cannot be too emphatic that Syria must be defended not only to protect Suez and Persian Gulf but because it is one of the few important potential bases for an Allied offensive against Axis later on.

Engert

99 Neither printed.

1 Not printed.

2 King of Saudi Arabia.

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/585: Telegram

[Document 759]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 4, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 5:40 p.m.]

69. My 68 of today.3 I have had several conversations in the past few months with high British and Free French officials regarding their attitude toward the mandate. The British feel, as do of course Syrians and Lebanese, that with the proclamations of last September and November the old French mandate was de facto abolished and that independence is only limited by the exigencies of the war. On the other hand they admit that theoretically the mandate can only be said to be in a state of liquidation to be definitely terminated after the war either by the League of Nations or fresh international agreements.

The French prefer to think that technically the mandate continues in existence unimpaired until it is formally wound up by the League and until treaties between a new France and the Levant States have been signed. They concede however that as a matter of fact the mandate has been modified by the proclamation of independence and they claim that they are taking this into account in dealing with the native administrations.

The Syrians and Lebanese on the other hand complain bitterly that the Free French have done little or nothing to break with the old mandatory regime and that their attitude renders independence an illusion. They see that most French officials continue to act precisely as they did [under] the mandate and many of the minor ones are the identical personnel already known to the natives neither for special probity nor efficiency.

It is this reluctance on the part of the French to implement their promises which is at the bottom of much of the political unrest mentioned in my 64 March 3 and which is causing the Nationalists to look more and more to Great Britain and the United States for the fulfillment of their hopes for real independence and an Arab union.

Repeated to London, by mail to Cairo.

Engert

3 Not printed.

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/879: Telegram

[Document 760]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, March 10, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 6:24 p.m.]

79. My 64, March 3. Catroux has been persuaded to permit Shukri Kuwatly to return unconditionally but has requested British to inform him he must refrain from stirring up trouble. This has had good effect in Damascus especially as British and French have also publicly declared complete harmony exists between them as regards activities of political agitators, etc. Nine arrests have been made among persons believed to be in Axis pay.

Engert

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 890D.01/607

[Document 761]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 23, 1942.

The British Ambassador called to see me this evening at my request. The Ambassador again brought up the question of our recognition of the independence of Syria. I replied that I preferred to leave this matter in continued abeyance for the time being. I said that until we knew clearly what our situation with the Vichy Government was, I saw nothing to be gained by raising this new obstacle. The Ambassador said that he understood our position and acquiesced.

S[umner] W[elles]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert) 890D.01/602a: Telegram

[Document 762]

The Secretary of State to the Consul General at Beirut (Engert)

Washington, June 2, 1942—9 p.m.

78. The Department is contemplating accrediting a “Diplomatic Agent and Consul General” to the Governments at Damascus and Beirut on a suitable occasion in the near future, at which time the following statement to the press would be issued: “On November 29, 1941, the Department of State issued a statement4 of the American Government’s attitude concerning the status of Syria and Lebanon, in which it was pointed out that the Government of the United States had always sympathized with the aspirations of the peoples of Syria and the Lebanon for sovereign independence and consequently welcomed any step towards the realization of these aspirations.

The Government of the United States is prepared to extend formal recognition to Syria and the Lebanon as fully sovereign States as soon as duly constituted independent governments are established in those States, on the understanding that such governments will continue to recognize the existing treaty rights of the United States and its nationals until such time as new instruments can be negotiated regulating the relations between the United States and the two countries. Meanwhile, pending the extension of such recognition, the Government of the United States has now decided to accredit a Diplomatic Agent and Consul General to the governments at Damascus and Beirut.”

The Department would be glad to receive your comments regarding the action and the press release suggested above.

The proposed action should be considered strictly confidential until officially announced.

Hull

4  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 807.

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/603: Telegram

[Document 763]

The Consul General at Beirut (Engert) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, June 6, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 6:04 p.m.]

205. Department’s 78, June 2, 9 p.m.

1. For the reasons set forth in my telegram No. 434, October 30, 1941,5 a promise to recognize the independence of the Levant States will make a most happy impression both on the local and on the occupying authorities. And if coupled with the appointment in the near future of a Diplomatic Agent and Consul General such a declaration will at once inspire confidence that we believe the Allies capable of and willing to defend Syria against Axis aggression.

2. I do not anticipate any difficulty in obtaining from both countries the necessary engagements to respect all our existing treaty rights until new treaties can be negotiated. See my 426, October 24, 1941,6 11, January 16, and 35, February 6, 1942.

The only question in my mind concerns the expression “as soon as duly constituted independent governments are established”, I assume we shall be the sole judges as to what we consider duly constituted governments but I fear lest all four authorities concerned viz. the British, the French, the Syrians and the Lebanese—not to mention some of the racial and religious minorities—at variance put a different interpretation on the phrase and denounce the others and appeal to us for justice. The problem of fair elections for example would alone be sufficient to cause no end of discussion and ill feeling and no matter which government was in office we would be blamed if we recognized it since many of the natives or even England or France might not consider it strictly constitutional.

3. The Department may therefore prefer to word that particular reference a little more vaguely in order to avoid being drawn into a discussion of any definite programs for the establishment of duly constituted governments. As stated in my 155, May 1, 10 a.m.,7 I feel that for the time being it would be preferable if we were not committed to support or withhold support from any native authorities which in the nature of things must be provisional under military occupation. It is quite possible that no duly constituted governments in the strict sense of the term will be possible before the end of the war, and I take it that the Department would not wish to wait that long before extending recognition.

4. It would be helpful if the Department could inform me of the approximate date when the proposed press release is to be issued as the situation may of course change in the meantime.

Engert

5  Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 794.

6  ibid., p. 793.

7  Ante, p. 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 710 and Doc. 711].

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/609: Telegram

[Document 764]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, June 25, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 12:11 p.m.]

227. With further reference to the Department’s 78, June 2, I wish to call particular attention to the fact that the present Governments of Syria and the Lebanon appear to be in no way prepared to recognize all of the existing treaty rights of the United States and of its nationals. I make particular reference to the fiscal immunities granted to American philanthropic, educational, and religious institutions by virtue of Herrick–Poincaré letters of April 4, 1924.8

As reported in despatch 175, October 21, 1941,9 the question of these immunities has been the object of considerable correspondence recently especially as concerns the American hospital at Deir Ez Zor. French authorities do not question the claim to tax exemption and have repeatedly informed the Syrian Government that the hospital is exempt from taxation in any form. Syrian authorities refuse to accede to this view. On or about June 1 Syrian official handed to director of hospital copies of four documents in Arabic, from an examination of which it appears that the Syrian Minister of Finance has decided after considerable deliberation that the hospital must pay all the taxes assessed against it in the past and in the future. I have handed a new note on the subject to the Delegate General.10 Copies of correspondence will go forward by the next pouch.

The Consulate General has also had a considerable correspondence with the Delegation General on the application to the American University of Beirut of the import license taxes reported in despatch No. 308, March 14.11 This correspondence also will go forward to the Department in the near future. The Delegation General assured the Consulate General April 17 that the American establishments are exonerated from the payment of this tax for all supplies they may have to import. However, the taxes were and are still required. At my request, I believe, the Delegation General asked that an amendment be made to article VI of Decree 146 N L to specifically exempt foreign philanthropic and educational institutions from the tax.

I was informed verbally yesterday that the amendment had been refused as the Lebanese member of the Superior Committee of Supplies was absolutely opposed to it and had expressed the opinion that the mandatory power had been far too generous in its treatment of foreign institutions.

As far as I can make out the Syrian and Lebanese officials have adopted the same line of argument that is, the mandatory has given too wide an interpretation to the pertinent provision of treaty of [apparent omission] of 1901 and of the agreement of Constantinople of December 18, 1913,12 and that these conventions must in future be interpreted restrictively by the two Governments. They appear to wish to ignore the Poincaré-Herrick correspondence as well as the statement made by General Catroux in his proclamation of September 27, 1941,13 and November 26, 1941,14 see enclosure 2 to despatch 159 of September 20, 1941,11 and enclosure 1 to despatch 223, of December 5, 1941,11 to the effect that Syria and the Lebanon in entering upon an independent international life naturally succeed to the rights and obligations resulting from all treaties, conventions, and international acts concluded by France which concern them or were made in their names.

Until or unless this attitude is changed as shown by acts and not by words alone it would seem to be most inadvisable to go beyond the Department’s statement of November 29, 1941.

I hope soon to pay calls on the important Syrian and Lebanese officials and shall not fail to sound them out on this particular point of immunities.

In the meanwhile I see no urgency in going further toward recognizing an independence which is fictitious. There are reasons for this which go far beyond the point discussed above and which I hope soon to set forth in despatches or in telegrams if time is an important consideration. American prestige is so high in these territories that we need fear no untoward reaction to our reserved attitude in this unanimity [sic].

For my guidance I should appreciate any directives the Department may wish to send.

Gwynn

8  Foreign Relations, 1924, vol. i, pp. 738–740.

9 Not printed.

10 Gen. Georges Catroux.

11 Not printed.

12 Martens, Nouveau recueil général de traités, etc., 3 sér., tome viii, p. 720.

13 See telegram No. 381, September 28, 10 p.m., from the Consul General at Beirut, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 786.

14 See telegram No. 467, November 26, 1 p.m., from the Consul General at Beirut, ibid., p. 805.

11 Not printed.

11 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) 890D.01/609: Telegram

[Document 765]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, July 21, 1942—11 p.m.

111. Your 227, June 25, 10 a.m. You should call personally by appointment on the Foreign Ministers of Syria and Lebanon and leave with each an “informal aide-mémoire” substantially as follows: “The Department of State in Washington received in due course with satisfaction the formal, official assurances given Mr. Engert on October 22, 194115 and February 6, 194216 (January 16, 194217 ) by the competent Minister of the Syrian (Lebanese) Government that that Government willingly recognized and would fully respect all treaty rights of the United States and its nationals in Syria (Lebanon) pending negotiation of fresh treaty relations and definite abolition of the Mandate.

Consequently, the Department of State has been seriously concerned to learn that in certain matters with respect to which representations have been recently made to the competent Syrian (Lebanese) authorities by its representatives at Beirut—matters to which the applicability of such treaty rights appears both clear and buttressed by precedent of many years standing—the Government of Syria (Lebanon) seems inclined to adduce from a new study of the pertinent accords and relevant documentation a new interpretation thereof, which would, in fact, result in a treatment of American individuals and institutions in Syria (Lebanon) clearly prejudicial to their interests and in violation of the rights or privileges which they have heretofore enjoyed.

For some weeks past, the Department of State has had under careful and sympathetic consideration the question of the action which, in the light of the present situation in Syria (Lebanon) and of its juridical position, might properly be taken by the United States Government, in the exercise of such pertinent executive power as is accorded by the American Constitution, effectively to supplement and implement its Statement of November 29, 1941, with a view to meeting the desire of the Government of Syria (Lebanon), as expressed to Mr. Engert on February 6, 1942, (January 16, 1942) that the United States extend recognition to Syria (Lebanon).

Manifestly, such consideration has been premised in important measure on the assurances in question as well as on those of a similarly unequivocal nature received from the Free French authorities.

Consequently and to its sincere regret, the Department of State must defer final determination of this larger question, at least pending the receipt of satisfactory clarification of and assurances regarding the Syrian (Lebanese) Government’s attitude relative not only to the matters to which reference has been made above but also to any other matters similarly falling within the framework of the American treaty rights in question.”

Should you deem advisable any substantial modification of or addition to the foregoing, telegraph your recommendations. If not you should proceed as directed and report developments currently by telegraph.

Answering your penultimate paragraph: Having in mind the limited scope of the proposed Statement quoted in the Department’s 78 of June 2, 9 p.m., and the consideration that a diplomatic agent is traditionally appointed to a state limited in the exercise of its sovereignty (e. g. Egypt 1876–1922, Bulgaria 1901–10 and Morocco 1917 to date) and if appointed to Beirut would be authorized to deal on a de facto basis with the Syrian and Lebanese authorities, the Free French Delegation and the British Military, the Department would welcome your further comment by telegraph.

You will realize from the foregoing that the assumption made at the end of paragraph 3 of Engert’s telegram no. 205 of June 6, 11 a.m., is not in conformity with the Department’s intentions, for we have contemplated from the beginning that only general post-war settlement would afford appropriate occasion for recognition of full sovereignty of the Levant States.

It is thought that no more detailed exposition of the Department’s position, or contemplated policy, need be given you in this connection or in reply to your helpful telegram no. 246 of July 13, 9 a.m.20 You should adapt your actions to the foregoing outline of such policy, notably by continuing to deal informally on a de facto basis with the British, Free French, Lebanese and Syrian authorities.

You may in your discretion discuss the substance of this telegram confidentially with the appropriate British and Free French authorities.

Hull

15 See telegram No. 426, October 24, 1941, 9 a.m., from the Consul General at Beirut, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 793.

16 See telegram No. 35, February 6, 9 p.m., from the Consul General at Beirut, p. 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755].

17 See telegram No. 11, January 16, 3 p.m., from the Consul General at Beirut, p. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753].

20  Ante, p. 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715].

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/621: Telegram

[Document 766]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, July 26, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received July 27—2:04 p.m.]

264. Department’s 111, July 21.

1. As pressure of business in Beirut has not permitted me to pay calls long overdue on Damascus officials, I shall if Department concurs proceed to that city Wednesday 29th, call on French delegate Collet, President of Syria and his Foreign Minister, and return here Friday. I should like to make these first visits merely courtesy calls allowing any subjects to be discussed that may come up, and to put off aide-mémoire which is sure to be somewhat disagreeable to Syrians (and to British) for second visit about 10 days later.

2. Nothing can be done for the moment with Lebanese as Ministerial crisis is on. New Foreign Minister will probably be Joseph Salem, a well known Beirut businessman and long time friend who has never held public office, who will need some time to get his office in hand, … (see my 259, July 2421 ).

3. For obvious reasons two démarches should be made on about same day.

4. As regards second paragraph of aide-mémoire I suggest following phraseology be used “recently made by its representatives at Beirut to the Delegation General of Free France in the Levant for communication to the competent Syrian Lebanese authorities”. While I have no reason to doubt that French have transmitted substance of Consulate General’s several notes to Syrians and Lebanese, the confusion and disorder are so extreme that it is possible that local governments may claim not to have been duly apprised. In any case our notes were addressed to the French and to no one else.

5. In other respects the proposed text seems very satisfactory.

6. As to the appointment of a Diplomatic Agent here I am not well enough acquainted with the details of the position in Egypt, Bulgaria, and Morocco to judge whether the tradition should be deemed as meriting great consideration as applied to these two countries. I can see no great advantage in changing now the present status of this post. The disadvantage of becoming implicated in any way in the Franco-British jockeying for position must be apparent. When they have settled their differences between themselves and their relations to Syria and Lebanon and the situation has become somewhat clarified it will be time enough for the United States to determine its attitude. In the meantime we are on solid ground and our interest in no serious danger. Our recognition of Syrian and Lebanese independence should be considered by ourselves as the culminating point, as it would be by others, and any present move in that direction would seem to me premature. For the time being I should think the less said the better.

7. As concerns the directions to continue to deal informally on a de facto basis with the British, Free French, Lebanese and Syrian authorities, I feel obligated to point out that the Consulate General has for the past year dealt with the Free French Delegation on as formal a basis as it did with the French High Commission for some 20 years prior to the Vichy withdrawal from the Levant. I think we should continue to do so, considering the Free French as the natural successors to the party with whom our international agreements concerning these territories were concluded and as such responsible to us for the protection of our interests. With the others our relations should, I think be friendly, informal and de facto.

Gwynn

21 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) 890D.01/621: Telegram

[Document 767]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, July 31, 1942—11 p.m.

121. Your 264, July 26, 3 p.m.

1. Your courtesy visit to Damascus prior to delivery of aide-mémoire is approved. However, the Department desires to obtain as early as possible the necessary assurances from the Syrian and Lebanese Governments regarding treatment of American individuals and institutions in Syria and Lebanon, in order that decision may be taken on question of recognition. Note has been taken of your comment in this regard, but consideration of a broad nature connected with our general relations with peoples of the Near East render prompt decision desirable if satisfactory assurances of respect for our treaty rights are received.

2. Change of wording you suggest in paragraph 2 of aide-mémoire is approved.

3. With reference to your paragraph 7, the Department is not aware of any objection to your continuing to carry on your relations with the Free French authorities in a manner similar to that followed in the past.

Hull

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk) 890D.01/619: Telegram

[Document 768]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Minister in Egypt (Kirk)

Washington, August 1, 1942—4 p.m.

839. Department’s 817, July 28, 9 p.m.22 For your further information, the Department is considering the advisability of implementing its statement of November 29, 1941 (see press release no. 574) in which sympathy with “the natural and legitimate aspirations of the peoples of Syria and Lebanon, including the full enjoyment of sovereign independence” was expressed.

Action would take the form of the appointment to the two states of a diplomatic agent, whose letters of credence would elaborate on that statement in the sense of applicable portions of my basic declaration of July 23.23 It may interest you to know that we have Wadsworth in mind for the post.

Although no such action is contemplated unless and until the present immediate threat of Axis occupation of Egypt has been removed, you may in your discretion discuss the question freely in confidence with Casey24 as of possible interest in connection with the reported present examination of the situation in the Levant States.

We should be glad to learn of any present plans for the gradual transfer to the Governments of Syria and Lebanon of such additional sovereign powers as the situation may appear to warrant. Your views would also be welcome regarding the beneficial effect which our contemplated appointment of diplomatic agent at Beirut might have upon our relations in the Arab countries.

Welles

22 Not printed.

23 Address by the Secretary of State, July 23, 1942, Department of State Bulletin, July 25, 1942, p. 639.

24 Richard G. Casey, British Minister of State Resident in the Middle East.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 890D.01/626

[Document 769]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] August 4, 1942.

Monsieur Tixier called to see me this afternoon at his request.

[Here follows paragraph dealing with the appointment of American Consul General to Brazzaville; see volume II, pages 557 ff.]

Monsieur Tixier then raised the question of Syria. He stated that he understood that the Government of the United States intended appointing a new Diplomatic Agent and Consul General in Syria, and he was instructed to request that this action should not be taken before the United States accorded recognition to Syria and the Lebanon as independent states. He said he understood, however, that this Government was not yet prepared to take such a step and he asked if this Government would not therefore be willing to adopt the same procedure as that indicated above in this instance, and let the competent authorities in Syria and the Lebanon have a copy of the commission of the American Diplomatic Agent and Consul General for their information. I said I would be glad also to have consideration given to this suggestion.

S[umner] W[elles]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) 890D.01/626: Telegram

[Document 770]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, August 19, 1942—10 p.m.

135. While the Department appreciates the reasons which have doubtless caused you to delay in presenting to the Governments of Syria and Lebanon the aide-mémoires referred to in the Department’s 121, July 31, 11 p.m., developments connected with our general policy concerning the Arab peoples24a makes it important that we obtain the desired assurances from the Lebanese and Syrian Governments at the earliest moment. Unless subsequent developments have rendered inappropriate the aide-mémoires as drafted, they should be presented without further delay.

For your strictly confidential information, the Department contemplates the extension only of limited recognition to Syria and Lebanon, at least for the present. Since diplomatic agents are accredited by the United States to areas such as Morocco which are less than fully independent, the establishment of such a rank in Beirut would be in accord with the existing situation there.

Hull

24a See also pp. 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 17] ff.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/630: Telegram

[Document 771]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 21, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received August 22—1:25 p.m.]

296. Department’s 135, August 19 was received yesterday during my absence from Beirut. I had gone to Damascus to leave with the Syrian Foreign Minister the informal aide-mémoire called for in Department’s 111.25 A copy will go forward by next pouch.

2. Fayes el Khowry is both Foreign and Finance Minister. He assured me the matter of Deir-ez-Zor Hospital taxes would soon be settled to our entire satisfaction and that we would receive further assurances to all matters falling within the framework of American treaty rights. It was evident that he had only a vague conception of what those rights might be. He should, I think, make inquiry in that regard of the French who have been acting on Syria’s behalf but it is very doubtful if he will do so as he wants to ignore them in so far as possible. The Department may deem wise to transmit to him its statement of its understanding of what those rights are with view to having them recited in a letter which he would address to us, in order to avoid in future just the sort of trouble that has arisen about Deir-ez-Zor Hospital. If left to himself he will give us a general statement. I do not doubt he will act in good faith but any one of his successors may be inclined to circumscribe our rights, particularly if the Syrians find themselves obliged to grant equal rights to other nations whom they may like less. I am convinced that fundamentally the Syrians are xenophobe and would like to get all westerners out of their country, though they find us less objectionable than the others, and I think we will have to be continuously vigilant in protecting our acquired rights if we put store by them.

3. Foreign Minister attempted to minimize present difficulty and to convince me that so small a matter should not be allowed to stand for a minute in the way of America’s recognition of Syrian independence. That recognition he is most anxious to obtain as it would, he said, be the only one of any real value. The limited recognition mentioned in Department’s 135, August 19 may be a great disappointment to him as it will probably be less than he was led confidentially to expect in the immediate future by Mr. Engert on receipt of Department’s 78, June 2.

4. As I stated in paragraph 4, my 227, June 25, the Syrians and Lebanese had adopted a similar line of argument as to treatment to be accorded to foreign institutions. I have since learned that Foreign Ministers of both countries (see my 259, June [July] 2426 ) met often with General Spears27 to discuss policies and took their directives from him. I am inclined now to believe that the line adopted was meant to eliminate French influence here by restricting French institutions and that we were hit only by ricochet. Lebanese Foreign Minister Frangie is now out of office. I should not be surprised if the Syrian followed him soon as result of political conferences held in Damascus by de Gaulle this week. … That will probably be outcome of de Gaulle-Spears duel.27a

5. I will present aide-mémoire to Lebanese Foreign Minister within few days.

6. Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

25 Dated July 21, 11 p.m., p. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765].

26 Not printed.

27 Maj. Gen. Sir Edward Spears, Head of British Military Mission, and British Minister in Syria and in Lebanon.

27a For correspondence regarding the visit of General de Gaulle to Syria and Lebanon at this time, see pp. 606–634 [Pgs. 606–634 include portions of Doc. 721, Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745].

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/629: Telegram

[Document 772]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 21, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received August 22—5 p.m.]

298. Department’s 135, August 19. I note Department contemplates appointing Diplomatic Agent to this post for reasons connected with our general policy concerning the Arab peoples. I have but the vaguest idea of what that policy may be. I should be most grateful for any directives Department may find it possible to give me to enable me to adapt my actions and words to the Department’s aims.

I have already expressed my views on this subject in the penultimate paragraph of my 24628 and paragraph 6 of my 264, July 26, 3 p.m. In view of the very unsatisfactory relations between the British and the French and the possibility of serious trouble arising between them, trouble that may profoundly affect the status of this territory but which it would seem must soon come to a head I feel it my duty to urge again that no important step be taken until we see a little clearer into this complex situation.

It is my conviction that the Arabs here have little use for the Allies and from what I can learn the situation would not appear to be very different in other Arab countries. They will like us when we have proved our strength and fall on us if we show any weakness.

If our policy is based on seeking their favor it is, I fear, ill-inspired. If it is based on the thought of favoring an Arab union I can only say that it is difficult to believe that the Arabs, who are essentially a people of families and clans all of whose interests are personal or local, none of whose tendencies are profoundly national or sufficiently patriotic to induce them to sacrifices such as westerners are called upon to bear, really want such a union. I cannot eliminate the thought from my mind that the Arab union is possibly an invention of the British fostered in the thought of excluding other westerners including perhaps ourselves … And it may be to our advantage to be able to deal with more than one party in defending our interests present and future in these regions. Oil and aviation come to my mind.

I am also at a loss to understand great haste in recognizing the independence of these peoples who have never or not for many centuries been free when we are as yet unable to restore independence to such nations as the Dutch and Norwegians.

Repeated to Cairo.

Gwynn

28 Dated July 13, 9 a.m., p. 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715].

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/631: Telegram

[Document 773]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 25, 1942—noon.
[Received August 25—11:54 a.m.]

307. My 296, August 21, 10 a.m., and Department’s 135, August 19, 10 a.m. [p.m.] I presented at 11 this morning the informal aide-mémoire to the Lebanese Minister for Foreign Affairs, Philippe Boulos. He said he hoped to be able to reply soon.

Gwynn

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/636: Telegram

[Document 774]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, August 31, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 1:14 p.m.]

317. Reference my telegram No. 296, August 21, 10 a.m. I have received through the British Political Officer at Damascus and the British Legation at Beirut a note dated August 24 from the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs, an excerpt from which reads as follows: “The Syrian Government have passed a measure in the form of a legislative decree ordaining that American institutions in Syria: missions, schools, hospitals et cetera, be exempted from the payment of all taxes and that taxes paid by all or some of these institutions in the past be reimbursed. The Syrian Government in taking this step have been animated by a spirit of friendship towards the United States the justice of whose claim they do not question.”

A copy of the note will go forward by the next pouch. The legislative decree has not yet appeared in the Syrian Journal Officiel nor was a copy sent to me. When it appears I will ask the American Mission to institute proceedings immediately to recover taxes in the past.

Gwynn

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/649: Telegram

[Document 775]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, September 12, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 11:06 a.m.]

340. My 317, August 31, 9 a.m. Syrian Official Journal September 3 publishes a decree of August 25 the substance of which reads as follows: “The hospital of the American Mission in Syria located at Deir ez Zor is exempted for all direct taxes as of the date of its establishment. All taxes paid by this hospital will be returned to it.”

It will be noted that the terms of the decree are much less comprehensive than those of the note dated August 24. This latter in turn would appear to me scarcely to satisfy the request contained in the informal aide-mémoire I left with the Syrian Foreign Minister on August 20.

Gwynn

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. George Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 124.90D/4

[Document 776]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. George Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] October 3, 1942.

Mr. Baudet29 called to inquire regarding the significance of the announcement released by the White House yesterday that Mr. George Wadsworth had been nominated to be American Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut and Damascus. He asked specifically what was implied by the American Government when it employed the rank of Diplomatic Agent.

I said that in our practice, a Diplomatic Agent is sent to an area enjoying something less than full sovereign independence, but having a considerable degree of autonomy, and gave as examples the situation in Morocco at present, and in Egypt and Bulgaria during the periods preceding their full independence. Mr. Baudet implied that the accrediting of an American Diplomatic Agent at Beirut agreed very well with the attitude of Fighting France towards Syria and Lebanon.

Mr. Baudet next wanted to know whether the American Government would respectfully the “prestige and authority” of the Fighting French authorities in Syria. I said that although I had no authority to speak for the Department in this regard, I thought I could say that the American Government would be careful not to render General Catroux’ position any more difficult than it already is. Mr. Baudet said that the American Government’s recognition of the authority of Fighting France and the Lebanese was implicit in the fact that we had decided to send a Diplomatic Agent rather than a Minister Plenipotentiary to Beirut. He felt confident, however, that the Fighting French National Committee would insist upon an explicit statement to this effect by the American Government. I asked Mr. Baudet in what connection he thought the American Government might make the explicit statement to which he referred. He thought such a statement might be included in Mr. Wadsworth’s credentials. I said that Mr. Wadsworth’s credentials had not yet been drafted but that his suggestion would be borne in mind if feasible during their drafting.

Mr. Baudet next wanted to know when we would ask for an agrément for Mr. Wadsworth. I said that I did not presume any agrément would be necessary, other than the informal discussions which we had already had with Mr. Tixier on the subject. Mr. Baudet said that Mr. Tixier had concurred in principle in the suggestion of the appointment of a Diplomatic Agent, but that he had not considered the individual appointee and would of course expect to be given the privilege of granting an agrément. I said that I did not believe the Department had had in mind asking for any formal agrément * for Mr. Wadsworth. I said that if the Fighting French authorities had any reason whatsoever to object to Mr. Wadsworth, we would be very glad to receive their views. Mr. Baudet emphasized that it was not a question of objecting to Mr. Wadsworth who, he said, was well and favorably known to the Fighting French authorities, but that a matter of principle was involved. I asked Mr. Baudet if he thought it would tend to support General Catroux’ prestige and authority if we should ask for a formal agrément of the Syrian and Lebanese authorities. He said he hoped very much that we would not ask the Syrians and Lebanese for the agrément. I asked Mr. Baudet whether the Syrian and Lebanese authorities, who have been told that their countries are independent and to whom Mr. Wadsworth will be accredited, would appreciate our requesting an agrément from the Fighting French. Mr. Baudet agreed that they would not. I suggested that in view of the above, it would be preferable to handle the matter informally both with the Fighting French and the Syrians and Lebanese. Mr. Baudet expressed the personal opinion that this might be the best solution. He added, however, that the Fighting French National Committee would feel highly slighted if they were not approached in some manner shortly after the confirmation of Mr. Wadsworth’s appointment by the Senate.

Mr. Baudet’s next inquiry concerned Mr. Wadsworth’s credentials. He said that the Fighting French authorities would insist that in these credentials the limitations on Syrian and Lebanese independence, necessitated by the war, should be specified. I asked Mr. Baudet what he thought the situation would be in Syria and Lebanon after the war. He said “full and complete sovereign independence”.

I emphasized to Mr. Baudet that our discussion had been of an informal and exploratory character.

29 Philip Baudet, representative of the Free French Delegation.

* I have asked Mr. Gerber, RP [William Gerber, Assistant to the Chief, Division of Research and Publication], to investigate the precedents to determine whether agréments have ever been requested, at least in recent years, for Diplomatic Agents. Apparently no agrément was requested for Mr. John Campbell White when he was appointed to Tangier in 1940. [Footnote in the original. See second paragraph of memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs, October 22, p. 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779].]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. George Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 124.90D/4

[Document 777]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. George Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] October 5, 1942.

Mr. Barclay30 called to inquire whether we could give him anything to report to his Government concerning the significance of Mr. Wadsworth’s appointment to Beirut. I gave him generally the same information furnished Mr. Baudet, of the Fighting French delegation, on October 3.

Mr. Barclay said he knew that the decision of the American Government in this matter was welcome to his Government, and expressed the hope that Mr. Wadsworth would be able to arrive in Beirut very shortly. He said that British-Fighting French relations had improved considerably of late, and that although the Fighting French were apparently still imbued with the idea that the British had ulterior motives in Syria, he thought General de Gaulle would be sufficiently tractable in London, where he has just arrived, to enable the British to carry out their intention and desire to place the Fighting French in civil control in Madagascar. He said it would be a convenience to the British for the civil government of Madagascar to be managed by the Fighting French, who could utilize the civil servants in Madagascar who are willing to remain at their posts.

30 R. E. Barclay, Second Secretary of the British Embassy.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 890D.01/663: Telegram

[Document 778]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, October 22, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received October 22—12:59 p.m.]

406. With reference to my telegram 307 of August 25, noon and despatch No. 457 of same date,31 I have received a note from the Lebanese Minister for Foreign Affairs stating that the Council of Ministers at its meeting of October 7, 1942 decided to exonerate the American philanthropic, educational and religious institutions from all municipal and customs taxes in conformity with the treaties and conventions in force.

The tenor of this note is very similar to that of the Syrian decree reported in my 340, September 12, 9 a.m. and would appear scarcely to satisfy the request contained in the informal aide-mémoire I left with the Lebanese Minister.

Gwynn

31 Latter not printed.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 123 W 111/409

[Document 779]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] October 22, 1942.

M. Tixier and M. Baudet called to make inquiries regarding Mr. Wadsworth’s mission to Syria and the Lebanon. I told them that I had understood Mr. Wadsworth had outlined to them informally the general nature of his proposed relationship with the French, Syrian, and Lebanese authorities. I added that I believed he had told them that he proposed to call informally on the French Delegate General Catroux prior to his audiences with the Chiefs of State of Syria and the Lebanon. M. Tixier inquired why Mr. Wadsworth’s call on General Catroux was to be informal. I replied that Mr. Wadsworth was accredited to the Presidents of Syria and of the Lebanon and although he of course would have a relationship with General Catroux, it was difficult to recognize the Fighting French request that we recognize the independence of these two territories while apparently at the same time maintaining that our representative should make a formal call on General Catroux. I said that it was our understanding that the British Minister had called first on the Syrian and Lebanese Presidents and that this had created difficulties with General Catroux. We were, therefore, only trying to find a middle course which we hoped would be satisfactory to all concerned.

I explained to M. Tixier and M. Baudet that it had not been the general practice of this Government to request agréments for diplomatic agents whom we considered in a different category from envoys extraordinary and ministers plenipotentiary. I said that diplomatic agents were sent only to countries which did not enjoy full sovereignty such as Bulgaria when it was still nominally part of the Ottoman Empire, Egypt when under the same status and Morocco as it was at present. M. Tixier said that the Fighting French Committee did not appear to question our failure to obtain an agrément for Mr. Wadsworth. Furthermore, he wished to make clear that Mr. Wadsworth was personally most acceptable. M. Tixier added however, that he thought it was important to avoid giving the impression that the National Committee was to be confronted with a fait accompli and that he had hoped that it would be consulted or at least informed regarding the nature of Mr. Wadsworth’s credentials. I said that Mr. Wadsworth’s letters of credence were in the usual form except for the fact that we had had to take account of the fact that Syria and the Lebanon did not enjoy full sovereign rights. I said that with that in mind Mr. Wadsworth’s letters of credence pointed out that his appointment was a manifestation of the American Government’s sympathy with the aspirations of the Syrian and the Lebanese peoples for independence while recognizing that the exercise of full sovereign power by their Governments is today circumscribed by conditions necessitated by the war. I explained that the last phrase was practically identical with the formula which had been used by General De Gaulle. I inquired whether M. Tixier perceived any objection to such a statement. He said that personally he did not but that he hoped very much that it would be possible for us to furnish him for communication to the Fighting French National Committee with a copy of Mr. Wadsworth’s letters of credence. He said he thought it was important that the Committee have this information for communication to General Catroux and that to avoid friction or misunderstanding between the Committee and General Catroux it would be better to have the information come from London to the General rather than for Mr. Wadsworth to inform General Catroux of the nature of his letters of credence only after Mr. Wadsworth’s arrival in Beirut. I said that I would inquire whether there was any objection to furnishing M. Tixier informally with a copy of the pertinent paragraph of Mr. Wadsworth’s letters. M. Baudet said he understood that Mr. Wadsworth was intending to make certain remarks at the time of the presentation of his letters to the Chiefs of State of Syria and the Lebanon Republic. He said it would be most desirable if we could furnish the Fighting French National Committee with a copy of the proposed remarks. I said that these remarks were merely an elaboration of the statements in Mr. Wadsworth’s letters of credence which I had already outlined.

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) 123 W 111/410: Telegram

[Document 780]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Beirut (Gwynn)

Washington, October 28, 1942—10 p.m.

209. 1. There follow, for your information and for informal oral communication, in your discretion, to Syrian and Lebanese Foreign Ministers and to Generals Catroux and Holmes,32 a résumé of instructions issued George Wadsworth to whom the President has given commissions appointing him Diplomatic Agent and Consul General to the Republics of Syria and Lebanon:

Upon arrival at Beirut, he is to seek informal conference with the Lebanese Foreign Minister, simultaneously addressing him a formal note announcing his appointment and requesting designation of a time and place for presenting his letter of credence to the President.

He is similarly to approach the Syrian Foreign Minister unless arrangements for the presentation of his letter of credence can appropriately be made without prior informal visit to Damascus.

When he presents his letters of credence he is to make a brief address in English, supplying a copy thereof in advance to the Foreign Minister so appropriate reply may be prepared.

He is authorized to call informally on the French Délégué Général prior to his audiences with the two Chiefs of State and hand him informally copies of his letters of credence and proposed addresses.

He is to assume charge of the Consulate General upon his arrival. The diplomatic missions (legations) which he will head will be considered to be opened as of the respective dates of presentation of letters of credence at Beirut and Damascus.

2. By the present appointments it is the intent of the American Government to manifest its sympathy with the aspirations of the Syrian and Lebanese peoples for independence, recognizing at the same time that the exercise of full sovereign power by their present governments is today circumscribed by limitations necessitated by conditions of war. We feel confident that the Syrian and Lebanese Governments will welcome this step, which represents an effort to meet their desires, so far as seems practicable at present.

3. An oral communication in the sense of the foregoing was made on October 22, 1942 by the Chief of the Department’s Division of Near Eastern Affairs to Monsieur Tixier. Copies of Wadsworth’s letters of credence have been given to Tixier informally as a matter of courtesy for communication by telegraph to the Fighting French National Committee in London, which, the Department understands, is transmitting them to General Catroux.

4. Wadsworth and Scott32a will leave New York on or about November 1st and will spend 10 days en route at Cairo and Jerusalem whence they will communicate with you.

Hull

32 General Holmes, Commanding Officer of the British Ninth Army.

32a James T. Scott, appointed Commercial Attaché at Beirut.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard) 851R.01/27½

[Document 781]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Villard)

[Washington,] October 30, 1942.

Mr. Baudet referred to the attitude of the Department with respect to the approach to be made by Mr. George Wadsworth to the French authorities upon his arrival in Syria, and said that a telegram had been sent to General de Gaulle on the subject by the Fighting French Delegation in Washington. The Department’s position in this matter was understood to be that Mr. Wadsworth should pay an unofficial call on General Catroux in Beirut, whereas his call on the Lebanese and Syrian authorities would be of an official and formal character.

A reply had now been received from General de Gaulle to the effect that “he saw no reason” why Mr. Wadsworth should not make an official call on General Catroux. This statement was interpreted by Mr. Baudet to mean that General de Gaulle was strongly opposed to the proposed unofficial call of Mr. Wadsworth and that he would like to have the Department alter its instructions to Mr. Wadsworth accordingly. Mr. Baudet said that there was some urgency about the matter as he understood Mr. Wadsworth was to leave in the immediate future for Beirut, and a decision would have to be made before his arrival.

I told Mr. Baudet that I would look into the matter. Mr. Baudet said he would like to have a reply from the Department on this subject as soon as possible in order that it might be transmitted to General de Gaulle.

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State 123 W 111/419: Telegram

[Document 782]

The Consul at Beirut (Gwynn) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 16, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received November 17—12:16 p.m.]

455. Wadsworth arrived, am relinquishing charge as of close of business today.

Gwynn

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25817: Telegram

[Document 783]

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 18, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received 3:49 p.m.]

458. After leaving copy of my letter of credence with the Lebanese Foreign Minister yesterday morning I called by appointment on General Catroux who returned my call the same afternoon because as he informed me confidentially he is to leave by air today for London “for important consultations”. From both my welcome was most cordial. I am to be received by President Naccache tomorrow.

As a former military commander in North Africa the General expressed high admiration of our expedition’s success but confessed himself seriously perturbed at our apparent close liaison with Admiral Darlan33 whom he characterized as bitterly Anglophobe and irretrievably unpopular among the great majority of metropolitan Frenchmen who now more than ever before he believes will repudiate the Vichy policies of surrender and collaboration and look for leadership to the Fighting French notably in the present juncture because of their constant championship of France’s position overseas.

He could explain but hardly condone this liaison on grounds of temporary military expediency designed to reestablish order and perhaps to influence the French Fleet in Toulon to join our forces. He fears however that enemy dispositions now militate strongly against success of the latter move.

His own loyalty to General de Gaulle was reaffirmed in a message made public last night in which he stressed the necessity of “standing in close formation around the flag which you refused to lower before the enemy”.

The local situation he said had improved, with Lebanese factional jealousies considerably eased by an understanding recently reached between President and Maronite Patriarch for joint effort to combat any action aimed by Syrians at circumscribing Lebanon’s present territorial boundaries or by its own Moslem elements at union with Syria. Similar easing of political rivalries in Syria he added might be expected to result from reestablishment of the suspended constitutional regime, in which connection he seemed disposed if the military situation continues favorable to hold elections next spring “provided always that this be not under British aegis”.

Wadsworth

33 Adm. Jean François Darlan, Commander in Chief of all French Armed Forces.

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/916: Telegram

[Document 784]

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 20, 1942—noon.
[Received 5:14 p.m.]

465. Reference telegram No. 458, November 18, 9 a.m. At the ceremony of my reception yesterday by President Naccache the well ordered formality was tempered by cordial, evidently sincere, welcome. Lebanese gendarmerie supplied a smart guard of honor and band.

This morning’s press features the event with photographs and full texts of my remarks and the President’s reply. Editorial comment is limited largely to expressions of welcome and satisfaction that this “appointment is a new confirmation of our independence”. The Foreign Minister informs me he has sent an appreciative account to representative [of] Lebanese in New York, Rio de Janeiro and Buenos Aires.

The President, whom Gwynn esteems as an earnest, honest servant of his country, was obviously moved when reading his reply, full text of which has been reported by Office of War Information (telegram No. 462, November 1934 ). Its most effective passages were those expressing confidence in the victory of the United Nations and their purpose to establish a just and fruitful peace. He interpreted the appointment of an American diplomatic representative as “a further pledge of his country’s better future, of the safeguard of its traditions and of its independence”.

Highlights of our ensuing conversation follow:

At least 80% of the Christian majority of Lebanon, he said, hoped for United Nations’ victory, whereas this proportion was unhappily reversed among its Moslem minority. Our successes in North Africa and the Solomons had done much to convert this hope into faith. There was growing recognition of the necessity for personal sacrifice to meet war-born problems of scarcity. His policy was to foster this trend. Thus might Lebanon show itself worthy of promised independence.

He spoke in this connection of the country’s motor transport problem. Strict controls were being put into force (see telegram No. 416 at [of] October 28, noon35 ). They were far from popular, especially as public transport was primitive and inadequate. [Apparent omission] as murmuring that America from whence spare parts and tires must come was ill-informed as to the situation.

I told him of our own radical control measures designed to conserve rubber for war industries but he seemed more impressed by my description of Italy’s increasingly acute transport problem and of growing Nazi strangle hold on that country’s economy. He commented, “You would do well, I believe, to use such an approach in your propaganda in this and neighboring countries”.

Elections in Lebanon he felt would be unwise at this time. The threat of German invasion was not wholly removed. Lack of transport was a practical impediment. Candidates could not freely voice their views, e. g. on such vitally important matters as the country’s political future. The bulk of the population was a worthy non-politically minded peasantry interested today primarily in questions of supply. The thin crust of small politicians too often fished in troubles for personal gain. Probably only some 15% of the electorate could be gotten to the polls.

In Syria he said the problem was different.

There, among political leaders, there was a growing demand for elections. But such leaders felt sure of their constituencies. They would stop at nothing—money, favor, and false promises—to gain their ends. There was little of real democracy in their demands.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Wadsworth

34 Not printed.

35 Not printed.

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/921: Telegram

[Document 785]

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 24, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 7:20 p.m.]

478. To explain the reference in the third numbered paragraph of my telegram No. 480 of November 24, 1 p.m.35a I should add the following to the brief report made in telegram 458 of November 18, 9 a.m. of my conversations of the previous day with General Catroux:

When handing him copies of my letters credence and proposed remarks I said that, while I felt sure there was nothing therein which he would not find agreeable, I should perhaps mention and explain what to him might appear to be a regrettable omission, namely an absence of recognition such as the British Government had given of a “preeminent, privileged position of France” in the Levant States.

I explained that, as he would no doubt have learned through the National Committee in London, this was a point which Monsieur Tixier had discussed informally with officials of the Department of State and with respect to which he had been informed that, in accord with our traditional policy dating from the inception of the mandate principle, the American Government could not recognize any such position as accruing to any mandatory power in any mandated territory.

He commented in substance that he quite understood that such a longstanding policy was not one from which it would be convenient for us to vary in the present circumstances, and he ended on a note which I took to give clear indication of the objective of present de Gaullist policy in this country that in the normal course of events the termination of any mandate would normally entail the conclusion and entry into effect of a treaty of alliance between the mandatory and the Government of the mandated territory.

I limited my reply to saying that I was of course aware that such a treaty had been considered quite “normal” at the time of Iraq’s admission to membership in the League of Nations.

General Spears’ views on this subject were strongly put in a despatch of September 19 to Mr. Eden (see enclosure to Gwynn’s despatch No. 545 of November 1436 ) where he wrote inter alia “It emerges all too clearly that their main preoccupation is not the winning of the war but the maintenance of the French position in these states and in the maintenance indefinitely regardless of the declaration of independence”. General Spears’ ill health prevents his receiving my call, but three members of his staff whom I have known at former posts insist there can be no two views on this subject.

Wadsworth

35a  Post, p. 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787].

36 Not printed.

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 123 W 111/420: Telegram

[Document 786]

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 24, 1942—noon.
[Received 5:36 p.m.]

479. Yesterday I called by appointment on the Syrian Foreign Minister37 in Damascus to arrange for presentation of my letter of credence to his President.37a His welcome was cordial and his expressions of appreciation of our policy of recognition were forthright and evidently sincere. Two days earlier Gwynn had given him informally copies of my letter and proposed remarks. He had also to read with care my letter and remarks to Lebanese President as published in full in local press.

Eminently satisfactory arrangements for the presentation ceremony a week from today, including an official luncheon to be given by the President was made; but on latter’s instructions he took pointed exception to the omission from my Syrian letter of any phrase indicating, as had been done by the phrase “with residence at Beirut” in my Lebanese letter, that I would also have a residence at Damascus.

Such omission he explained would be taken as a pointed slight by the Syrian people who, he said, felt that their country was far more important than Lebanon [not?] many even being prepared to admit that the latter should enjoy separate independence.

In reply I mentioned half a dozen obvious international precedents for our action, assured him no slight was intended, all that we proposed to establish [was] a well appointed Legation in Damascus and explained that as a Diplomatic Agent I must deal not only with the Governments to which I am accredited but also with the British military and Free French authorities whose headquarters are in or near Beirut.

While readily admitting the force of this reply, he held to his point; but, on my adding that it was my Government’s desire that if [apparent omission] combined office and residence quarters in Damascus where I would in fact frequently reside, he suggested that the appearances could be saved were I to make appropriate addition to my suggested remarks.

We thereupon agreed to the following addition which I propose to employ unless instructed to the contrary: “It is, too, I venture to add, my Government’s intention to establish in your illustrious capital of Damascus, so soon as practical arrangements to that end can be made, a fully appointed Legation and residence for its first diplomatic representative.”

Wadsworth

37 Fayez el Khoury.

37a Tajeddine Hassani.

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/920: Telegram

[Document 787]

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, November 24, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 6:58 p.m.]

480. Reference my 479, November 24, noon. There follows a résumé of balance of my conversation with Syrian Foreign Minister.

1. He expressed particular satisfaction at my confirmation of his impression that the trend of public, as well as official, opinion in the United States includes so strong a repudiation of isolationism as to warrant his Government’s assuming that the American Government will in fact at the peace conference to follow the United Nations victory “use the full measure of our influence to support the attainment” of uncircumscribed independence by his country. He welcomed my comment that we believed Syria was “ready for it” and assured me there could be no question but that during the period of necessary waiting his people would “by their acts show themselves worthy of it” (note: quotes are from my remark to President of Lebanon).

2. He recalled in this connection of his country that following the last war we did not act in accordance with the findings of the King–Crane Commission38 and the fact that to the question put to them by Mr. Willkie39 as to whether they would prefer the French or the British he and two of his Cabinet colleagues had replied “neither”.

3. He was even more pleased when I told him briefly of our attitude towards what he termed French insistence on a special preeminent privileged position (see my 478, November 24, 11 a.m.) and he said that last year when he had accepted post of Foreign Minister, General Spears had assured him that British recognition of this French position was designed simply to keep things quiet until the end of the war when it was the British Government’s intention that Syria would require full independence.

4. He recalled, however, that after the last war Britain had taken very much the same attitude toward the Amir Faisal then established in Damascus but had later yielded to French insistence even failing to intervene when General Gouraud invaded the country by force of arms. The result, he said, had been that Syrian leaders were long classified as pro-British or pro-French and the former had been consistently persecuted. Today unhappily the picture was very much the same. He had tried to steer a middle course. He wanted only for his country eventual post-war independence. I would understand, therefore, the great satisfaction he felt in having the assurances which I brought from my Government.

Wadsworth

38 For correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1919, The Paris Peace Conference, vol. xii, pp. 745 ff.

39 Wendell Wilkie, Republican candidate for President in 1940, on a tour around the world.

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 123 W 111/435: Telegram

[Document 788]

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, December 3, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received December 4—5:56 p.m.]

501. My 3-day visit to Damascus for presentation of credentials was marked by cordiality fully equal to that attending my reception in Beirut; our policy, as enunciated in the President’s letter and my remarks, being acclaimed as the best possible assurance that Syrian aspirations for full independence will receive at the peace conference forthright support based rather on constructive international policy than on narrow considerations of national self-interest.

There could be no question, I was assured, but that the Syrian Government would willingly adopt policies to Allied wartime needs.

I found, however, as a dominant underlying theme in conversations with the Syrian President, Premier and Foreign Minister, the same apprehensions as to French imperialism, British muddling and American isolationism as were reported in my telegram No. 480 of November 24, 1 p.m.

Office of War Information has telegraphed full text of the President’s reply to my remarks (see my telegram No. 500 of December 140 ). To me he emphasized the high importance he attached to our maintaining a Legation in Damascus both as a continuing outward manifestation of our recognition and as essential to our understanding Syrian problems and outlook.

To his twice repeated affirmation that he wished the American Government to be the judge of these problems, I replied that we hoped rather to collaborate in so far as might be properly possible in finding mutually satisfactory solutions.

He was obviously most keenly concerned at the public statements made in Beirut last summer regarding the continuing mission of France devolving from its responsibilities as mandatory (see despatches Nos. 446 and 460 of August 13 and September 241 ).

On his insistence that the mandate should be considered as terminated by the declaration of independence, I felt obliged to say that, while my Government had not been called upon to offer any opinion in the matter, my impression gained in Washington, was that competent departmental officials considered the mandate to be suspended de facto as a result of developments which, in the normal course of events and assuming Syrian cooperation in our war effort, would crystallize into a situation logically entailing recognition of full independence rather than reestablishment of the mandatory regime.

He then stated bluntly that he wished Syria “assured of a place at the peace conference as a fully independent state”. In view of the rivalry (competition) between other powers which he need not name he felt this country’s future to be insecure. Would I not obtain the desired assurance from President Roosevelt?

I replied that I would not fail to report his words faithfully to my Government; and on his pressing for a personal opinion I suggested that, as the question obviously involved juridical considerations of considerable nicety, he permit me to discuss it fully with his Foreign Minister to the end that I might have a reasoned exposition of his Government’s views for communication to you. To this he agreed.

His only comment of political significance at the official luncheon which followed was his ready agreement with one which I ventured when reiterating appreciation of his welcome and helpful conversation. He had persuaded me, I said, of the truth of at least the first half of what a friend had told me before coming to Damascus, namely, that I would find that Syria wanted independence without limitation whereas a majority of Christian Lebanon would prefer independence with protection.

In the thought that they may be of timely interest should General de Gaulle visit the United States (General Spears having told me confidentially that President Roosevelt’s invitation has been accepted), I shall report in another telegram the substance of my other conversations at Damascus.

Wadsworth

40 Not printed.

41 Neither printed.

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State 890D.00/922: Telegram

[Document 789]

The Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut (Wadsworth) to the Secretary of State

Beirut, December 5, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received 4:22 p.m.]

503. Reference my 501, December 3, 5 p.m. Résumés follow of my conversations with Premier Barazi, Foreign Minister Faiz Khouri, his brother Faris who was President of last Parliament, Kalid Azam who headed last Government under Vichy French, General Spears and General Collet:

1. Premier. He has consistently insisted, he said, and only last week reiterated to Minister Casey, that Syrian independence is not real;

That the President’s French-granted autocratic legislative and executive powers are exercised under the firm control of General Collet with General Catroux’s support and General de Gaulle’s approval;

That consequently such important matters as national defense, police sûreté, censorship, supply services and intérêts communs (revenues from customs, oil refinery, monopolies, et cetera) are in fact controlled by the French with scantiest regard for and no accounting to the Ministry;

That, in short, autocratic Vichy-French mandatory control has been replaced by one even more autocratic and less acceptable exercised by Free France;

That his Ministry is more than willing to cooperate with Allied control in all matters where limitation of sovereign authority is necessitated by conditions of war; including questions of supply;

But that for such cooperation to be most effective two fundamental political steps must be taken, namely reestablishment of the constitutional regime and assumption by Great Britain of more direct responsibility under a clearly enunciated policy.

To me he wished to repeat this exposition with the following important addition: He welcomes our clear statement of basic policy, suggests its adoption by the United Nations and urges that control of all necessarily reserved questions be exercised by an Allied Military Commission on which the United States to be represented.

Finally, he asked me to inform my Government that he took serious exception to a telegram sent by his President to General de Gaulle and of which he had learned only when reading it in the newspapers December 1.

This telegram, prompted by the sinking of the French Fleet at Toulon, expressed the President’s confidence that this catastrophe would soon unite the people of France “around your person and foster reconstitution of her existence under your leadership”.

The Premier argued that no such commitment should have been made without Ministerial consultation, that it was tantamount to approval of Free French control in Syria, which neither he nor the Syrian people would ever willingly accept.

2. Foreign Minister. He had, he said, left the National Bloc early in 1941 because many of its members were tending towards a pro-Nazi policy, prompted thereto primarily by bitter opposition to French rule as well as admiration of German strength and belief in the inevitability of Axis victory.

Now Syrian sentiment including that of these same leaders was predominantly pro-Ally, due largely to direct British intervention in Syria and to American entry into the war; but anti-French feeling had rather strengthened than abated.

He had accepted office at British instance but was keenly disappointed that after more than 1 year London had formulated no program for preparing Syria for full postwar independence. He had, however, reason to hope that Minister Casey’s visit, following on Allied victories, augured well for early reconsideration in London of Syrian problems.

Finally, he believed it most important that an Allied policy regarding Syria be elaborated, and he urged that clear understanding on fundamentals be reached between the British and American Governments and especially with General de Gaulle during his forthcoming visit in Washington.

3. Faris Khouri. A leader of the important national bloc and an ardent nationalist with American cultural background, he welcomes our policy, is intransigently anti-French and urges reestablishment of the constitutional regime.

He argues that the Vichy-French decree suspending the constitution should be revoked and the former Parliament reconvened but would not oppose new elections if assured that they could be held with reasonable fairness.

He said that all Syrian leaders readily recognize the necessity of wartime limitation of government powers but feels strongly that this should be supplemented by a program of progressive preparation for full postwar independence.

4. Azam. A nationalist of old Damascus family and French cultural background, he painted Syria’s history from the coining of Emir Faisal and the King–Crane Commission as a sequence of dashed hopes and disillusionments. He blamed its ills primarily on French maladministration and disregard of the principle of mandatory trusteeship.

He was apprehensive lest Britain again yield to French importunity and America again withdraw into isolationism. To reassure Syrian leadership on this score he said would be far more effective propaganda than any designed to prove our growing military might.

5. Spears. He had not, he said, during Casey’s brief visit been able to complete discussions of the many aspects of the Syrian problem: Constitution and elections, economic policy and inflation, intérêts comrmms and financial controls, security and the Garde Mobile and the possibility, suggested by the British military authorities of enlisting locally some thousands of auxiliary service troops.

He would continue the discussions in Cairo this week end and perhaps soon to London. One serious handicap to working out the problems locally had been a sometimes distressing lack of clear policy directives from London.

Here he had found all too often that prestige and self interest, rather than a will to win the war, had determined Free French policy. And in London, when de Gaulle had grown too big for his boots, Free French susceptibilities as to Syria had been humored presumably because of more important aspects of Franco-British relations.

The net result was an obvious weakening of the British position in Syria and Lebanon. Now, however, with defeat in North Africa turned into victory and the whole question of Anglo-American-French relations one of urgency, the time seemed propitious for general settlement.

6. Collet. To Syrian [nationalists] he symbolizes French repression and imperialism. British sources report him “out to win the war”. He sees in de Gaulle “a man of destiny”.

He is not opposed to elections but argues strongly that, as the country is from almost no point of view ready for self-government, close foreign control must be maintained. The alternative would be to risk, unwarrantably in war time, political and economic chaos.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

An early Cabinet crisis may be expected.

Wadsworth

Turkey:Turkey:

Contents

Negotiations regarding handling of Lend-Lease supplies for TurkeyNegotiations regarding handling of Lend-Lease supplies for Turkey1

1 For previous correspondence regarding lend-lease aid for Turkey, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 814 ff.

[790] Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)

[Washington,] February 7, 1942.

867.24/225

[791] The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Lend-Lease Administrator (Stettinius)

Washington, February 11, 1942.

867.24/225

[792] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 13, 1942.

867.24/274

[793] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 14, 1942—7 p.m. [Received 7:55 p.m.]

887.24/226: Telegram

[794] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 6, 1942—9 p.m. [Received March 8—10:20 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/20008: Telegram

[795] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 9, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 10:15 p.m.]

867.24/231: Telegram

[796] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 9, 1942—6 p.m.

867.24/226: Telegram

[797] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 11, 1942—4 p.m. [Received March 12—2:17 p.m.]

867.24/232: Telegram

[798] Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson)

[Washington,] March 13, 1942.

867.24/286: Telegram

[799] The British Embassy to the Department of State

Washington , March 13, 1942.

867.24/288

[800] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 17, 1942.

867.24/289

[801] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson)

[Washington,] March 19, 1942.

867.24/244

[802] The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, March 24, 1942—midnight. [Received March 24—11:50 p.m.]

867.24/236: Telegram

[803] The Department of State to the British Embassy

Washington , March 30, 1942.

867.24/293

[804] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 30, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 7:27 p.m.]

867.24/242: Telegram

[805] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, April 1, 1942—9 p.m.

867.24/241: Telegram

[806] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 8, 1942.

867.24/295

[807] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 10, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 11:51 p.m.]

867.24/257: Telegram

[808] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 10, 1942—8 p.m. [Received 10:31 p.m.]

867.24/255: Telegram

[809] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, April 14, 1942—9 p.m.

887.24/263a: Telegram

[810] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 20, 1942—11 a.m. [Received April 21—5:33 a.m.]

867.24/264: Telegram

[811] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, April 20, 1942—7 p.m.

867.24/257: Telegram

[812] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, May 29, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 8:25 p.m.]

867.24/312: Telegram

[813] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, May 30, 1942—2 p.m. [Received May 31—2:48 a.m.]

867.24/315: Telegram

[814] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 10, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 10:13 p.m.]

867.24/323: Telegram

[815] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 11, 1942—8 p.m. [Received June 13—4:25 p.m.]

867.24/327: Telegram

[816] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 26, 1942—6 p.m. [Received June 27—12:40 a.m.]

867.24/336: Telegram

[817] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] June 30, 1942.

867.24/345

[818] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 3, 1942—noon. [Received July 3—3:23 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/22683: Telegram

[819] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. George V. Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] July 29, 1942.

867.24/375

[820] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 5, 1942—4 p.m.

867.24/375: Telegram

[821] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 12, 1942—5 p.m. [Received August 13—1:55 a.m.]

867.24/379: Telegram

[822] Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] October 5, 1942.

867.24/505

[823] Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements

[Washington,] November 6, 1942.

867.24/531

[824] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. George V. Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 21, 1942.

867.24/549

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray) 867.24/225

[Document 790]

Memorandum by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Murray)2

[Washington,] February 7, 1942.

The attached letter3 to Mr. Stettinius4 was suggested to us yesterday by Mr. Steinhardt,5 following his conference with the President regarding Lend-Lease aid to Turkey. Mr. Steinhardt informs us that the President desires some action on Turkish requests for Lend-Lease aid. Mr. Steinhardt has consulted with Mr. Stettinius on the subject, who believes that his position will be considerably strengthened if he can present to the Munitions Allocation Board a recent letter from the Secretary of State renewing the Department’s view that Turkey can be reasonably counted on to use the material granted in resisting Germany.

Although there is of course no basis for a categorical opinion regarding what Turkey will do, this Division has been strengthened of late in its opinion that Turkey will resist an Axis attack. The attached letter is consequently submitted for your consideration.

Wallace Murray

2 Addressed to the Secretary of State and the Under Secretary of State.

3  Infra.

4 Edward R. Stettinius, Lend-Lease Administrator.

5 Laurence A. Steinhardt, appointed Ambassador to Turkey; previously Ambassador in the Soviet Union.

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Lend-Lease Administrator (Stettinius) 867.24/225

[Document 791]

The Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Lend-Lease Administrator (Stettinius)

Washington, February 11, 1942.

My Dear Mr. Stettinius: In view of the efforts which the Turkish Government is now making to prepare for the possible extension of hostilities in the Near East during the spring, the Department of State regards it as particularly important that supplies be furnished to Turkey as soon as possible, not only for the purpose of strengthening the Turkish Government in its announced determination to resist aggression but also in order to enable that resistance to be effective.

This Department understands that the Turkish military authorities consider it of the greatest importance, for instance, that 950 trucks, for which the Turkish Government has already deposited more than $1,000,000 in cash payment, reach Turkey by the end of March.

Sincerely yours,

Sumner Welles

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 867.24/274

[Document 792]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] February 13, 1942.

The British Ambassador6 called to see me this morning. The Ambassador brought up the question of our Lease-Lend arrangements with Turkey. The Ambassador alleged that during my absence a change in the previous arrangements had been made and that the British Government had now been informed that Turkey was to be permitted to apply directly to the Lease-Lend authority for Lease-Lend assistance without prior consultation on our part with the British Government.

I said I was not informed with regard to this matter other than that I had a few days ago sent a letter to Mr. Stettinius7 suggesting that for reasons of policy Turkey be given some concrete evidence of our desire to assist her under the Lease-Lend Act8 by having made available to her some material and that I thought trucks had been suggested.

The Ambassador asked if before any final decision was reached with regard to Turkey under the Lease-Lend Act, he could be given the opportunity of obtaining a full statement from his Government as to their thoughts in this matter which he said he had requested and which he believed would be in his hands within the next few days.

I said I would be glad to ask that this be done.

S[umner] W[elles]

6 Viscount Halifax.

7  Supra.

8 Approved March 11, 1941; 55 Stat. 31.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 887.24/226: Telegram

[Document 793]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, February 14, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received 7:55 p.m.]

713. To Hopkins9 and Stettinius from Harriman.10 In accordance with the request in your 428 of February 5,11 to familiarize myself with British handling of Turkish supply, I find: (1) British here are surprised that United States is not being notified of Turkish requisitions disapproved by them and will see that this is done in the future. They are anxious for Turks to feel that their needs are known to the United States as well as by London.

(2) The Turkish situation is considered extremely delicate and the proper handling of supply for them is considered of primary importance to British war strategy in the Middle East area.

(3) Colonel Taylor12 has been present at Joint Munitions Board discussions of Turkish needs here in London. He is impressed with the careful and even generous consideration which they receive.

(4) Detailed list of war material sent to Turkey by the British will be forwarded to you as quickly as possible.

(5) If need arises, it is planned to supply items such as planes and tanks by sending fully equipped British units rather than the tanks and planes independently.

(6) British are also supplying substantial amounts of food and other supplies to Turkey at the expense of shipping they need themselves. They report that there are already quantities of supplies for Turkey in the Middle East which cannot be sent on because of lack of facilities at the Turkish ports open to British shipping and because the Turks have so far made only four ships available for this purpose. The Turks have done little so far to assist in opening up supply lines into their country.

(7) They feel it vital that all Turkish demands be analyzed and checked by them in the first instance to ensure that they are essential and that no duplication occurs. They have numerous technical and military men in Turkey from whom they get very complete appraisal of actual Turkish needs.

(8) Turkish requirements must be considered in relation to the overall problem of supply and shipping for the Middle East area. The British have to feed and supply this area and are the best qualified to make a judgment as to priorities, for example, trucks and wheat.

I urge that all Turkish requests be considered in the light of the shipping shortage and priority demands in other quarters and that no requisitions be accepted which we are not prepared to undertake to ship.

From my experience it seems clear to me that the processing of Turkish requirements through British hands is on balance wiser than the system of direct requisitioning. The goodwill created at first by agreement now to use the latter procedure would, I believe, be offset by subsequent confusion, disagreement and delay.

I believe this matter to be of diplomatic, political and strategic importance and that change in the present procedure should not be made without consideration at the highest level in both Washington and London. Please advise. [Harriman.]

Winant

9 Harry Hopkins, Special Assistant to President Roosevelt.

10 W. Averell Harriman, personal representative of President Roosevelt in the United Kingdom, with rank of Minister, to expedite lend-lease aid to the British Empire.

11 Not printed.

12 Col. Victor V. Taylor, Assistant Military Attaché in the United Kingdom.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/20008: Telegram

[Document 794]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 6, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received March 8—10:20 a.m.]

126. In the course of my visits to the Minister for Foreign Affairs13 and the Secretary General of the Foreign Office14 today, the Minister stated categorically that “the Turkish Government had made its decision and would defend itself if attacked from any source even if the country was surrounded on all sides”. He then pointed out that there were no divided councils in Turkey as had been the case in Yugoslavia and was inclined to attribute the rapid defeat of the Yugoslav Army to these divided councils which he said had paralyzed action.

I gave the Minister a resume of our war effort with particular reference to merchant tonnage, planes, tanks and artillery to be produced this year [with] which he did not appear to be particularly familiar and which seemed to impress him. After a further general discussion along these lines the Minister indicated the Turkish Government’s dissatisfaction with the delays and diversions which have occurred in connection with the delivery of war and other material to Turkey from the United States. I assured him that we were making every effort to eliminate any delays or diversions and invited his attention to the fact that substantial deliveries of goods intended for Turkey were now lying in Mediterranean ports awaiting transportation to Turkish railheads and suggested that all available Turkish vessels carry chrome to these ports and pick up the material destined for Turkey. Towards the close of our conversation which was marked by extreme cordiality on the Minister’s part he remarked that several minor occurrences had taken place which had caused him some annoyance and referred particularly to recent incident in which he said that a request for oil drilling necessary for Turkey had been refused on the grounds that Turkey might be attacked by the Germans and that the machinery would undoubtedly fall into their hands. I assured the Minister of my desire to be helpful in connection with shipments of American material to Turkey and that I hoped that he would bring to my attention any particular matters which were causing him vexation.

In the course of my subsequent conversation with Secretary General he said Turkish Minister to Egypt was being sent to Washington to assist the Ambassador in connection with lease-lend matters and that he would arrange to have me meet him in Ankara prior to his departure for Washington.

Steinhardt

13 Sükrü Saraçoğlu.

14 Numan Menemencioğlu.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/231: Telegram

[Document 795]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 9, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 10:15 p.m.]

135. For the President, Secretary and Under Secretary. In the course of a conversation in Beirut with Rauf Orbay who is en route to London as the new Turkish Ambassador he remarked that while Turkey would, of course, adhere to its alliance with Britain, their will to resist a German attack had been secretly shaken during recent weeks not so much as a result of failure of Libyan campaign and recent events in Far East as of steadily growing dissatisfaction in Turkish Government circles at failure of promised and requisitioned war material to arrive from Britain and United States. He referred with asperity to requirement that Britain first approve delivery of American lease-lend material to Turkey and remarked that this requirement and the physical handling of shipments by various British agencies continued to entail inordinate delays.

He cited delivery to Turkish Government of 50 American Howitzers which he said had been received without the proper motive power, to the diversion by British authorities in Near East of 190 out of 200 American lend-lease trucks and to repeated failure of British mission in Washington to take action in what he described as relatively unimportant requisitions submitted by this Government and approved by American authorities. He said that as a result of these and similar incidents his Government was beginning to question whether Britain really wanted a strong Turkey able to resist German aggression and that it was his intention upon arrival in London to express the foregoing views to British Government.

As I am informed Orbay is a confidante of President Inönü15 and spent considerable time with him immediately prior to his departure, he may well be considered to reflect Inönü’s state of mind.

Steinhardt

15 Ismet Inönü, President of the Turkish Republic.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 867.24/226: Telegram

[Document 796]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, March 9, 1942—6 p.m.

1000. “For Harriman from Hopkins, Stettinius and Acheson.16 Your no. 713, February 14. The Turkish Government desires to submit its requisitions for Lend-Lease materials direct to the authorities of this Government. The Turkish Ambassador17 makes a serious point of this request and is supported by Ambassador Steinhardt. The matter has been discussed with the Acting Secretary of State who believes that the procedure outlined below is desirable in view of the Turkish position while maintaining the full substance of joint American-British decision and control.

It is fully recognized here that decision as to what materials shall actually go forward to Turkey must be based on strategic grounds; that the British have the main strategic responsibility in that area, and in most cases their view will be controlling. Nevertheless it is thought here important for this Government to accord the Turks the courtesy of receiving their requisitions direct.

In view of the foregoing, it has been decided to institute the following changes in existing procedure. The Turks to file their requisitions with the Lend-Lease Administration here and the Lend-Lease Administration to furnish copies to the British. The United States and British authorities, after consultation with the Turks, whenever necessary, will then decide jointly whether the requisition should be approved or disapproved.

Generally speaking articles will go to the Turks by way of retransfer from the British but occasionally they may go direct following full discussion. It is proposed that all Lend-Lease articles to be retransferred will be authorized for export to Turkey by the Turkish agent in New York as is now the case with cash reimbursable items.

Such a procedure would not preclude loss of control in case of urgent military necessity since all Turkish material will still be shipped either on British or U. S. boats. It will also make possible more accurate knowledge and record of the actual destination of material shipped for retransfer to Turkey. Our records show only a small amount of actual deliveries to Turkey although a much larger amount of deliveries to the British for retransfer.”

Welles

16 Dean Acheson, Assistant Secretary of State.

17 Mehmet Münir Ertegun.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/232: Telegram

[Document 797]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 11, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received March 12—2:17 p.m.]

144. For the President, Secretary and Under Secretary. In conversation with President Inönü yesterday afternoon following presentation of my credentials at which the Foreign Minister was present the President expressed grave concern lest Soviet Union defeat Germany or so weaken Germany as to eventually permit what he described as Soviet imperialism to over-run Europe and Middle East. Although he did not mention the Straits by name it was obvious that he was concerned lest the Soviet be in a position to take possession of the Dardanelles. He expressed doubt Britain or the United States would be in a position to curb Soviet imperialism in the event of a German defeat.

He expressed dissatisfaction at failure of Britain and the United States to send more war material to Turkey. He remarked Turkey had been faithful to its alliance with Britain but for over 2 years many promises but little material had been received. He clearly indicated his keen disappointment at failure of American lend-lease material to reach Turkey in other than what he described as inconsequential amounts remarking that quantities sought were small.

I told him the subject had been discussed in Washington prior to my departure and I had every reason to believe at least a part of material requested by his Government was already enroute. To this he replied he hoped this would prove to be the case as Turkey could not be expected to successfully defend itself against a German attack unless the limited amount of material sought by his Government is delivered immediately. He then referred to a request made some time ago for what he described as a limited amount of machine tools with which to manufacture war material and expressed the hope that these tools would soon be forthcoming.

At one point in course of his remarks the President implied that there must be a reason for British failure to clear Turkish requisitions of American lend-lease material some of which he said had been held up for months by the British authorities at Washington after American authorities had informed Turkish Embassy that material was ready for shipment. In this connection he referred to the diversion by the British authorities in Egypt of trucks and other material sent from the United States.

Towards the close of our conversation the President expressed the opinion that a neutral Turkey allied to Britain constituted a powerful bulwark to the cause of the United Nations in the Near and Middle East and would ultimately prove to be a greater asset to the United Nations than a belligerent Turkey. He added that to assure the continuance of Turkey’s neutrality it was essential that Turkey should be strong and able to defend itself against attack rather than continue to be denied one or two shiploads of material periodically. He concluded this part of his remarks with the observation that Turkey had not as yet been attacked by Germany by reason of the fact that the Turkish Government had in the past made it unmistakably clear to the German Government that it would resist attack but that he did did not know how long this position would be effective unless Britain and the United States furnished at least a limited amount of war material with which to implement the Turkish intention to resist aggression.

I am convinced that he is thoroughly sincere, a man of broad vision, and that his sympathies and convictions are wholly with the cause of the United Nations. I gained a highly favorable impression of his character and qualifications as I am convinced of the sincerity of the views expressed by him and that his reason for complaining of the failure of adequate British and American war material to reach Turkey is his intention to use these supplies to resist a possible German attack. I urge that steps be taken at the earliest possible moment to forward the American lend-lease material which I understand has been awaiting shipment subject to authorities in Washington and that these authorities be requested to see to it that this material is delivered to Turkey and is not diverted en route.

I can not emphasize too strongly that the actual physical arrival in Turkey of even a few hundred tons of war material in the immediate future is likely to have an effect on the morale of the Turkish Government out of all proportion to the tonnage involved and that conversely a continuance of the delays and diversions of the past few months may have a decidedly adverse effect on the willingness of the Turkish Government to resist a German attack.

I feel fortified in making this recommendation by reason of my detailed study prior to my departure from [Washington] of material promised Turkey by Britain and France under the Orbay agreement of 1939,17a the requisitions filed by Turkish Government with our lend-lease administration since December 3, 1941, as against shipments thus far actually received in Turkey indicating Turkish requests have been extremely modest whereas deliveries have been relatively unimportant while British diversions have been serious and many requisitions approved by the lend-lease and our War Department have not been acted upon by the British in Washington for a period of months although they are aware the material has long since been ready for shipment.

Steinhardt

17a This refers to a list of military supplies to be furnished to Turkey drawn up in London in 1939, in agreement between British, French, and Turkish military experts, following the conclusion of the Treaty of Mutual Assistance between Great Britain, France, and Turkey at Ankara on October 19, 1939 (League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. cc, p. 167). Gen. Kazim Orbay, Chief of the Turkish General Staff, headed the Turkish Military Mission which was in London at this time.

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson) 867.24/286: Telegram

[Document 798]

Memorandum by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) to the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson)

[Washington,] March 13, 1942.

Mr. Acheson: A copy of telegram 144, March 11, 4 p.m. from Ankara has been sent to you. I fully share Mr. Steinhardt’s views and in accordance with the policy we have all agreed upon, prompt action should now be taken to give some concrete evidence to the Turkish Government that we are doing something for it.

The British Embassy to the Department of State 867.24/288

[Document 799]

The British Embassy to the Department of State

Aide-Mémoire

Recent experience has shown that the present system for dealing with the Turkish Government’s orders for raw materials and finished products is unsatisfactory and leads to duplication. In some instances the Turkish Ambassador in London has placed orders in the United Kingdom. In others the Turkish Ambassador in Washington has placed orders in the United States. There have been further cases in which British firms in Turkey have placed orders in London on behalf of the Turkish Government, and others again where Turkish Government departments have placed orders with British or American agents in Turkey. The result has been considerable overlapping, and much time has in some cases been lost.

2. The British authorities feel that it is desirable that all Turkish demands for military and civilian supplies should be placed through one channel, and that if possible it would be best that the orders should in the first instance be received and examined by a competent authority in Turkey. They therefore suggest that all Turkish Government requirements, civilian and military, whether for supply from British or American sources, should be receivable only through the existing Coordinating Committee at Ankara, the Committee to be supplemented by the addition of United States representatives. The Ankara Committee would then pass on to London with their comments, favourable or unfavourable, all Turkish requirements formally submitted to them, quoting an appropriate reference number which would be given to the Turkish authorities for use in any further discussions of the requirements in question. Where possible requirements would of course continue to be satisfied from sources in the Middle East.

3. Requirements received in London from the Coordinating Committee would be considered there, and items which could not be supplied from the United Kingdom would be passed on to Washington through appropriate machinery.

4. The United States authorities would be kept informed through the British Joint Staff Mission of all Turkish requirements for military supplies, and through the British Supply Council of all civilian requirements: this would apply whether the requirements were supplied from British sources or not, and the comments of the Coordinating Committee and of the British Departments concerned would also be transmitted through the same channels.

5. In the case of bulk foodstuffs and other commodities normally handled by the Middle East Supply Centre, the requirements would be referred in the first place from Ankara to that body, London and Washington being informed and when necessary consulted. In the case of air supplies of a strictly military nature, the requests would be forwarded in the first instance to the Air Officer Commander-in-Chief, Middle East, and thence to London.

6. It would always be open to the Turkish Government to make representations in support of their requirements through the diplomatic channel, whether in London or in Washington.

7. His Majesty’s Government hope that the United States Government will agree that the above proposals represent a valuable simplification of procedure, and will be in the best interests of the Turkish Government as well as in those of the United Nations as a whole. It is hoped therefore that the United States Government will agree to instruct the United States Ambassador in Ankara to join with his British colleague in recommending the acceptance of this procedure to the Turkish Government.

Washington , March 13, 1942.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 867.24/289

[Document 800]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] March 17, 1942.

The Turkish Ambassador called to see me this morning at his request.

The Ambassador said that he wished most urgently to request, by instruction of his Government, that steps be taken by the United States to simplify and to expedite the procedure by which Turkey might obtain urgently-needed war matériel in the United States.

I said to the Ambassador that this question was now receiving our most urgent and immediate consideration. I said that Ambassador Steinhardt, as soon as he had arrived in Ankara, had cabled the Department fully concerning this question and that of course, as the Ambassador knew from his conversations with Mr. Murray,18 this Government had been giving very favorable attention to the problem for some time past. I said that only yesterday I had received from the British Ambassador some suggestions on the part of the British Government for arrangements which would make it easier and quicker for the Turkish Government to obtain matériel here. I added that these suggestions were now being given attention and that I had asked Mr. Acheson to do what might be best to work out a satisfactory tentative understanding with the British and that as soon as that stage was reached, I would hope to have another opportunity of talking with the Ambassador himself.

The Ambassador made it clear that he trusted arrangements could be entered into under lend-lease directly between the Turkish and the United States Governments so that decisions would be reached solely by those two Governments. I did not discuss this phase of the issue with him and it was, therefore, merely agreed that I would talk again with the Ambassador within the next few days for the purpose of finding a solution satisfactory to all concerned.

S[umner] W[elles]

18 Wallace Murray, Adviser on Political Relations; formerly Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson) 867.24/244

[Document 801]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Assistant Secretary of State (Acheson)

[Washington,] March 19, 1942.

I took up with Lord Halifax the memorandum19 which he had handed to the Acting Secretary on arrangements for lend-lease with Turkey. I told him that the Department believed that the present arrangements and the arrangements proposed by him were defective in that they did not provide for direct relations between the Turkish Government and this Government.

I went over with him the history of present procedure and mentioned the mounting irritation of the Turks by reason of the requirement that they must deal with us through the British. I said that we fully realized the fact that the British had the primary responsibility in this area and that we had no desire to minimize the weight which should be attached to their views as to whether or not specific requests should be granted. However, since the main effect of lend-lease to Turkey was psychological, any system which produced adverse psychological effects was on its face defective.

Lord Halifax appeared to agree with this and said that he had no strong convictions in the matter. It was, in his opinion, necessary to have some system which would avoid overlapping requests. I suggested the possibility of a system by which American and British officials in Ankara could go over the requests at the outset to determine whether or not similar items had been requested from London. After this the Turkish requests might be sent simultaneously to London and Washington with the comments of the coordinating committee. London could then inform Washington as to what items might be furnished from London or Cairo. The matter could then be discussed here with the Turkish authorities in the light of all this information and a decision reached by the Joint Munitions Assignments Board.

Lord Halifax thought that if the substance of his note were communicated to Mr. Harriman, along with our decision as to the procedure which we wished, agreement could be promptly reached.

Dean Acheson

19  Aide-mémoire dated March 13, p. 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799].

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State 867.24/236: Telegram

[Document 802]

The Chargé in the United Kingdom (Matthews) to the Secretary of State

London, March 24, 1942—midnight.
[Received March 24—11:50 p.m.]

1415. For Hopkins, Acheson and Stettinius from Harriman. A few days ago Eden20 discussed with me procedure for submission of requirements for Turkey and showed me two cables of March 10 to Halifax which crossed your No. 1000 of March 9 to me. I presume you have been informed of the contents of these cables.

Eden now writes me expressing the hope that Washington will accept the suggested procedure. The cornerstone is the establishment of an Ankara coordinating committee through which all Turkish requests would be received, this committee to include both British and American representatives.

Eden’s letter enumerates the following advantages of this procedure: “(1) Although joint consultation between ourselves and the United States authorities in Washington about Turkish requirements can achieve something, it has been shown to be quite impossible to reach proper decisions without obtaining expert advice from those on the spot in Turkey. It is quite possible to take decisions in London or Washington on such major questions as whether we can spare tanks for Turkey, but most Turkish requirements are for items like boring rigs, constructional steel, copper wire, et cetera, the purpose and significance of which can only be ascertained in Turkey. It seems to us, therefore, that the first essential is to be certain that all Turkish requirements whether for supply in the United Kingdom or the United States are submitted to the coordinating committee in Angora.

(2) It seems to us that the suggested procedure is the only one which will avoid duplication of demands and similar confusion, of which we have had experience in the past when we and the French were supplying Turkey as part of a joint policy.

(3) It further seems to us that the arrangements for the assignment of munitions and allocations of raw materials can only work smoothly if the requirements of the various allied countries are presented through one single channel.”

I am impressed with the soundness of the general plan proposed, particularly the Ankara committee and hope that you will find it possible to work some procedure out along these lines. I would appreciate being advised of your decision. [Harriman.]

Matthews

20 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

The Department of State to the British Embassy 867.24/293

[Document 803]

The Department of State to the British Embassy

Aide-Mémoire

Instead of the procedure set forth in the British Embassy’s aide-mémoire of March 13, 1942, an alternative procedure, formulated to meet recent developments in the situation, is suggested for immediate adoption.

The new developments are: (1) A formal request has been made by the Turkish Ambassador for direct transfer basis in our dealings with Turkey.

(2) As was pointed out in the aide-mémoire of March 13, under the present system there is no protection against duplication of orders.

Since elaborate controls have now been established here under the various combined committees and combined boards for processing all requisitions, the question of the direct transfer versus the retransfer system has become a matter of form rather than of substance. Since it is difficult to satisfy the material requirements of Turkey, it seems essential to comply at least with the request for direct transfer procedure. At the same time there is contemplated no change that would in any way compromise or impair the British conception of military operations in the Middle East.

The suggested alternative procedure follows:

The present Coordinating Committee in Ankara will be enlarged to include United States representatives. This Committee will receive and consider all Turkish requirements, both military and civilian, and cable them simultaneously to London and Washington with its recommendations, quoting the number assigned for identification.

The British authorities in London will determine within a limited period of time, the requirements that are to be supplied from United Kingdom sources, and cable to Washington their decision and their recommendations on items which they do not intend to supply themselves.

The United States authorities in Washington will consider the requirements which the British authorities do not undertake to fill from United Kingdom supplies. The United States authorities here will consult with the British and the Turks either jointly or separately.

They will then furnish sufficient information to the Turkish Embassy so that the latter may properly prepare the formal papers required for procuring in the United States the military and civilian supplies.

Requisitions for lend-lease material will follow the prescribed course through the various committees and boards where ample British representation is provided so that the material is under complete joint British and United States control.

If the requisition is finally approved, the material when available will be shipped to the Middle East for delivery to the Turkish authorities there, provided the military situation at the time of its arrival warrants such action.

It is believed that the procedure outlined above takes into account in a realistic manner the exigencies of the situation, and would resolve the complications now existing.

It is hoped that through the extension of lend-lease assistance on a direct transfer basis Turkish wishes would be satisfied and the Turks thereby be encouraged to improve their own procurement machinery by coordinating and synchronizing the various agencies in Ankara into a central commission. This Turkish commission would then be able to collaborate more effectively with the Coordinating Committee after the latter has been expanded to include representatives of the United States Government.

Washington , March 30, 1942.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/242: Telegram

[Document 804]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 30, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 7:27 p.m.]

230. For Oscar Cox, General Counsel, Lend-Lease Administration, from Kaufman.21 The term lend-lease has apparently never been understood by the Turks. Since his arrival the Ambassador has explained to the Turkish authorities that the Turkish Government is not required to pay the United States or the British Government for the lend-lease material that is being shipped. It would therefore be very helpful if a master lend-lease agreement with Turkey could be signed. Such a document should make it clear just what the term lend-lease means in so far as Turkey is concerned. The agreement could be negotiated at least in part here if that is deemed desirable. [Kaufman.]

Steinhardt

21 Frank A. Kaufman, representative of the Lend-Lease Administration in Turkey.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.24/241: Telegram

[Document 805]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, April 1, 1942—9 p.m.

115. Your no. 230, March 30, 4 p.m. The Department appreciates the need of a master Lend-Lease agreement with Turkey and has the matter under consideration at the present time. All negotiations leading up to the agreement will be handled here. You will be kept fully informed.

Meanwhile it is highly important that no erroneous impression be given the Turkish authorities as to the obligations and responsibilities assumed by a country receiving Lend-Lease assistance. There is a distinct obligation on the part of the recipient to pay in money or repay in kind or property or any benefit that the President of the United States may deem satisfactory. There is a further responsibility as to the handling of the goods received. This Government will also expect a commitment in favor of liberal trade and commercial policies after the war.

It is impossible to determine the terms of settlement in advance, but you should not convey the idea to the Turkish authorities that Lend-Lease supplies are gifts.

Please be careful to avoid any actual or implied commitment regarding probable terms until further advice from the Department on the progress of negotiations.

Welles

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State 867.24/295

[Document 806]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Acting Secretary of State

[Washington,] April 8, 1942.

The British Ambassador called to see me this morning. The Ambassador stated that he had just received a cable from his Foreign Office stating that the British Government agreed to the proposals of this Government concerning the manner of determining the Lease-Lend material to be furnished Turkey.

I said that I was very glad to receive this information and that I trusted that his Embassy would immediately discuss these questions with Mr. Acheson.

S[umner] W[elles]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/257: Telegram

[Document 807]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 10, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 11:51 p.m.]

249. Department’s 115, April 1, 9 p.m. I appreciate the Department’s concern lest the Turkish authorities gain the impression that lend-lease supplies are gifts. I do not believe that they entertain any such belief. Quite the contrary on the only occasion the subject has been mentioned to me it was apparent that the Secretary General of the Foreign Office on learning of the greatly increased shipments of lend-lease material was apprehensive that immediate payment in cash might be sought. Since then the subject of payment has not been mentioned to me.

There is however little doubt in my mind that the Turkish authorities, as the result of past experience in matters of this kind with governments other than the United States, are perplexed at the shipment of large amounts of material without an understanding as to what will be expected of them in return. They appear to be puzzled at the disposal of American lend-lease aid through the British and irritated at the resultant delays. I believe that a master lend-lease agreement will clarify their understanding.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/255: Telegram

[Document 808]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 10, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received 10:31 p.m.]

251. British Ambassador22 informed me today that in connection with furnishing of supplies to Turkey he had received instructions from his Government that this subject would be dealt with in Ankara, with the exception that requirements which British authorities do not undertake to supply from the United Kingdom will be considered by the United States authorities in Washington, if necessary, with the British or Turkish Embassies.

The Ambassador’s instructions further provided that he is to endeavor to induce Turkish Government to accept this procedure.

He requested me to advise him if and when I receive instructions to like effect.

Steinhardt

22 Sir Hughe M. Knatchbull-Hugessen.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 887.24/263a: Telegram

[Document 809]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, April 14, 1942—9 p.m.

145. Your 251, April 10. After careful study with a view to improving the present system for handling Turkish requirements, the Department advances the following procedure which is entirely agreeable to the interested Governmental agencies here and to the British both here and in London, and which the Department feels will be particularly satisfactory to the Turkish authorities and to you.

[Here follows suggested alternative procedure set forth in the aide-mémoire of March 30 to the British Embassy, printed on page 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 802 and Doc. 803].]

One exception to the normal procedure described above will be in the handling of cereals and similar commodities, which should continue to be referred to the Middle East Supply Centre at Cairo which will shortly include United States representatives.23

To improve the situation at the originating point of the requirements, the Department is hopeful that the Turkish authorities will centralize their own procurement machinery into one main commission which could more effectively collaborate and deal with the proposed enlarged Coordinating Committee. From your cable No. 252 of April 11,24 it appears that the Turkish Government has already taken steps in this direction.

It is believed that the proposed procedure takes into account in a realistic manner the exigencies of the situation and resolves the complications now existing.

By adopting the direct transfer basis, the important benefit of meeting the Turkish wishes for direct dealing between the two Governments will be accomplished, and in addition fuller and clearer information will be available to all concerned for tracing any given requisition.

You are requested to associate yourself with your British colleague in presenting the proposal to the Turkish authorities and obtaining their approval. When this approval is obtained the Department will inform the Turkish Ambassador in Washington and will proceed at once to the adoption of the new procedure and to the negotiation of the necessary master agreement.

Welles

23 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1] ff.

24 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/264: Telegram

[Document 810]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 20, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received April 21—5:33 a.m.]

293. Department’s 145, April 14. The British Ambassador and I are very pleased with new procedure advanced by Department in its telegram under reference. We feel that it will obviate any further cause for complaint by Turk authorities while at same time giving evidence to them of our desire to meet their requirements in most expeditious manner. We do not anticipate any difficulty in obtaining approval of Turkish authorities to new procedure which we believe will be welcome to them. We are further convinced that flow of supplies to Turkey will be more regular and delivery more satisfactory under this new procedure.

At meeting April 17 attended by British Ambassador and myself and appropriate members of our staffs, preliminary steps were taken to enlarge existing Coordinating Committee to include United States representatives. Notes are in process of preparation from British Ambassador and myself to Foreign Office outlining proposed new procedure.

The special bureau reported in my 269, April 1525 established in Foreign Office to centralize Turkish procurement machinery has already been set up and should be able to collaborate effectively and deal with proposed enlarged and Anglo-American Coordinating Committee.

I shall of course advise Department as soon as formal approval of Turkish authorities has been obtained.

Steinhardt

25 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.24/257: Telegram

[Document 811]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, April 20, 1942—7 p.m.

157. Further to our cable 145 of April 10 [14] with particular reference to suggestion of enlarging existing Ankara Co-ordinating Committee by United States representation, Department feels advisable that two such representatives be provisionally designated at this time.

You and the military attaché are so designated. War Department has given the necessary approval for the latter. Any additional personnel will be left to your discretion, as is also the authority to designate a member of your staff to attend meetings on your behalf when desirable.

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/312: Telegram

[Document 812]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, May 29, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 8:25 p.m.]

499. My 434, May 16, 3 p.m.26 Secretary General of Foreign Office told me informally last night that Council of Ministers has given its formal approval to new procedure with regard to furnishing of supplies to Turkey and that he expected to transmit written notice to foregoing effect to American and British Embassies prior to June 3d.

Immediately upon receipt of formal notification from Ministry of Foreign Affairs that new procedure has been accepted by Turk Government and unless instructed by Department to contrary British-American Coordination Committee will commence to function in cooperation with Turk Coordination Committee.

I anticipate telegraphing Department next week Embassy’s recommendations concerning several subjects which in my opinion should be considered in any master lend-lease negotiations Department may inaugurate.

Steinhardt

26 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/315: Telegram

[Document 813]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, May 30, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received May 31—2:48 a.m.]

512. Reference my 468, May 24 and my 501, May 28 [29].27 Numan Bey asked me to call at Foreign Office this morning and told me following. He said that in January shortly after announcement American lend-lease aid was being extended to Turkey, Kroll, German Minister, called to see him and had inquired as to nature of agreement between the United States and Turkey which had occasioned the announcement. Numan Bey replied that there was no agreement and that American lend-lease aid was being extended to Turkey as result of a decision by President Roosevelt that defense of Turkey was vital to defense of the United States and that Turkey was accepting lend-lease aid on this basis. To this Kroll replied that the defense must mean against an attack by Germany to which Numan Bey said that he assumed so. Kroll then inquired as to whether Turkey did not fear an attack from the Soviet. Numan Bey said he seized the opportunity to state categorically to Kroll that Turkey would defend itself against an attack from any source. Kroll then inquired whether Turkey [would accept war materials?] from Germany to protect itself against an attack from Soviets to which Numan Bey answered Turkey was prepared to accept war material from any source. Numan Bey said after this conversation matter was allowed to drop until recently when von Papen28 called to see him and, referring to Kroll’s talk with him in January, said Germany was prepared to furnish war material to Turkey and wished to know what kind of agreement Turk Government was prepared to enter in exchange for material. Numan Bey replied that Turk Government was unwilling to enter into any agreement nor could he see any reason for an agreement as Turkey had been granted a credit of 150,000,000 reichsmarks by Germany in January 1939 which had not been availed of and the war material to be delivered by Germany could be charged as against this credit without an agreement of any kind. He also made it clear to von Papen Turkey did not desire a miscellaneous assortment of material but only the four following items: tanks, airplanes, anti-aircraft and antitank guns. Von Papen replied he could see no reason why the matter could not be dealt with on this basis. Accordingly Numan Bey said a Turk mission had been sent to Berlin with instructions to endeavor to procure the war material specified by him “as it comes from the factories” and to have cost charged against credit to extent of 100,000,000 reichsmarks.

Numan Bey remarked that he did not know whether any war material would be received but from point of view of Turk Government any of articles specified that might be obtained from Germany would mean much less material available to Germany in event of German attack on Turkey and that much more available to Turkey with which to defend itself. He said von Papen had proposed that the two Governments issue identical communiqués giving details of arrangement but that he had stated to von Papen he would not permit German Government to make political capital out of the arrangements and extracted a promise from him that sale of German war material to Turkey would not be made subject of German propaganda or given the appearance that there had been any change in Turkey’s status as an ally of Britain. He added that in order to prevent Germans from making any such political capital he had prepared a brief statement which he proposed to issue through the semi-official Anatolian Agency. Text of statement appears in my 515, May 30, 5 p.m.29

Steinhardt

27 Neither printed.

28 Franz von Papen, German Ambassador in Turkey; for his account of the decision by Germany to furnish war materials to Turkey, see Franz von Papen, Memoirs (New York, 1953), pp. 487 and 488.

29 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/323: Telegram

[Document 814]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 10, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 10:13 p.m.]

568. Reference my 499, May 29, 2 p.m. The Embassy received this morning the Turkish Government’s formal written acceptance of the new procedure proposed with regard to the furnishing of supplies to Turkey. The note reads as follows: “In reply to the Embassy’s oral communication of April 24, 1942, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the honor to inform the Embassy of the United States of America that in conformity with the principles discussed and agreed upon at the meeting held recently in the Ministry attended by the British Ambassador and the Ambassador of the United States of America, principles which formed the subject of the proposals made in the oral communication referred to above, there has just been created in the Ministry under the chairmanship of Mr. Bedri Tahri Saman, Director General of the Department of Economic and Commercial Affairs, a ‘Central Turkish Bureau of Orders’ which is charged with collaborating with the British-American Coordinating Committee in respect to all requests presented by the Turkish Government relative to American and English supplies for the needs of the State.

It will be the function of this Central Bureau to coordinate in accordance with the procedure of work proposed in the second paragraph of the Embassy’s oral communication of April 24, 1942, procedure which has been approved and settled in the course of the meeting referred to above—the aforementioned requests with its counterpart the British-American Coordinating Committee.

In this connection the Ministry of Foreign Affairs desires to make it clear that the special bureau under the chairmanship of Mr. Faik Akdur, Director General of the Third Department, will continue to exercise its functions and that it will be its duty and competence to receive all other requests, suggestions duty [sic] proposals relating to questions which have a political, military or administrative character specially those which do not fall within the sphere of the Central Bureau of Orders.”

The British Ambassador and I have agreed to hold the first formal meeting of the British-American Coordinating Committee within the next day or two.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/327: Telegram

[Document 815]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 11, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received June 13—4:25 p.m.]

580. The Turkish Government having formally accepted the new procedure outlined in the Department’s 145, April 14, 9 p.m., I assume that the Department will shortly give consideration to the negotiation of a master lend-lease agreement with Turkey (see Department’s 115, April 1, 9 p.m.). I accordingly venture to make the following suggestions which the Department may desire to consider in connection with any such negotiations and am setting forth below the position as we see it in Ankara with respect to the points in question.

1. The Turkish authorities are anxious to have clearly set forth the terms under which they have been receiving lend-lease material through the British on an indirect retransfer basis. They state that all military articles of British origin which the British Government has furnished them have been charged against credits granted to them by the British and that as American lend-lease material has been delivered to them by and through the British they are not certain but that our material may also have been charged against the credits granted by the British. The Secretary General of the Foreign Office states that the Turkish Ambassador in Washington has been cabling that he does not know the terms under which American lend-lease material has been or is being received and that in consequence the Turkish Government has found itself under the necessity of insuring at least some lend-lease shipments so that the Turkish Government would be protected against loss. He accordingly requests that the terms under which all American lend-lease material has been received in the past or is presently en route be settled as soon as possible. In order to avoid confusion in the minds of Turkish officials and to reap the full benefits of American lend-lease assistance, I recommend that if possible the same terms govern past, present and future lend-lease shipments to Turkey whether by retransfer or direct transfer. Such an arrangement would in my opinion favorably impress the Turks who have never understood the reasons for the retransfer basis and have only recently again stated that they did not know to whom they were responsible for the articles received to date. If this course is followed I suggest that it be clearly specified in the agreement that the material previously received by Turkey was actually American lend-lease material delivered through the British as a matter of convenience.

2. In as much as through the extension of lend-lease aid to Turkey we are supplying products and materials which Turkey considers essential to its national defense and welfare, it would seem desirable for us to request Turkey in return for such defense aid to furnish the United States, within the limits of Turkey’s capacity, the articles which we need in the prosecution of our war effort. The most important of these articles is chrome30 and, as the Department is aware, Turkey’s chrome agreement with Great Britain whereby its total production is delivered to Great Britain, expires on January 8, 1943. In my opinion, the negotiation of a master lend-lease agreement with Turkey would afford us an excellent opportunity to assure our continuing to obtain Turkish chrome upon the expiration of the existing agreement. Other articles in which we are interested are copper, antimony and opium. In seeking to acquire these commodities the Embassy has been faced with competition from the Axis which has already obtained Turkey’s commitment to supply considerable quantities of these articles in return for the supply by Germany of war materials and other essential products. Inasmuch as Turkey has already concluded agreements with other countries, including Germany, based on the principle of the reciprocal supply of commodities of equivalent economic importance to the two countries, Turkey could have no objection in principle to undertaking to deliver to us in return for war materials needed by Turkey specified quantities of the products which we consider essential to us.

3. In the event that it should be considered inadvisable to require Turkey to furnish us in return for lend-lease aid specified quantities of various commodities that it might be in a position to supply, I suggest that the Turkish Government be required to pay cash in dollars for an amount of American deliveries which would correspond approximately to the value of the Turkish products which we desire to purchase. Otherwise the application of non-cash reimbursable, or ordinary, lend-lease to all or practically all purchases in the United States would largely remove need of Turkish Government for dollars and would thus operate to make Turkish Government indifferent to the sale of its commodities to the United States thereby making it difficult for us not only to carry on a preclusive purchasing program in Turkey but even to acquire products of which we have particular need. Furthermore sale of some of our products to Turkey on a cash dollar basis would afford us an opportunity to increase our prices when as in the case of opium and copper Turkish authorities demand excessive prices for their products. Question of price has become an even more serious problem in view of recent abolition of the exchange premium of 25% hitherto paid for dollars sold for purchase of Turkish product[s] for export to the United States. Immediate effect of this measure has been to increase still further Turkish prices which as Department is aware are determined not by world market prices but by European famine prices. Unless Turkish Government is willing to stabilize its export prices at a reasonable level it is essential that we have means of meeting price situation.

4. In view of fact that extension of lend-lease aid to Turkey has relieved Turkish Government of necessity of using dollars to make purchases of needed American products it would seem reasonable to require Turkey in return to make dollars available for transferring American funds now frozen in Turkey comprising capital, interest, amortization and profits amounting to but a few million dollars. The excuse offered by the Turkish Government in the past has been the inadequacy of its dollar balances in the United States to cover both the necessary purchases and the transfer of frozen funds. This excuse has not obtained since almost all lend-lease deliveries have been made on a non-cash payment basis but the Turkish authorities have thus far shown no disposition to make available for transfer of [frozen funds] the dollars no longer required for the payment of purchases in the United States or any part thereof, or furthermore the situation from the American point of view is aggravated by the fact that substantial dollar amounts are transferred annually to Turkey whereas no American funds in Turkey may be transferred to the United States. Thus I am informed that the parent organization of Robert College transfers approximately 200,000 a year for maintenance of college and that other American bankers and organizations transfer substantial additional amounts annually for maintenance of other institutions in Turkey. Expenses of the United States Government for maintenance of its Embassy in Ankara and Consulates in Istanbul and Izmir also require substantial transfers. I have referred to the transfers for maintenance of our diplomatic establishments inasmuch as I am reliably informed that Dutch Legation in Ankara pays its expenses out of frozen balances of Dutch bank in Istanbul.

Steinhardt

30 For further negotiations regarding chrome, see pp. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856] ff.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/336: Telegram

[Document 816]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 26, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received June 27—12:40 a.m.]

667. In conversation with Numan Bey last night he expressed concern at difficult position in which Turkey has been placed by Britain’s failure either to adequately equip Turk Army during past 2 years or in the alternative maintain substantial forces of its own in Middle East. He said for over 2 years British have made only limited deliveries of non-mechanized war material insisting in event of a German attack Britain would come to Turkey’s assistance. He stated not a single tank and only a negligible number of airplanes have been delivered. He then remarked had British assurance of military assistance been implemented by maintenance of powerful British forces in the Middle East he could have understood the failure to supply Turkey with modern equipment but that the non-delivery of such equipment for the use of the Turk Army and the failure to maintain adequate British forces with which to render Turkey prompt and effective assistance now threatened Britain with the loss of the Middle East, than which he could conceive of no more serious blow to the future of Turkey which was firmly bound to [Britain;] he added that he found it extremely difficult to understand a policy which had entrusted defense of vital Middle East primarily to a miscellaneous aggregation of “South African, Indian, Free French, Greek, Polish, Yugoslav and colored troops” with extremely limited armament while large numbers of powerfully equipped British forces were being continually assembled in British Isles from among which a relatively limited number would have made Middle East impregnable.

He then observed that while he did not regard situation in Egypt as critical at the moment what he feared was that the deferment of a major German offensive against the Soviet might indicate that center of gravity of German offensive would be located in eastern Mediterranean rather than on Eastern Front and that it was no more of a secret to Axis than to him that Britain was ill-prepared to meet such an offensive.

Numan Bey concluded his observations with following remarks: “Please do not misunderstand me. Traditionally Turkish Armies have been courageous. If necessary even though surrounded we shall fight German tanks with infantry at Gallipoli at a cost of 400,000 men.”

Steinhardt

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles) 867.24/345

[Document 817]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Under Secretary of State (Welles)

[Washington,] June 30, 1942.

The British Ambassador called to see me today.

The Ambassador said that he wished to talk to me about a confidential matter which related to the attitude of Ambassador Steinhardt. He said that his “supply people” had reported that Ambassador Steinhardt had reported to the Government of the United States that lend-lease goods destined for Turkey had been taken by British authorities for their own use and had been charged up against the Turkish loan. He said that such a report was inaccurate inasmuch as only freight charges for the carrying of these goods to Turkey had been charged up against the Turkish loan by the British Government and that no goods intended for Turkey had been taken over by the British since the understanding reached with this Government concerning Turkey some months ago. He said he felt that a desirable solution for a problem of this character would be for Ambassador Steinhardt to inform his British colleague in Ankara of reports of this character which might come to him and not report them to the Government of the United States without giving his British colleague a chance to inform him of their accuracy.

I said I was surprised by the information the Ambassador had given me since I had understood that Ambassador Steinhardt maintained close and friendly cooperative relations with the British Ambassador in Turkey. Lord Halifax said he thought this was the case but that apparently the relationship did not go to the point of preventing the candid report to which exception had been taken. I stated that in my judgment Ambassador Steinhardt had already, in the short time he had been in Turkey, proven himself to be an exceptionally helpful and capable representative of the United States. I said I felt that his reports had been of the greatest value to us here and that his relations and close friendship with the Turkish Foreign Minister made him a particularly valuable contact at this time. I said further that I felt Mr. Steinhardt was entirely right in reporting to his own Government information of any character which, in his own judgment, he felt it should possess, and that, while I had no reason to doubt that it would be useful for him to maintain a very close contact with his British colleague regarding all supply questions, which were obviously of great interest to both of our Governments, I would not feel disposed to give Mr. Steinhardt any instructions which would in any sense limit his entire freedom of action with regard to his reporting to this Government on whatever he saw fit.

S[umner] W[elles]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/22683: Telegram

[Document 818]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 3, 1942—noon.
[Received July 3—3:23 a.m.]

699. For the President, Secretary and Under Secretary. I had a lengthy talk with Saraçoğlu last night on the eve of his departure on vacation. He was frank and outspoken and I am convinced entirely sincere. He criticized the British for their failure to provide mechanized equipment for the Turkish Army during the past 2 years observing that not a single tank had been received and only a few planes. He remarked “even the Bulgarians have 2 or 3 motorized divisions”. He then observed that if as he assumed the explanation for Britain’s failure to provide modern equipment for the Turk Army had been the shortage that existed, much larger British mechanized forces would have been stationed in the Middle East. He indicated that the Turkish general staff had for many months been aware of Britain’s weakness in the Middle East both in men and material and had repeatedly expressed concern at this condition. He clearly implied that it had been the opinion of the Turk Government for some time past that Britain was over-insured in England and under-insured in the Middle East. He then remarked “but our English friends have paid little heed to our advice.”

After having completed his criticism Saraçoğlu stated categorically that Turkish foreign policy would undergo no change even if Egypt fell and that Turkey even though surrounded would not yield to any unreasonable demands by the Axis. He closed his remarks with the following statement: “If we are attacked we will fight with our inadequate equipment as defeat on the battlefield is preferable to the loss of our honor”.

Saraçoğlu then told me that the Turkish note to the Soviet Government giving assurance that Turkey considered the Turk-Soviet agreement of 194131 to be in full force and effect (see my 661, June 2532 ) had been delivered a few days ago and that it had [been] well received by the Soviet Government which had replied in an appreciative manner. He said that in consequence Turk-Soviet relations at present were satisfactory, particularly as the Soviet press had been mild in its criticism of the conviction of the two Soviet defendants in the bomb explosion trial.33

Steinhardt

31 Joint Soviet-Turkish declaration of March 24, 1941; see telegram No. 79, March 24, 1941, 6 p.m., from the Ambassador in Turkey, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 836.

32 Not printed.

33 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 936] ff.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. George V. Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 867.24/375

[Document 819]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. George V. Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] July 29, 1942.

During the course of a conversation with the Ambassador34 today, he said that considerable notice had been given in the press of Lend-Lease shipments from the United States to Turkey. He said that, as a matter of fact, not one thing had been given Turkey by the United States up to the present time for which Turkey had not paid in full or had not obligated itself to pay in full, in money.

I told the Ambassador that I was very greatly surprised at his statement and reminded him of the very considerable amount of arms, ammunition, and other supplies which we had transferred to the British Government under Lend-Lease for re-transfer to Turkey. The Ambassador said that it was his very definite understanding that the value of all of this material had been charged by the British Government against a sterling credit advanced by the British Government to Turkey in 1939.34a He said that the Turkish Government was repaying this credit to the British Government in goods or in cash, the latter in semi-annual payments, and that the entire debt, representing the value of what Turkey had obtained from Great Britain and what she had obtained from the United States through re-transfer, was drawing interest at six percent.

I told the Ambassador that certainly the officials of the American Government did not understand that the Turkish Government was being charged for the supplies accorded the British for transmission to Turkey under the Lend-Lease Act and that the subject was one which should be clarified immediately. The Ambassador said that he hoped that something would be done to clear it up and that he was confident that the Turkish officials in Ankara did not understand the situation clearly.

34 The Turkish Ambassador.

34a Presumably this refers to the £25 million credit authorized in Article I of the “Special Agreement” concluded between Great Britain, France and Turkey at Ankara on October 19, 1939, concurrently with the signing of the Treaty of Mutual Assistance of the same date; for text of the “Special Agreement,” see League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. cc, p. 173.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 867.24/375: Telegram

[Document 820]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 5, 1942—4 p.m.

3666. Turkish Ambassador in Washington has expressed to the Department his firm conviction that the British Government has been charging and continues to charge the Turkish Government for all Lend-Lease supplies which we accord Great Britain for re-transfer to Turkey. The Ambassador believes the British Government makes the charge against a credit extended by Britain to Turkey in 1939, which Turkey is currently repaying in installments every 6 months.

The allegation has arisen from time to time in the past that Britain was charging Turkey for supplies furnished by us, and has been denied by the British authorities here. It is clearly desirable, however, to correct any misapprehension which may exist in the minds of the Turkish officials either in Washington or Ankara.

Please inform the appropriate British authorities that the Department is most anxious for the question to be cleared up beyond any doubt, to the end that the Turkish Government may instruct its Ambassador in Washington that Turkey is not paying Great Britain, either in cash or goods, for supplies furnished Turkey by the United States.

Please repeat to Ankara as no. 382 and keep Ankara informed of developments.

Hull

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 867.24/379: Telegram

[Document 821]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 12, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received August 13—1:55 a.m.]

4495. Department’s 3666, August 5, 4 p.m. concerning allegation of Turkish Ambassador that British Government is charging Turkish Government for lend-lease supplies.

Responsible Foreign Office official states that when the attention of the British Government was called to this charge by the British Supply Council in June the British Ambassador at Ankara was asked to investigate it. Early in July the British Ambassador replied substantially [as follows]:

Embassy’s Commercial Counselor stated that, as he recalled, at a meeting held on May 16, attended by representatives of the British and American Embassies, the Secretary General stated that he did not know whether Turkey was to receive lend-lease aid gratis; that as the British Government was charging Turkey freight on lend-lease supplies carried in British ships the Government of Turkey was compelled to insure these supplies against loss by sinking through enemy action; that freight and insurance were heavy items; and that the cost of freight was being debited against the British armaments credit to Turkey. No suggestion was made by the Secretary General that actual cost of lend-lease supplies was being charged to Turkey.

Foreign Office official adds that the British do not ask for payment of freight under the armaments credit when lend-lease supplies are shipped in lend-lease ships but only when British ships are utilized or when the British themselves must make disbursements in dollars.

This official states further that, as the Foreign Office appreciates the embarrassment which such allegations must be causing the Department, the British Ambassador at Ankara has been instructed by telegraph to take matter up with the Turkish authorities and to request them to inform the Turkish Ambassador at Washington of the facts. The British Ambassador has been further instructed to inquire of the Turkish Government whether, besides the debiting of freight charges against the armaments credit, the Turkish Government has knowledge of any specific cases involving a charge against this credit for lend-lease supplies that have been re-transferred to Turkey. If there are any such cases, this official says, steps would immediately be taken to cancel the transaction and prevent a repetition.

This telegram has been repeated to Ankara.

Winant

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling) 867.24/505

[Document 822]

Memorandum of Conversation, by the Chief of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Alling)

[Washington,] October 5, 1942.

The Minister35 called at his request to discuss certain problems, particularly those arising out of the Embassy’s endeavors to obtain Lend-Lease and other supplies. The Minister said that from his observations the situation was almost hopeless. If shipping space was available to carry certain goods, then it was impossible to obtain a navicert from the British. If a navicert was obtained, then they were met with the problem of no shipping space, and if both of these hurdles were overcome, as they were in a few instances, they were then confronted with the statement that the port at Basra was congested and therefore the goods could not be shipped.

The Minister said he thought the situation could be greatly improved if it were possible for his Government to buy a small ship now under the Panamanian flag. He said he had a list of five or six such vessels which he thought might be available, and he urged that the State Department grant permission for the purchase of one of these by the Turkish Government.

I told the Minister that the Department had no jurisdiction over such matters and that any decision would have to be made by the War Shipping Administration. I told him that I did not need to stress the great shortage of shipping at this time. The Minister said he realized this, but in his own opinion nothing could have a greater effect upon his Government or the Turkish public than the knowledge that, despite this shortage, we were willing to assist the Turks to that extent.

I asked the Minister what he proposed to carry in this vessel if its purchase is approved. He said they would take Lend-Lease and other supplies from the United States to Turkey through the Mediterranean. I asked him what they would propose to bring back, and he said he did not exclude the possibility of bringing back chrome ore, although he felt strongly that we should not make it a condition that such ore be carried as a quid pro quo for agreeing to the transfer of the ship from Panamanian to Turkish registry.

The Minister went on to point out that he hoped very much we could take some favorable action in this matter and thus avoid the necessity of his Government having to approach the Rumanians or others with a view to obtaining the shipping which was so vital to Turkish economy. I told the Minister that I was not optimistic that the arrangement which he proposed could be worked out in view of the serious shipping situation, but that we should be glad to explore the possibilities and let him know as soon as we had done so.

35 The Turkish Minister, Mehmet Ali Sevki Alhan.

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements 867.24/531

[Document 823]

Memorandum of Conversation, by Mr. C. Thayer White of the Division of Commercial Policy and Agreements

[Washington,] November 6, 1942.

I informed Mr. Bewley36 that the Department is giving consideration to offering a master lend-lease agreement to Turkey along the lines of our Master Agreement with Great Britain,37 and if we do so we expect to include the following sentence in an aide-mémoire which would be handed to the Turkish Ambassador: “Upon the signature of the agreement the Lend-Lease Administration will transfer from British account to Turkish account upon its books, the record of past deliveries of lend-lease aid to Turkey through the British authorities, and will request the British authorities to change their books accordingly.”

I explained that the Turks have never quite understood lend-lease through retransfer and that we believe that by this method we will make clear to the Turks the obligations which they have previously incurred. However, I said that before making such a statement to the Turks, we thought that we should ask whether the British Government would have any objections. Mr. Bewley replied that he felt sure that there would be no objection, but that he wished to check with his Turkish expert before making a definite reply. He later called to say that he could state definitely that his Government did not object to such a statement. In the course of the conversation Mr. Bewley made the interesting observation: “The British have no books”.

36 Kenneth Bewley, representative of the British Treasury at the British Embassy.

37 Signed at Washington, February 23, 1942; for text, see Department of State Executive Agreement Series No. 241, or 56 Stat. (pt. 2) 1433.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. George V. Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs 867.24/549

[Document 824]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. George V. Allen of the Division of Near Eastern Affairs

[Washington,] December 21, 1942.

Mr. Erol38 telephoned to say that the Turkish Ambassador here had received a telegram from the Turkish Foreign Office in Ankara stating that Ambassador Steinhardt had informed the Turkish authorities that a draft of a master Lend-Lease agreement between Turkey and the United States was being handed to the Turkish Ambassador in Washington by the State Department. Mr. Erol asked for such explanation as I might be able to give him on the subject, adding that his Embassy had heard nothing regarding the subject.

I said that the Department contemplated proposing the negotiation of a master Lend-Lease agreement between Turkey and the United States and that a draft of such an agreement had in fact been prepared, but that according to my understanding all the necessary initials had not yet been obtained on the draft, and that I was not aware how soon we might be in a position to begin the negotiations.

Mr. Erol asked if the master agreement would be along the lines of the Lend-Lease agreement between the United States and Great Britain. I said that I presumed the Turkish agreement would follow the lines of the British agreement, with necessary changes to take care of the fact that Turkey is a neutral and not one of the United Nations.

Mr. Erol said that the Turkish Ambassador would be relieved to have this explanation, since he was afraid that possibly a draft agreement had been sent to him and had been misplaced.

38 Orhan H. Erol, Counselor of the Turkish Embassy.

Policy of the United States regarding the pre-emptive buying of Turkish goodsPolicy of the United States regarding the pre-emptive buying of Turkish goods

[825] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, February 3, 1942—2 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M)/5152: Telegram

[826] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, February 26, 1942—5 p.m. [Received February 27—5:49 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M)/5530: Telegram

[827] The Secretary of Stateto the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, July 23, 1942—4 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/35a: Telegram

[828] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, August 2, 1942—noon. [Received August 3—12:09 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/35: Telegram

[829] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 4, 1942. [Received August 4—5:40 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/36: Telegram

[830] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 6, 1942. [Received August 6—5:52 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/37: Telegram

[831] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 11, 1942.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/36: Telegram

[832] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, August 17, 1942—9 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/35: Telegram

[833] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 20, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 11:01 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/111: Telegram

[834] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 17, 1942—5 p.m. [Received December 18—8:45 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/198: Telegram

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 811.20 Defense (M)/5152: Telegram

[Document 825]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

[Extract]

Washington, February 3, 1942—2 p.m.

34. …

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3d. The Department is considering recommending preclusive purchasing of other Turkish products.39 Please telegraph your recommendations as to the possibilities of buying the Turkish products in which Germany has shown the greatest interest, including hides, wool and possibly tobacco. The Department has had discussions with Ambassador Steinhardt40 on the subject, but pending his arrival in Ankara the Department desires this information in order to formulate its plans. In your reply please specify amounts of stocks and the production for a 12-month period for each commodity the purchase of which you recommend, and give your estimates of the prices which in your opinion would have to be offered to obtain contracts for such stocks and such future production.

Hull

39 Other than antimony discussed in paragraph 1 and copper discussed in paragraph 2. For a discussion of the preclusive buying program in Turkey at this time, as formulated by the British Government, see W. N. Medlicott, The Economic Blockade (London, 1959), vol. ii, pp. 242 ff., in the series History of the Second World War: United Kingdom Civil Series.

40 Laurence A. Steinhardt, appointed Ambassador to Turkey; previously Ambassador in the Soviet Union.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M)/5530: Telegram

[Document 826]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, February 26, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received February 27—5:49 a.m.]

105. Department’s 34, February 3, 2 p.m. paragraph 3. Following recommendations and suggestions are submitted for Department’s consideration in connection with elaboration of plans for preclusive purchasing of Turk products.

1. It is recommended that question be thoroughly discussed with British with view to formulation of unified program. British here have been engaged in sporadic and apparently ill-defined preclusive purchasing program. For instance, they recently purchased as measure of economic warfare over a million skins involving 900,000 pounds sterling, whereas some time ago they refused to purchase when offered to them by producer stock of antimony which has just passed into hands of Germans. It is further recommended that consideration be given to having common program agreed upon carried out through British purchasing agencies; first, because British have in Turkey an extensive commercial organization, United Kingdom Commercial Corporation, and second, because they are obliged to make considerable purchases in Turkey in order that Turks may have sufficient pounds sterling to pay for their purchases in sterling area. I understand that British may be faced in near future with alternative of either increasing their purchases in Turkey greatly beyond their needs or making Turks a loan.

2. With regard to possibility of preventing or interfering with German acquisition of Turk products it is first of all to be noted that Turk Government considers itself obligated under its commercial agreement with Germany to furnish quantities of Turk products specified in schedules provided Germany delivers stipulated German goods.

It is not believed that it would be possible through policy of preclusive purchasing to make any inroads on amounts specified for Germany. However, it might be possible by such a policy to cause some delay in shipment of Turk products to Germany as Germans are slow in their deliveries, because in such event it is probable that Turks would be willing to sell stocks earmarked for Germany thereby compelling Germans to acquire stocks from next crop (agreement covers two Turk export seasons).

3. From an investigation made in Istanbul it would appear that Germans have already actually acquired or obtained commitments for a very considerable part of Turk products covered by trade agreement.

4. In drawing up plans for preclusive purchasing of Turk products, especially those on free market, consideration should be given to effect such action might have on Turk price structure. Turk Government has been for some time seriously disturbed by rising prices and it would undoubtedly view with disfavor any action calculated to enhance prices still further.

5. With regard to commodities specifically mentioned in Department’s telegram all wool stocks are now controlled by Government and in view of greatly increased domestic consumption no export licenses are being granted; British are now engaged in preclusive purchasing of skins; and it is believed that bulk of German tobacco purchases have already been effected (British have been seeking to induce Russians to purchase low grade tobacco of type purchased by Germans). Germans appear to be greatly interested in olive oil and vegetable oils but British are also active in this market having recently purchased 5,000 tons of olive oil.

Kelley

The Secretary of Stateto the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/35a: Telegram

[Document 827]

The Secretary of Stateto the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)41

Washington, July 23, 1942—4 p.m.

358. 1. Contained in this telegram is a summary of the present and projected U. S. preemptive buying program in Turkey. It has been agreed by the Department, the Board of Economic Warfare, and the United States Commercial Company. It has furthermore been discussed with the British Embassy in Washington, and this same telegram is being sent to London for the information and suggestions of the Joint Preemption Committee.

2. This program is basically designed to supplement the British preemptive program in Turkey, and in general it comprehends only commodities which it is our present understanding that the British are not purchasing. Our information regarding the full scope and effectiveness of the British buying program is incomplete, and further information on this subject may call for appropriate adjustment in ours. Furthermore, the knowledge in Washington of the actual situation in the various commodities in Turkey is necessarily restricted, and estimates given of the surpluses in various items may well be inexact. Your comments and criticisms will be most welcome. The objective can be simply stated as preempting, in company with the British, maximum quantities of all commodities in which the Axis currently has or may develop a supply need. For the accomplishment of this end, the Board of Economic Warfare is issuing extremely broad purchasing directives to the United States Commercial Company.

3. Of necessity the program is to a great extent discretionary in form, since the Department and Board of Economic Warfare well realize that you are in the best position to judge the most effective and practical measures by which the enemy may be denied. It is expected, therefore, that the broad purchasing powers will be applied in such form and measure as your judgment dictates. You are familiar, of course, with the preemptive operations of the British in Turkey, and close consultation with your British colleague will naturally be required in order to insure correlation of our joint efforts. Until such time as the United States Commercial Company has its own organization in Turkey, it is envisaged that you will freely avail yourself of the facilities of the UKCC for handling all physical details, and you are fully empowered in such cases as you determine actually to delegate to the UKCC purchase authorities within the broad limits established by the USCC. The latter have been set with the purpose of covering the entire estimated exportable surplus of the various commodities with dollar limits calculated to give free play. Admittedly, actual purchases may well fall far short of such a target, and your comments as to the validity of the estimates or the practicability of the contemplated buying operations are solicited so that the appropriate adjustments in the authorizations can be made.

4. Given below is a recapitulation of outstanding authorizations, some of which have been fulfilled in part or in toto.

A. Opium. 2,200 chests at a price limit of $30 per kilo bought at $18.70 per kilo.

B. Antimony. 205 tons at a total dollar cost of approximately $40,000. The three deals comprising this tonnage have been closed. The USCC hereby authorizes the purchase of an additional unspecified tonnage up to a total expenditure of $100,000. An estimate of the annual exportable surplus of antimony would be welcomed.

C. Mohair. 3,000 tons of mohair at an all-inclusive total price limit of $7,000,000. The release of 800 tons it is now understood has been agreed. It is contemplated that whatever tonnage is actually obtained of this commodity will be resold by the USCC at their cost to the UKCC, payment being made by the latter in Turkish commodities to be bought by UKCC for USCC account.

D. Copper. A total of 8,000 tons has been authorized for purchase at a total all-inclusive price of $5,740,000. 2,000 of the total have been purchased at a cost understood to be about $1,240,000 leaving an outstanding authorization for 6,000 tons at a total limit of $4,500,000. It is understood that 2,000 tons previously promised but not closed are currently in suspense.

E. Woolen rags. The purchase of an unstated quantity up to a total value of 1 million dollars has been authorized. (See the Department’s 345 of July 1742 ).

5. Authorizations for purchase by the USCC are in addition herewith issued on the following commodities: A. Cotton clippings, waste and rags up to 1,800 tons (estimated) and up to a total expenditure of $800,000.

B. Molybdenum up to 35 tons metal content (estimated) and a total expenditure of $60,000.

C. Flax up to a total of 2,000 tons (estimated) and a maximum expenditure of $1,000,000.

D. Hemp up to a total of 4,000 tons (estimated) and a maximum expenditure of $2,000,000.

6. In addition, the USCC herewith authorizes at your discretion the expenditure of up to $8,000,000 for cotton. The estimated tonnage amount is 18,000. It is understood that at the present time the export of this commodity is prohibited by the Turkish Government. In the absence of the removal of this prohibition or its evasion by illicit methods, it is assumed that no purchases are necessary for preemptive reasons. If for any reason you believe that the fundamental purpose of denial to the enemy would be served by purchase of these commodities, either for export or storage within Turkey, you are fully empowered to act within the above limits as your judgment dictates.

7. Finally, the USCC authorizes expenditures up to $1,000,000 for the chartering of caiques if, after consultation with your British colleague, such action is in your judgment desirable.

8. It is understood that the British are purchasing in maximum quantities obtainable olive oil, wool, sheep, lamb, goat and kid skins, valonia and valex. It is assumed, therefore, that our entrance into these markets is unnecessary and as a consequence no authorization is being currently made by the USCC. The Department and the Board of Economic Warfare would appreciate being informed if for any reason you believe activity on the part of the U. S. in these markets would be advisable.

9. The above authorizations cover the Turkish products which in the opinion of the Board of Economic Warfare lead the list of possible purchases on preclusive grounds. One broad category, however, which does contain preemptive interest is edible oils of all sorts, including oil cake, linseed, ground nuts, seasame seed, and sunflower seed. Your opinions and recommendations as to the desirability and scope of operations in these markets would be appreciated.

10. As you have recommended in the past, it is intended that the essential basis for the U. S. buying program shall be payment to the Turks in dollars. This decision, however, is not intended to exclude the acquisition from the British of Turkish pounds for use in payment of certain of our purchases. By taking over from the British such Turkish pounds at cost to them and translating this cost into dollars at the official pound sterling-dollar cross rate, it is currently possible, as you are aware, to acquire Turkish pounds at a lower dollar cost than through the direct purchase of Turkish pounds by the U. S. at the official Turkish pound-dollar rate. Until and unless it is possible to place all or a substantial part of our Lend-Lease transfers to Turkey on a cash basis, it is desirable to make certain that no Turkish exchange available either to the British or ourselves be overlooked. It is therefore anticipated that upon consultation with you, the United States Commercial Company will direct that certain preemptive purchases in the future (as has been the case in the past) shall be paid for by the British from their Turkish pound balances. In addition, continued examination will be given the possibility of acquiring the Match Company’s Turkish pounds.

11. The machinery by which the USCC will reimburse the UKCC for such purchases will necessarily take into consideration the fact that the USCC and the UKCC are jointly operating preclusive activities in Spain and Portugal. Repayments for Turkish commodities acquired by the UKCC for USCC account may therefore take the form of reimbursement in commodities as well as in money. It should be stated, however, that any such procedure as developed is not intended to alter or affect in any way the financial arrangements whereby the U. S. is purchasing chrome43 from the British Government.

12. The USCC is actively seeking appropriately qualified individuals to represent it in Turkey. It is not intended at the present time to build up a large USCC organization. The final selection of such representatives will be subject to your approval, and they will operate in Turkey in close collaboration with the UKCC and under your supervision. It is anticipated that the established organization and facilities of the UKCC will be heavily relied on, and there is no intention of needlessly duplicating existing establishments.

Hull

41 Repeated to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom as telegram No. 3414, July 23.

42 Not printed.

43 For correspondence regarding the purchase of chrome, see pp. 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856] ff.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/35: Telegram

[Document 828]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, August 2, 1942—noon.
[Received August 3—12:09 p.m.]

819. The summary of the present and projected United States preemptive buying program in Turkey, contained in your 358, of July 23, is exceedingly helpful to the Embassy. I greatly appreciate the discretionary powers which the Department has accorded me in connection with the carrying out of this program.

The program has been discussed with the British Embassy and the UKCC in connection with the buying program proposals drawn up by the Joint Preemption Commission in London. The United States program and the London proposals have been the subject of extensive discussion with a view to correlating the purchasing activities of the two Embassies and determining the measures best calculated to attain most effectively the objective of preempting the maximum quantities of all commodities of which the Axis has currently or may develop as supply need. The following comments and recommendations are made in the light of these preliminary discussions. I contemplate having further discussions of this subject shortly in Istanbul with our Acting Commercial Attaché and the representatives there of the British Embassy and the UKCC.

1. Opium, antimony, copper and woolen rags. The purchases of these commodities are to be left in the hands of the United States Embassy, the USCC [UKCC?] collaborating in respect to the handling of the physical details.

With regard to copper it is estimated that Turkish copper stocks amount at present to approximately 10,000 tons and that annual production is about 9500 tons. Of the 12000 tons to be delivered to Germany under the Turkish-German trade agreement only 1500 tons have been delivered to date. The Prime Minister has assured me that if the Germans do not deliver in the near future the products in exchange for which copper is to be supplied by Turkey, additional quantities of copper will be made available to us. This Embassy will continue to press the Turkish Government with a view to acquiring as large a quantity as possible of the exportable surplus.

The Embassy will telegraph shortly the situation obtaining with respect to antimony and woolen rags.

2. Mohair. Both Embassies are to continue to endeavor to obtain export licenses for additional amounts of mohair until the balance of this year’s crop, estimated at 1400 tons, is exhausted. This year’s crop is estimated at 5000 tons, and of this amount 2800 tons have already been acquired by the British and 400 [sic] by ourselves. While it appears doubtful that the Turkish Government will grant any further licenses for the export of mohair to Great Britain and the United States, we are agreed that the two Embassies should make every effort to obtain as much of the remaining 1400 tons as possible.

3. Molybdenum. The purchase of this commodity is to be left in our hands and an investigation is now being made with a view to ascertaining whether there are any stocks of this mineral available for export.

4. Cotton clipping, waste and rags. In view of the fact that the UKCC is active in this market with a view to purchasing 1500 tons, and that not more than 1800 tons are likely to be available during the next 12 months, it is considered that our entrance into this market is unnecessary at the present time. The UKCC has already procured a license for the export of 300 tons and is now seeking to obtain a license for the export of an additional 300 tons now available in Istanbul. The UKCC will continue to endeavor to acquire all available stocks of this commodity and we will enter the market if and when it becomes necessary to supplement the efforts of UKCC. Consideration was given to question of buying up for storage purposes available supplies for which Turks would refuse to issue export licenses to UKCC but it was decided to refrain from taking such action at present time in view of unfavorable reaction which it would undoubtedly produce among Turks.

5. Flax. UKCC is now in market for 600 tons. It is estimated that present stocks total 500 tons and that new crop will amount to 1500 tons. British and ourselves will collaborate in an endeavor to buy up whole exportable surplus.

6. Hemp. UKCC is already in market for 1000 tons. Existing stocks are estimated at approximately 2000 tons and new crop at 4 to 5000 tons. British and ourselves will collaborate in an attempt to buy up the whole exportable surplus.

7. Cotton. The export of cotton is prohibited except in exchange for urgent Turkish requirements and even then only short staple yerli or the poorest grades of Cleveland may be exported. Turkey has been seeking to import from either Egypt or Irak long staple cotton, which is required by Turkish mills, but the British have refused to accede to Turkish requests except against an equivalent value of short staple cotton.

8. It is the considered opinion of the two Embassies that it would be inadvisable to attempt to charter caiques for preemptive purposes. In the first place the charter of caiques is strictly controlled by the Turkish Government with a view to serving Turkish transportation needs and the Turkish Government would naturally, in view of the great shortage of shipping, object to any effort made to reduce the number of available caiques. Furthermore the caiques are largely employed in bringing material from Bulgarian ports which Turkey needs and it is felt that interference with the importation of products badly needed by Turkey would do more harm to Turkey than to the Axis.

9. In view of the fact that the British are purchasing or endeavoring to purchase in maximum quantities obtainable olive oil, wool, sheep, lamb, kid and goat skins, valonia and valex, there would appear to be no need for our entrance into these markets at least at the present time. This consideration also applies to silk cocoons and silk waste, all available supplies of which the British are prepared to purchase.

UKCC has purchased whole exportable surpluses of 1941 crops of valonia and valex and British are requesting authorization to purchase up to 20,000 tons of 1942 crop of valonia and 5,000 tons of 1942 crop of valex, latter two amounts being considered to represent total exportable surplus of these commodities from this year’s crops. Export of wool is forbidden at present time and it is not believed that this embargo will be lifted in near future. UKCC has bought 2500 tons of skins and has authority to purchase a further 1000 tons. British are requesting authorization to purchase a further 1100 tons which will clear market. Export of olive oil is forbidden at present time and UKCC at request of Turkish Government has handed back 5000 tons which they purchased from 1941 crop in order to meet local shortage. It has been agreed between UKCC and Turkish Ministry of Commerce that first 5000 tons of any exportable surplus of olive oil will be made available to UKCC as compensation for amount taken over from them. Owing to damage done to olive trees by severe winter it is considered unlikely that there will be any exportable surplus during 1942 or 1943.

10. Linseed. No stocks exist at present and no reliable figures are as yet available regarding 1942 crop. It is estimated, however, that this will approach 8,000 to 10,000 tons. In view of keen demand from central European powers for linseed, two Embassies feel that this commodity has a high preemptive interest and British are recommending that UKCC be authorized to purchase any quantity offered.

11. Oil seeds. In view of fact that Axis Powers have attached considerable importance to purchase of oil seeds such as sesame seed, sunflower seed and ground nuts, two Embassies are agreed that we ought to enter these markets with a view to acquiring maximum quantities available of these commodities. Proposed British buying program for these commodities calls for purchase of 15,000 tons of sesame seed, 5,000 tons of sunflower seed and 1,500 tons of ground nuts. It is not believed that ground nuts will be available for export and it is doubtful whether any large quantity of sesame or sunflower seed will be procurable since it is understood that Turks intend to convert these commodities into cakes for animal fodder on account of cereal shortage.

12. Gum tragacanth. Inasmuch as Germans and Italians have taken considerable interest in this commodity British are recommending that authorization be granted to purchase total exportable surplus estimated to amount to 250 tons.

13. Hazel nuts. Question of purchase of hazel nuts which were not mentioned in Department’s telegram has been subject of considerable discussion. It is understood that Germans are using hazel nuts for making lubricating oil and also for food purposes. They purchased 20,000 tons last year when crop amounted to only 20,000 tons, although there was a large carry-over from previous year. This year’s crop is estimated at 70,000 tons unshelled with a carry-over of 2,000 tons from last year. Transportation of this commodity to accessible ports presents a difficult problem inasmuch as hazel nuts are grown exclusively on the Black Sea coast with which there is no rail communication. An important consideration is fact that Turks have been pressing British to purchase larger amounts of this commodity. Consideration was given to question of possibility of delivering hazel nuts to Russians and also to possibility of pressing oil from nuts in Turkey. Recommendations with regard to this commodity will be submitted upon completion of a study of hazel nut situation which is now in progress.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/36: Telegram

[Document 829]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 4, 1942.
[Received August 4—5:40 p.m.]

4347. Department’s telegram 3414, July 23.44 The London Preemption Committee has submitted the following comments on the program of preclusive purchasing in Turkey contained in the Department’s telegram cited above.

“Pre-emption Committee have carefully studied program of purchases contained in State Department’s telegram to United States Embassy at Ankara, which they warmly welcome and approve.

In accordance with request of State Department they beg to submit the following comments:

1. They assume that the purchases proposed constitute short term program for immediate execution.

2. Full statement regarding British purchases has been sent by U. K. C. C. to their representative in New York for communication to U. S. C. C. This will no doubt be made available by the latter to the State Department and Board of Economic Warfare. Committee fully endorse objective set out in fifth sentence of this paragraph.

Paragraphs 3 and 12. Committee fully agree that closest consultation between the two Ambassadors is essential and would welcome early appointment of representatives of U. S. C. C. in Turkey which they are confident will still further facilitate joint effort. They suggest that pending such appointment negotiations for purchase under the new United States program should be conducted through U. K. C. C. except where otherwise agreed between the two Ambassadors.

4. Antimony. This may become an enemy deficiency in 1942 and Turkish production, estimated at 900 tons of ore per annum, has pre-emptive importance. Further purchases are fully approved.

5. Cotton clippings, waste and rags. U. K. C. C. have authority to buy up to 1,700 tons of waste but are having difficulty in making purchases. These commodities have great pre-emptive importance.

Molybdenum. According to present information there is little to be had in Turkey but British Ambassador is already investigating in view of reported German interest. Committee hope that any quantity, great or small, will be purchased.

Flax. U. K. C. C. has authority to buy up to 600 tons.

Hemp. According to recent report from U. K. C. C. present stocks are 2,000 tons. Purchase would be desirable subject to quality. There is some very poor quality on the market which would not be worth buying.

6. Cotton. Committee understand that export is prohibited except for amounts destined to Germany under Clodius agreement45 and to other European countries for barter. They nevertheless consider it would be useful to test possibilities of purchase.

On the question of storage they offer following comments which are of general application and do not apply only to cotton. To be fully effective pre-emptive purchases must be followed by early shipment. If that is impossible purchase for storage may be justifiable in order to deny valuable goods to the enemy but it entails some risk especially if the goods are stored in dangerous localities. Moreover, it provides opportunity to local government to exact conditions for eventual grant of export licence.

[7.] Caiques. Committee has hitherto accepted advice of British Ambassador against pre-emption. Possibility of connecting it with a purchase of hazel nuts is now being examined.

8. Committee agree that United States purchases are unnecessary.

9. Edible oils are a serious enemy deficiency but Committee would not feel justified in recommending pre-emptive purchases in Turkey in view of exorbitant prices and small size of Turkish surplus as compared with enemy requirements. On the other hand Committee recommend immediate purchase of linseed as Germany is now very short of drying oils though she may later ease her position by means of substitutes. Practicability of pre-empting hazel nuts is being examined as hazel nut oil can be used as luboil.

Paragraphs 10 and 11. United States Embassy are telegraphing separately to State Department on financial matters and British Embassy are also receiving instructions to discuss with State Department.”

Winant

44 See footnote 41, p. 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827].

45 Commercial agreement between Turkey and Germany, signed at Ankara, October 9, 1941. Dr. Carl Clodius negotiated and signed the agreement for Germany. For a summary of provisions of agreement, see telegram No. 388, October 17, 1941, 7 p.m., from the Ambassador in Turkey, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 964.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/37: Telegram

[Document 830]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, August 6, 1942.
[Received August 6—5:52 p.m.]

4394. Department’s telegrams Nos. 3414, July 23,46 and 3561, July 30.47 Before receipt of the Department’s 3561 the representatives of the Embassy had a number of meetings with British authorities, including the Treasury, concerning preclusive purchasing in Turkey and had consulted the London Pre-emption Committee at a meeting held on July 31, 1942. At the meeting the Committee expressed satisfaction with the inauguration of American preclusive purchases in Turkey as well as the general terms of the Department’s telegram to Ankara setting forth particulars of the program.

The following remarks, based partly on this meeting, were drafted prior to the receipt of the Department’s 3561 but they are, nevertheless, transmitted in the belief that they represent accurately the British views of the position prior to consideration of the USCC proposals just received and that they may help to ensure smooth functioning of the program. The British reaction to the USCC proposals will be transmitted as soon as possible: With respect to paragraphs 10 and 11 of the Department’s instructions to Ankara48 this Embassy would like to stress the following points on utilization of British purchasing power in Turkey. There are two main Anglo-Turkish accounts (a) commodities account (exchange rate 5.20 Turkish to £1 sterling) used for paying for minerals and 20% of value of certain other commodities coming to the United Kingdom. Probably, however, British and Turks could agree exceptionally to use this account if UKCC were acting as principals in a purchase but not as in recent case of copper where United States Ankara Embassy negotiated the deal and only asked UKCC to act as bankers and shippers. (b) Special account (exchange rate 7.28 Turkish to £1 sterling so long as British continue to receive 40% premium). British already hold substantial balance of Turkish pounds on this account. These Turkish pounds can be used for UKCC purchases but Turks might refuse to accept them if a purchase had obviously been made by United States and was only being financed by UKCC. Remittance has been made for payment for copper through the special account but Turks would be within their rights in refusing this method of payment.

Therefore, in both the above cases if we want to use British purchasing power UKCC should appear as principals vis-à-vis Turks from the start of any deal. It is most improbable that the Turks would permit us to make a straight purchase of British-owned Turkish pounds and use them for our buying program.

To take advantage of the Anglo-Turkish accounts it seems advisable that the UKCC should be brought into the picture at the outset of any deal and the Department and our Embassy at Ankara may wish to have all of these purchases made by UKCC for USCC account with the sole exception of cases agreed upon by the two Embassies at Ankara which can reach appropriate understanding about the method and currency of payment in each case.

A case in point is mohair covered by paragraph 4 (c) of the Department’s telegram under reference which contemplates resale to the British.

British are perfectly prepared to pay for this with their Turkish pounds but they cannot make a straight transfer of these Turkish pounds to USCC (see above). They are, therefore, telegraphing to UKCC Turkey to contact Embassy and Turks and to try to arrange that UKCC do the actual buying from merchants although the mohair be exported under our export license. If Turks do not agree only sensible arrangement seems to be that purchase is made with our dollars, and since British are offering to pay for bulk of purchases in Turkey (see below) this would soon be offset. There would be no question of the British reimbursing us directly in dollars for any mohair purchased by us since the dollar resources are not available to them.

British are telegraphing their Embassy in Washington that while it is of course agreeable to them that we should help their dollar position by our purchasing from them for dollars commodities which they have pre-empted in Turkey with their Turkish balances they wish it made clear that if we are going to relieve them of dollar liabilities in Portugal and possibly in Spain they are willing to reciprocate by paying outright for goods bought in Turkey whether on an American, British or joint program. They would only expect us to put up the cash where purchases could not be paid for in sterling but would cost gold or dollars either because the Turks refused to sell except on such terms or because British purchasing power was exhausted.

British consider that it is to the advantage of United Nations to use their purchasing power in Turkey since this would avoid necessity of shipping extra goods from United States to Turkey to absorb Turkish dollar purchasing power resulting from preclusive purchases for dollars.

It is understood nothing in the procedure above described should be construed as modifying existing arrangements for purchase of chrome in Turkey. The London Pre-emption Committee concurs with the views of the Department in this respect as expressed in paragraph 11 of the Department’s telegram in reference.

British do not feel that we should in any way try to balance exactly their extra burden in Turkey against ours in Portugal since as they say there is no reason why the two things should balance and in order to make them balance goods might be shipped in the least efficient way. Their view is that each should do what he can, where he can, and that goods bought should go where they are needed and not necessarily to the country financing the purchase.

The views of the British regarding the utilization of their purchasing power in Turkey and the British stand that we ought not to try to balance exactly their position in Turkey with ours in Portugal and Spain, as well as the other British views outlined above, are submitted without comment as the Embassy does not feel that it has sufficient knowledge of how the Department views the question in its broader aspects to do so.

Please repeat to Ankara from the Department.

Winant

46 See footnote 41, p. 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827].

47 Not printed.

48 Telegram No. 358, July 23, 4 p.m., p. 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827].

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/36: Telegram

[Document 831]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant)

Washington, August 11, 1942.

3794. Your 4347 of August 4 and the Department’s 3664 of August 5.49

1. In the light of the comments of the London Preemption Committee and those of Amembassy Ankara, a redefinition of the short term U. S. preclusive program in Turkey and its transition to a long term U. S. program in collaboration with the British are under study. You will be kept informed in this connection.

2. It can be stated that in general this Government favors assigning individual responsibility for individual commodities. Adherence to this principle, however, would not preclude joint action by the British and ourselves in any specific commodity where Turkish policy either on allocations or the issuance of export licenses indicated the advisability of such collaboration.

3. The Department would appreciate an elaboration of MEW’s50 recommendation that edible oils should not be preempted in Turkey. Amembassy Ankara has telegraphed, in an extension of its comments reported in the Department’s 3664 of August 6 [5], that the Axis attach importance to the purchase of oil seeds such as sunflower, sesame and ground nuts, and that both the British and American Embassies in Ankara are in agreement that we should enter these markets. Ambassador Steinhardt states that the British Embassy has proposed the purchase of 15,000 tons sesame, 5,000 tons sunflower seed, and 15,000 tons ground nuts, although doubt is expressed as to the availability of ground nuts for export.

4. Steinhardt further reports that the British are seeking authorization to purchase 250 tons gum tragacanth and unlimited authority to purchase linseed. The Department would appreciate being informed as to whether or not these requests for authorization have been granted by UKCC.

5. The matter of financial arrangements between the British and ourselves will be discussed in a later telegram after the receipt of comments on the Department’s 3561 of July 30, 5 p.m.51

Hull

49 Latter not printed; it summarized telegram No. 819, August 2, noon, from the Ambassador in Turkey, p. 714 [Pg. 714 includes portions of Doc. 827 and Doc. 828].

50 Ministry of Economic Warfare.

51 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/35: Telegram

[Document 832]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, August 17, 1942—9 p.m.

398. 1. Your 819 of August 2, noon, was most helpful. In the light of its contents and comments on the program received from the London Preemption Committee, appropriate modifications have been under study here. In this process it has seemed desirable to transform the program originally designated as short term into a program to run for the next 12 months. The changes noted hereinafter have been agreed by the Department, Board of Economic Warfare, and United States Commercial Company. They have in addition been discussed with the British Embassy here and will be submitted to the London Preemption Committee for their approval.

2. The same general principles outlined in the Department’s 358 of July 23, 4 p.m. obtain. In addition, it is believed that as a general policy individual responsibility as between the British and ourselves should be assigned in the case of each commodity. This does not preclude, however, jointly purchasing a specific commodity if for any reason in your judgment and that of your British colleague such action promises the most effective results. Extreme flexibility is sought and, consequently, recommendations from the Embassy for the removal or addition of commodities or for modifications in outstanding purchase directives are solicited.

3. Caiques. Your recommendation that no action be taken at the present time is accepted, but the Board of Economic Warfare is leaving its directive unchanged so that you will be free at any time to act under it if the situation changes.

4. Antimony. It is reported by MEW that there is currently a deficiency of this metal in Germany. Little information is available here on the situation in Turkey with regard to production, stocks, etc., and your forthcoming comments are eagerly awaited.

5. Cotton. In the light of your recommendation and because of the fact that it is planned to leave primary responsibility for this commodity with the British, the Board of Economic Warfare directive on cotton requires no action but it is left in effect for later exercise if the situation changes.

6. Linseed. The Board of Economic Warfare is issuing a purchase directive to cover 10,000 tons of this commodity. Tentatively a dollar limit has been set of $6,000,000.

7. Gum tragacanth. The BEW is studying and would appreciate information regarding Axis uses and London response to UKCC request for purchase authority.

8. Oil seeds. Your recommendation is being carefully considered. The Joint Preemption Committee in London has recommended against buying sesame, sunflower and ground nuts. The Board of Economic Warfare is studying the matter, and a final decision will be made after any necessary reconciliation between MEW and BEW views.

9. Hazel nuts. No decision pending receipt of forthcoming study from the Embassy.

10. Copper. The outstanding purchase directive is for 6,000 tons with an all-inclusive limit of $4,760,000. This is in correction of paragraph 4d of the Department’s 358 of July 23.

11. In summary, responsibility for the following products would be assigned to the U. S.: antimony, copper, woolen rags, molybdenum, linseed, and, if necessary, caiques. On the following products primary responsibility would rest with the British: olive oil, wool, cotton (the export of these three commodities being currently prohibited), sheep and lamb skins, goat and kid skins, valonia, valex, silk cocoons and waste. Mohair, cotton clippings, waste and rags, flax and hemp are to be purchased jointly by the British and ourselves in collaboration. The existing arrangements regarding chrome would remain unchanged.

12. In certain commodities it is expected you will decide to have the Embassy negotiate, using the UKCC to handle the physical details. In others, pending the arrival of USCC representatives, it is presumed you will delegate the actual purchasing as well as the physical details to the UKCC.

13. Pending final determination of financial arrangements between the British and ourselves, it is expected that the UKCC will make payment out of their Turkish pound balances (through their “special” account) for such purchases as they make for our account. In the latter case London has pointed out that UKCC should appear in Turkey as the principal. It therefore follows that while such purchases would be ultimately for account of USCC, USCC would have to place order with UKCC, after consultation with you. Purchases negotiated by the Embassy presumably should be made in dollars or Turk pounds purchased by U. S. against dollars.

14. Progress is being made on selection of USCC mission, and it is expected that definite information will be telegraphed shortly.

15. Your comments and recommendations will be welcomed on this telegram which has been repeated to London.

Hull

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/111: Telegram

[Document 833]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 20, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 11:01 p.m.]

1044. During my conversation October 16 with Foreign Minister52 I took occasion to bring to his attention situation which appeared to me to be developing regarding availability of Turkish products for purchase by the United States. I pointed out as he was aware Germany and Axis Powers had made furnishing of supplies to Turkey conditional upon Turkey’s furnishing specific products desired by them while we and British furnished supplies to Turkey independently of Turkey’s making available to us Turkish products which we desired. If Turkey desired military or industrial equipment from Germany she had to deliver valuable Turkish products to Germany; if she wanted petroleum products from Rumania latter insisted upon receiving cotton and copper in return. On other hand when Turkey desired goods from the United States and Great Britain, neither ourselves nor the British made deliveries contingent upon the receipt of Turkish goods in exchange. In these circumstances it was not unnatural that the most important Turkish products were being reserved almost wholly for the Axis Powers. I realized of course that the Turkish Government was not seeking to bring about such a situation and it was possible even that the Turkish Government was not fully conscious of the trend of developments in this respect.

Numan said that he did not think that such a situation was developing. He stated that since the Clodius agreement had gone into force only 9 million Turkish pounds of goods had been exported to Germany. This amount was very much less than the quantity of exports to Great Britain during the same period. I observed that while the total amount of actual exports to Germany was small, large quantities of goods were reserved for future export to Germany. Such was case in respect to copper, a product which was greatly desired by my Government. I said, furthermore, that there were rumors that there would be a new large scale agreement concluded with Germany upon termination of Clodius agreement. If that were so the greater part of principal Turk products would inevitably be reserved for Germany. Numan said that if Clodius agreement were not entirely carried out which seemed likely to because it was probable that an arrangement might be made for exchange of goods which had not been exchanged under that agreement. We should look upon Clodius agreement as covering exchange of goods between Turkey and Germany for a much longer period than 18 months covered by agreement. He said that there was no question of the conclusion upon expiration of that agreement of a new agreement of same scope as old one.

Minister said that he could not agree that greater part of Turkey’s principal products was going or would go to Axis Powers. He stated that in not a few cases high prices of Turkish products were resulting in Germans refraining from purchasing Turkish products which they desired. Inasmuch as I had several times mentioned copper he wanted me to know that it was fault of British that greater part of Turkey’s copper output was going to Germany inasmuch as he himself had offered copper to British prior to conclusion of Clodius agreement and British had said that they were not interested in purchasing Turk copper. Unfortunately British often looked at things from a purely commercial point of view and situations developed which they afterwards regretted.

In course of discussion Numan observed that Turkey had to trade with Germany and this necessarily involved the furnishing of Turkish products to Germany. Turkey could not provoke Germany by refusing to trade with her. Turkey must adopt a friendly attitude towards Germany in this respect; not only Turkey’s geographical position but also her political situation demanded it. If notwithstanding Turkey’s non-provocatory policy towards Germany, Germany adopted an aggressive policy towards Turkey, then the whole country would be united in defense of Turkey’s independence. I said that as I saw it, it was not a question of Turkey’s breaking off trade relations with Germany but of Turkey’s increasing inability in consequence of the enlargement of her commitments to Germany, to furnish to the United States the Turkish products which we needed. He assured me that I need have no anxiety on that score because the Turkish Government would not permit such a situation to develop.

Kelley

52 Numan Menemencioğlu.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/198: Telegram

[Document 834]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 17, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received December 18—8:45 a.m.]

1312. As an indication of the results of our preclusive purchasing program here, the Germans have recently made representations to Turkish Government regarding the difficulties they have been encountering in obtaining the Turkish products provided for under Clodius agreement and for which they hold export licenses.

Following these representations the President of Foreign Trade Section of Turkish Ministry of Commerce visited Istanbul in an effort to ascertain why the prices of various oil seeds (which are dealt in on commodities exchange) while fluctuating considerably were even at their lowest level always above the price at which Germany is authorized to buy. Turkish official returned to Ankara without having obtained any explanation of these price manipulations.

There seems little doubt that Germans have been seriously inconvenienced by our woolen rag purchases. From available information it now appears certain that Germany and the other Axis nations have exhausted their stocks of woolen rags and that Germany in particular had counted on utilizing Turkish rags for manufacture of uniforms and blankets for the winter’s campaign in Russia. Both Hungary and Rumania are now unsuccessfully offering most lucrative compensation transactions in a wide variety of their products against Turkish woolen rags.

We hold commitments for some 2,242,000 kilos of woolen rags for a value of 1,473,000 Turkish pounds and are preventing any accumulation of stocks through purchases of small lots both at Istanbul and in the interior.

Steinhardt

Favorable response by the United States to Turkish requests for additional wheatFavorable response by the United States to Turkish requests for additional wheat

[835] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 17, 1942—noon. [Received 5:49 p.m.]

867.24/359: Telegram

[836] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 17, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 9:40 p.m.]

867.24/352: Telegram

[837] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, July 18, 1942—8 p.m.

867.24/359: Telegram

[838] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, July 22, 1942—6 p.m.

867.24/352: Telegram

[839] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 23, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 6:40 p.m.]

867.24/360: Telegram

[840] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, July 24, 1942—9 p.m.

867.24/360: Telegram

[841] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 31, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 10:40 p.m.]

867.24/367: Telegram

[842] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, August 8, 1942—4 p.m.

867.24/378: Telegram

[843] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Istanbul, August 11, 1942—5 p.m. [Received August 11—3:40 p.m.]

867.24/378: Telegram

[844] The Secretary of State to the Consul at Istanbul (Berry)

Washington, August 17, 1942—9 p.m.

867.24/378: Telegram

[845] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Istanbul, August 20, 1942—noon. [Received 1:40 p.m.]

867.24/389: Telegram

[846] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 23, 1942—5 p.m.

867.24/423a: Telegram

[847] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 25, 1942—1 p.m.

867.24/424a: Telegram

[848] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, September 25, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 11:43 p.m.]

867.24/424: Telegram

[849] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 22, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 10:10 p.m.]

867.24/450: Telegram

[850] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 29, 1942—noon.

867.24/517: Telegram

[851] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 13, 1942—3 p.m. [Received November 14—7:05 a.m.]

867.5018/11: Telegram

[852] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, December 5, 1942—3 p.m.

867.24/521: Telegram

[853] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, January 1, 1943—4 p.m.

867.24/521: Telegram

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/359: Telegram

[Document 835]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 17, 1942—noon.
[Received 5:49 p.m.]

751. During my first call on the new Prime Minister53 July 15, I was forcibly struck by his nervousness and preoccupation which stood out in sharp contrast with his normally serene and jovial disposition. Later in the day my British colleague54 who had seen him half an hour before I did inquired of me as to whether I had gained same impression he had that Saraçoğlu was clearly laboring under a great strain. He said Saraçoğlu had seemed so worried he had decided not to discuss with him some of the matters he had gone to see him about. Hugessen also told me late the night before Saraçoğlu had called him on the phone and had made an urgent plea for the immediate shipment of wheat to Turkey.

This morning President of Office of Soil Products requested Kelley55 to call on him ostensibly to discuss pending negotiations for purchase of opium by the United States.56 After disposing of opium matter he said that in view of serious wheat situation confronting Turkey, he requested that the United States allocate the maximum tonnage available to the shipment of wheat to Turkey. He went on to say that need for wheat was so urgent that new Cabinet had decided to give priority to shipments of wheat from the United States over everything else without exception including all military supplies and that he was authorized to communicate this decision to the Embassy so that it could inform the American Government to this effect. He added that this decision reflected an abrupt traversal of the position of the old Cabinet.

I am inclined to the view that immediately after assuming office as Prime Minister, Saraçoğlu discovered that the stocks of wheat on hand are materially less than the former Cabinet had been led to believe and that in addition preliminary reports on the new crop are worse than anticipated. Saraçoğlu’s telephone call late at night to Hugessen and his nervousness and preoccupation during the visits of both Hugessen and myself the following day are to my mind clearly indicative that the new Cabinet has discovered that the wheat situation in Turkey is extremely grave. The fact that the new Cabinet succeeded without delay in obtaining the consent of Marshal Cakmak57 and the General Staff to giving priority to the immediate shipment of wheat over all military supplies supports this view. From other remarks made by the President of the Office of Soil Products to Kelley, it would appear that there is not enough wheat to maintain the army this summer.

As it is clearly in our interest to strengthen the position of Turkey at this critical time and also clearly in our interest to support the Saraçoğlu Cabinet which is most friendly disposed towards the United States and Great Britain, I urgently recommend that immediate steps be taken to meet the desires of the Turkish Government by shipping wheat instead of war material or other supplies.

Steinhardt

53 Sükrü Saraçoğlu, formerly Minister for Foreign Affairs, who had succeeded as Prime Minister on July 9, following the death of Prime Minister Saydam.

54 Sir Hughe M. Knatchbull-Hugessen.

55 Robert F. Kelley, Counselor of Embassy.

56 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 824 and Doc. 825] ff.

57 Chief of Turkish General Staff.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/352: Telegram

[Document 836]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 17, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 9:40 p.m.]

752. My 751, July 17, noon. For the President, Secretary and Under Secretary. Prime Minister telephoned me this morning and asked me to come to see him immediately. He said that he had ascertained that wheat situation in Turkey was extremely grave and that but for the arrival of a British vessel a few days ago with 2500 tons of wheat on board Turkish Government would be in serious difficulties this week. He requested me to bring urgently to your attention Turkey’s imperative need of wheat. He confirmed decision of Cabinet to request that priority be given immediately to shipment of wheat over all other supplies including war material stating that Turkish Army could fight with such material as it possessed but not without food. Saraçoğlu said since German break through towards the Caucasus the Turkish Government had mobilized additional classes of reservists and was transferring troops from Thrace to the Trebizond area in order to forestall any German attempt to gain access to Caucasus through Turkish territory (see my 736, July 14, 1 p.m.58 ). He added categorically “There will be no change in Turkish foreign policy. Germans will not be permitted to make use of Turkish territory. We have too many troops in Thrace. Turkish General Staff has informed me that our position in the Trebizond area is dangerously weak but in 2 weeks when new troop dispositions have been completed it will no longer be possible for Germans successfully to invade Caucasus by crossing Turkish territory”.

I explained to Saraçoğlu while the United States possessed large reserves of wheat transportation was a difficult problem to which he replied he hoped American Government would implement Turkish Government’s decision that wheat be given immediate priority over all other supplies including all war material. He informed me Turkish Government had proposed to Vichy about 2 months ago the purchase of several small French vessels interned in Turkish ports which totaled somewhat less than 15,000 tons (Embassy’s 266, July 24, 194159 ) but that the proposal had been rejected at the time. However, the Vichy Government had indicated to him during the past few days a willingness to charter these vessels to the Turkish Government. He proposes to take advantage of this offer at once. He said he hoped the American Government would provide wheat for these vessels on their arrival in American ports in addition to such wheat as the United States is willing to ship immediately in lieu of war material and other supplies.

I believe that prompt and favorable response to Saraçoğlu’s appeal would be of the utmost value in further fortifying our position in Turkey. In strengthening Saraçoğlu’s position we strengthen our own. His new Cabinet is outstandingly pro-American and pro-British. In my opinion no step that we could take by way of lend-leasing war material or these supplies to Turkey with the object of insuring continued Turkish resistance to Axis pressure would under existing conditions carry the same amount of weight as prompt shipment of quantity of wheat relatively unimportant in terms of American stocks. As we have been lend-leasing war materials and other supplies to strengthen Turkey and as Turkish Government now considers that for the time being it has a greater need for wheat than for war materials I deem it unnecessary to advance any further considerations in support of Saraçoğlu’s request.

As even immediate shipments of wheat could not reach Turkey for some time to come I recommend that I be instructed to inform Saraçoğlu that American Government has given instructions to load only wheat instead of war materials or other supplies on all vessels assigned to carrying supplies to Turkey.

Steinhardt

58 Not printed.

59 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.24/359: Telegram

[Document 837]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, July 18, 1942—8 p.m.

347. Your 751, July 17, noon, and 752, July 17, 3 p.m. Department is giving immediate attention to Turkish Premier’s request in cooperation with interested American and British agencies, with particular regard to recourse to MESC.60 We assume Turkish Ambassador has been or is being instructed in the matter.

Hull

60 Middle East Supply Center.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.24/352: Telegram

[Document 838]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, July 22, 1942—6 p.m.

354. Your 751, July 17, noon, your 752, July 17, 3 p.m., and the Department’s 347, July 18, 8 p.m.

1. Wheat in any reasonable quantity will be made available for the Turkish Government in this country for shipment to Turkey.

2. In accordance with your recommendation, the Department has requested Lend-Lease Administration and War Shipping Administration, and they have agreed, to issue instructions that wheat be loaded instead of war materials or other supplies on all vessels assigned to carry supplies to Turkey. The War Shipping Administration has informed the Department that approximately 15,000 tons of wheat as fill-in cargo could be lifted from the U. S. during the next 45 to 60 days for Turkey on the basis of present schedules. Diversion of additional United Nations’ ships for this purpose would be extremely difficult due to urgent priorities for battle areas. Turkish charter of vessels such as interned French ships referred to would represent most hopeful solution for large scale shipments. In your judgment will the 15,000 tons of cargo space referred to above plus tonnage Turkey is likely to charter for the purpose meet the situation?

3. In view of the clear and immediate urgency of Saraçoğlu’s appeal and the length of time at best before any cargo of wheat from the U. S. could arrive in Turkey, recourse to whatever supplies of wheat the Middle East Supply Center actually holds in the Middle Eastern area would appear indicated as an alternative. Before committing this Government to make the 15,000 tons above referred to in paragraph 2 available to the Turks, please consult with your British colleague and verify directly with MESC that this amount of wheat cannot be made available by MESC within the time contemplated for the delivery of such wheat from the U. S.

4. The Department will likewise pursue its inquiries with regard to the MESC through the British here, and will also investigate the possible alternative of wheat shipments from Australia. Please keep us informed of developments and any further action which your judgment indicates should be taken in Washington.

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/360: Telegram

[Document 839]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 23, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 6:40 p.m.]

789. My 751 and 752, July 17, and Department’s 354, July 22. I informed the Prime Minister this afternoon of substance of Department’s telegram under reference. He requested me to convey to Department his deep appreciation for the prompt and effective action which it contemplates taking to assist him in meeting an extremely difficult situation.

In response to my inquiry as to whether shipment of 15,000 tons of wheat within next 60 days in addition to such tonnage as his Government might be able to charter would meet the situation (and after I had pointed out to him that it would be extremely difficult to divert additional United States ships due to urgent priorities to battle areas) he replied that while of course he was desirous of obtaining maximum possible quantity of wheat during next few months he was unwilling to request “our allies” to divert tonnage which was carrying war material to battle front. He then informed me that in addition to his endeavor to charter small French ships interned in Turkish ports he was hopeful of being able to charter several large French merchantmen now in French ports. I assured him that wheat would be promptly forthcoming for such ships as his Government succeeded in sending to American ports for that purpose.

While sufficient time has not yet elapsed for me to have received a reply from my British colleague who is spending a few days on the Bosphorus or from the Middle East Supply Center to my inquiries as to whether 15,000 tons of wheat can be made available for Turkey from the Middle East Supply Center within the time contemplated for delivery from the United States, I am reasonably certain that no such quantity is available. However, irrespective of whether any part of the 15,000 tons can be made available by the Middle East Supply Center, I urgently recommend that 15,000 tons of wheat be shipped from the United States to Turkey as filling cargo during the next 45 to 60 days and that instructions be issued to the Middle East Supply Center to make every effort to expedite the forwarding of this wheat to Turkey.

Steinhardt

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.24/360: Telegram

[Document 840]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, July 24, 1942—9 p.m.

362. Your 789 of July 23, 6 p.m. and the Department’s 354 of July 22, 6 p.m.

1. British Supply Council in Washington informed the Department today that they had received a reply to their query resulting from the Department’s discussion with them last week. (See Department’s 347 of July 18). Reply states that MESC is giving active consideration to immediate shipment to Turkey of 5,000 tons of wheat from available stocks and to the later dispatch of 10,000 additional tons of wheat when available. MESC is also considering purchase of barley in Iraq for shipment to Turkey. Department will continue close collaboration in Washington with British Supply Council in the matter and suggests that with support of your British colleague you also press directly MESC who are in best position to deal with problem.

2. War Shipping administration will exert best efforts to make available maximum cargo space for wheat shipments for Turks. As you are aware, exigencies of war make precise commitments of tonnage for further shipments impossible. Furthermore, system does not allocate any fixed future cargo space for specific countries in Middle East area. Instructions are now outstanding that wheat will be loaded to exclusion of all supplies to Turkey other than munitions of a character suitable for emergency diversion to United Nations armed forces in Middle East. Fill-in cargo space totalling 15,000 tons during next 45 to 60 days represents realizable estimate, but safest to regard it as maximum and subject to understandable reservations.

3. For wheat movement of magnitude of 100,000 tons or more as indicated in your 769 of July 20,61 Turkish-owned or chartered vessels would appear to represent the only transport. The Department confirms that if Turks provide bottoms to lift, wheat would be available in this country. It should be noted however, that (a) Board of Economic Warfare reserves right to judge reasonableness of large amounts on grounds of possible danger of excessive stocks, and (b) Turkish arrangements for purchase, delivery to seaboard, bagging, if necessary, etc. would have to be made in ample time.

Hull

61 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/367: Telegram

[Document 841]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 31, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 10:40 p.m.]

815. Your 362, July 24. My British colleague and myself had a thorough discussion of Turk wheat situation yesterday. Hugessen had a talk with Saraçoğlu the day before which he reported in his 238 of July 29 to Minister of State with repetition to Washington.

We both believe that 15,000 tons of wheat should be shipped as soon as possible from the United States to Middle East as fill-in cargo. We strongly recommend that this movement be started immediately and if that amount cannot be shipped within 45 to 60 days movement should be continued until 15,000 tons have been shipped from the United States. In making this recommendation we have been influenced by following considerations: (1) Shortage of wheat in Turkey. While food situation in Turkey will be eased after August 15 with coming in of new harvest possibility of a shortage later on cannot be excluded if Turk expectations as to harvest are not realized. Turk Government is naturally deeply concerned over possibility of a deficiency in country’s food supplies and it is in our interest to see to it that Turkey is not confronted with a food shortage. It should be borne in mind that wheat which is loaded immediately in the United States will not arrive in Turkey for several months.

(2) The extreme shortage of reserve stocks in Middle East. In view of depleted wheat supplies in Middle East and demands which will be made upon MESC in near future in respect to requirements of British forces and countries in that area addition of 15,000 tons of wheat from us to reserve stocks in Middle East will improve wheat situation all around in this area.

(3) Compelling nature of specific request made by Saraçoğlu that tonnage allocated for movement of war materials and other supplies to Turkey be utilized for shipment of wheat. We are convinced that any attempt to disregard this request would cause Turks to view with suspicion entire lend-lease program of aid to Turkey and would have a most unfortunate effect on them because they might well come to feel that lend-lease aid to Turkey was not what they had believed it to be, a genuine endeavor to aid Turkey, but merely a screen for shipment of war material to Middle East with Turks receiving whatever was not needed elsewhere in that area.

British Ambassador is sending a telegram to London along similar lines.

Steinhardt

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.24/378: Telegram

[Document 842]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, August 8, 1942—4 p.m.

385. Your 815 of July 31, 4 p.m. and your unnumbered of August 5, 6 p.m.62

1. Department has held continuing discussions on wheat for Turkey with British Embassy and representatives of the British Supply Council who act as liaison for MESC. They reported yesterday that since the receipt of your appeal on behalf of Turkish Prime Minister and as the consequence of Department’s discussions and your communications with MESC, the latter has shipped or made available for shipment to Turkey 12,000 tons of wheat and has railed or is railing to Turkey 3800 tons of barley from Iraq. It is apparent that MESC is giving effect to the important political elements in the situation and realizes that actual shortages of wheat in certain consuming centers of Turkey and these political elements make prompt action necessary.

2. As you are aware, the general cereal situation in entire Middle East gives grave concern. MESC estimates that minimum cereal imports into that area for combined military and civilian requirements will amount to 350,000 tons between now and June 1943. Furthermore, this estimate makes no allowance for loss by sinkings or possible increase in military requirements. Despite the above, it was proposed in a meeting yesterday with the British that because of the urgent need in Turkey and the time required to ship from America, the additional 15,000 tons of wheat promised the Turks by us be met by MESC out of its early wheat arrivals in the Near East. This would be over and above 15,800 tons of cereals referred to in paragraph 1. This proposal, which was welcomed by the Department, promises the great advantage of providing the Turks with absolute maximum tonnage of wheat which could be stowed as fill-in cargo from this country in next 6 weeks or so. The British are recommending this to London and believe it will be agreed. The Department assumes that the Turks will welcome this arrangement but naturally wishes an expression of your judgment in the matter before accepting the definite offer which it is expected London will make.

3. The movement of wheat from all loading areas, including the United States, to meet projected demands on MESC for next 10 months will place obvious strain on the restricted tonnage available to serve that area. Furthermore, the shipping shortage is accentuated by heavy movement of nitrates and coal necessary for that area. Consequently, an agreement by MESC to make available additional 15,000 tons out of early arrivals would probably result in nil cargo space being available in next 2 or 3 months for shipment of supplies, including munitions, to Turkey since any space available during that time, including fill-in stowage, will presumably be required to help replenish MESC granary.

4. In accordance with the Department’s 362 of July 24, 9 p.m., paragraph 3, wheat remains available to the Turks in this country for lifting by any ships they can provide subject only to the conditions noted in the paragraph under reference. In the interest of certainty we should think that the Turkish Government would want to make every effort immediately to secure ships for this purpose and within your discretion urge it to do so.

Hull

62 Latter not printed.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/378: Telegram

[Document 843]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Istanbul, August 11, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received August 11—3:40 p.m.]

22. Department’s 385, August 8. I am most gratified to learn the 15,000 tons of wheat which were to be shipped from the United States as fill-in cargo in response to Prime Minister’s urgent request for shipment of wheat from the United States are to be furnished by MESC out of early wheat arrivals in Near East. I assume Turk authorities will welcome arrangement proposed by the Department which means an earlier delivery of wheat.

In my opinion it is important it be made unmistakably clear to Turk Government these 15,000 tons of wheat originate with the United States and are being delivered to Turkey in direct response to Prime Minister’s appeal to the United States for wheat. It should be noted the Turks invariably regard themselves as beholden to the British for all supplies received from MESC. A failure to make it clear to the Turks these additional 15,000 tons of wheat are of American origin delivered in response to Prime Minister’s appeal to United States would result in conviction on his part Britain and not the United States had responded to his plea which was specifically addressed to us.

As the Turks requested this wheat from the United States in lieu of war material and other supplies I assume they will not expect cargo space in next 2 or 3 months for other shipments.

I have already informed the Turks that wheat will be available in the United States in reasonable quantities for lifting by any ships they can provide subject to conditions noted in paragraph 3 of Department’s 362,63 and Prime Minister has assured me Turk Government is bending every effort to secure ships for this purpose.

As Prime Minister has repeatedly expressed his personal interest in the procurement of wheat from the United States I should appreciate being advised as soon as delivery of 15,000 tons of wheat from MESC has been definitely agreed to by London so I may inform Prime Minister.

Steinhardt

63 Dated July 24, 9 p.m., p. 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840].

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Istanbul (Berry) 867.24/378: Telegram

[Document 844]

The Secretary of State to the Consul at Istanbul (Berry)

Washington, August 17, 1942—9 p.m.

95. Following for the Ambassador. Your 22 of August 11, 5 p.m.

1. The Department has been informed by the British Embassy here that MESC, with full London approval, definitely offers to provide for Turkey 15,000 additional tons of wheat out of early arrivals in the Near East. On the basis of the opinion as to Turkish reaction expressed in your telegram under reference, the Department has replied that it would welcome this arrangement.

2. As the consequence of this undertaking, MESC has increased its projected wheat loading schedule in North America by 15,000 tons with the consequence that the Turks should expect little or no shipment of munitions or civilian supplies for next month or two.

3. The Department agrees that the Turks should extract the full measure of satisfaction from the knowledge that the U. S. responded to their urgent appeal, and that the response took the form best suited to provide the promptest possible solution to their immediate needs. In informing the Prime Minister of the conclusion of the arrangements described in paragraph 1 above, however, it is suggested that you also take occasion to point out that MESC is now an Anglo-American organization, and that the shipping limitations which were responsible for its creation make doubly logical today its acceptance in the future as the machinery for an orderly and expeditious channeling of the essential cereal and sugar requirements throughout the area including Turkey.

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/389: Telegram

[Document 845]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Istanbul, August 20, 1942—noon.
[Received 1:40 p.m.]

47. Department’s 95, August 17. I have today communicated to the Prime Minister substance of Department’s cable under reference.

In connection with a visit made to Ankara and Istanbul by Jackson, head of the MESC, and Fred Winant,64 I had occasion to discuss with them the delivery of the 15,000 tons of wheat. Jackson stated that he expected to be able to deliver 5,000 tons by September 15 and 5,000 additional tons by October 15 but that the delivery to Turkey of the final 5,000 tons would be dependent upon the arrival in the Middle East of the first of the shipments from the United States sent in replacement of the 10,000 tons already advanced by the MESC.

Steinhardt

64 American representative on the Middle East Supply Center.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.24/423a: Telegram

[Document 846]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 23, 1942—5 p.m.

461. 1. The Turkish Ambassador has informed the Department of the effort which is being made by his Government to charter three Swedish vessels now in the Baltic for the purpose of lifting wheat from an American port to a Turkish port. It is understood that the lifting of about 100,000 tons of wheat by these vessels is contemplated.

2. When the Ambassador has received information to the effect that the chartering has been accomplished, he intends to file with Lend Lease a requisition for the wheat. In connection with discussion of the procedure to be followed, there arises the question of the terms under which the wheat is to be obtained by the Turks. While this Government was glad to gratify the Turkish Government by furnishing on a non-cash reimbursable basis the 15,000 tons of wheat which was the subject of considerable discussion recently, as well as the 6,000 tons which is expected to be lifted by a Turkish vessel, the furnishing on that basis of the quantity now sought by the Turks raises real problems. The Department would appreciate being informed whether, to your knowledge, the Turkish Government has valid reason to believe that it will be able to obtain this considerable quantity of wheat through Lend Lease on a basis other than cash reimbursable.

3. We have suggested to the Ambassador informally that arrangements might be worked out, should his Government prefer, for the wheat to be paid for in Turkish currency rather than in dollars, such funds to be deposited in Turkey to the credit of this Government, and to be made available to it for use in connection with the purchase and exportation of Turkish commodities.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.24/424a: Telegram

[Document 847]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 25, 1942—1 p.m.

465. With reference to the Department’s 461 of September 23, 5 p.m., our prospective needs for the funds required for an extensive preemptive program in Turkey, and the substantial quantities of wheat which the Turks appear hopeful of providing the bottoms to lift leads the Department to the conclusion that it would be a mistake to grant on any basis other than cash reimbursement wheat over and above the two lots totaling 21,000 tons which Lend-Lease, at your request, is providing for non-cash reimbursement. The Department believes it would be well, therefore, to discourage any hopes the Turks might nurture for large quantities of wheat from the U. S. without making immediate payment either in dollars or Turkish pounds.

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/424: Telegram

[Document 848]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, September 25, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 11:43 p.m.]

954. Department’s 461, September 23.

1. In course of my conversation with Prime Minister yesterday he informed me that a condition of chartering of the three Swedish vessels to lift wheat from an American port was these vessels bring 25,000 tons of chrome from Turkey to Sweden and Turkish Government provide motor fuel to operate vessels. He admitted the 25,000 tons of chrome could only be destined ultimately for Germany as present Swedish requirements are but a fraction of this amount. He also readily agreed that the foregoing terms were unquestionably being imposed upon the Swedish owners by Germany as a condition of safe conduct for the vessels.

I have personal knowledge of the status of these three Swedish vessels and of the terms which the Germans have repeatedly sought to impose on their owner as a condition of safe conduct. The information was given me about a year ago by Axel Johnson the owner. On my arrival in the Department I will be glad to furnish the details. In my opinion it is most unlikely that Turkish Government will succeed in chartering these vessels for the purpose desired.

2. I do not know of any valid reason that the Turkish Government has to believe that it will be able to obtain 100,000 tons of wheat through Lend-Lease on a non-cash reimbursable basis other perhaps than the assurance that a reasonable amount of wheat would be made available for vessels owned or chartered by it coupled with the generous treatment thus far accorded it in respect of Lend-Lease shipments in general on a non-cash reimbursable basis and 1000 [21000] tons of wheat already promised on this basis in particular.

3. When the Department and the Lend-Lease Administration have fixed the total amount of wheat to be made available to the Turkish Government on a non-cash reimbursable basis there should be no great difficulty in persuading the Turkish Government to accept the Department’s suggestion that any additional quantities be paid for in Turkish pounds such funds to be deposited in Turkey to the credit of the American Government and to be made available to it for use in connection with the purchase and exportation of Turkish commodities.

Steinhardt

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 867.24/450: Telegram

[Document 849]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 22, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 10:10 p.m.]

1052. Department’s 461, September 23, paragraph 1. I have ascertained that Turkish-Swedish negotiations for charter of three Swedish vessels by Turkey have broken down because Germans have refused to allow these ships to leave Baltic. It is opinion of Foreign Office that there is no possibility of negotiations being renewed.

Department will recall that in chrome negotiations the Minister for Foreign Affairs65 requested British to let him have 5,000 tons of chrome for delivery to Sweden in connection with charter of Swedish vessels. It appears that Swedes insisted upon delivery of chrome as soon as first Swedish vessel arrived in Turk waters. Turks now admit their belief that chrome demand had been made at German instigation and that chrome would probably have gone to Germany.

Kelley

65 Numan Menemencioğlu.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 867.24/517: Telegram

[Document 850]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 29, 1942—noon.66

1085. My 1052, October 22. The Minister of Foreign Affairs today, in response to my inquiry with regard to the status of the negotiations for charter of Swedish vessels to transport wheat from the United States, said that the matter had practically fallen through as a result of difficulties arising out of the agreement between the Swedes and the Germans that whenever a Swedish ship leaves the Baltic another must replace it. He said that the Turkish Government was now seeking to purchase two old Panamanian vessels.

I raised this matter with the Minister for Foreign Affairs because the Swedish Minister informed me yesterday that it was his understanding that the matter of the charter of Swedish vessels had not yet fallen through. He said that he had not yet received a definite answer from the Turkish Government. He also mentioned the agreement existing with regard to the Swedish ships in the Baltic but observed that there were Swedish ships outside of the Baltic which might be chartered.

Kelley

66 Receipt date not indicated. Marginal note states: “Original not received by wire. Copied from mail confirmation.”

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 867.5018/11: Telegram

[Document 851]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 13, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received November 14—7:05 a.m.]

1153. In the course of an important address made to the Grand National Assembly on the 11th on the serious economic situation prevailing in Turkey the Prime Minister recalled that since the end of spring and the ending of summer the country had experienced serious shortage of cereals and that the Government has taken various steps in order to overcome this shortage by requesting cereals of the British and Americans by seeking means of transportation for cereals which can be obtained abroad and by taking 25% of the crop from the farmers.

The 15,000 tons of wheat promised respectively by the Ambassador of Great Britain and the United States he continued have been delivered and in addition the British have promised 7,800 tons of oats more than half of which has been delivered. United States in addition to the 15,000 tons already granted Turkey holds at its disposition in America 6,000 tons of wheat which a Turkish vessel will go to pick up in the near future. It is hoped that the aid of the British and Americans will continue in this sense.

Furthermore, the Government has sought everywhere for means of transportation. All of its efforts to buy German boats in Portuguese ports have failed for lack of the consent of the Portuguese Government; negotiations to obtain Swedish ships continue but it seems unlikely they will be successful and steps to purchase Panamanian ships in America have not reached a definite stage. On the other hand negotiations with France with the full knowledge of the belligerents for the lease of certain French ships seem to have been successfully concluded although no definite and positive arrangement has yet been made and it is unfortunately possible that recent events may affect this territorial expansion [sic].

Kelley

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 867.24/521: Telegram

[Document 852]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, December 5, 1942—3 p.m.

635. The appropriate authorities of this Government have been giving sympathetic consideration to the urgent desire of the Turkish Government to purchase or charter ships to transport wheat from the United States to Turkey. This desire has been stressed to the Department since the arrival here of Sevki Alhan,67 and was emphasized to the Under Secretary by the Turkish Ambassador some weeks ago. At that time Mr. Welles pointed out that there was no matter in which he was more deeply interested or regarding which this Government was more anxious to be of assistance to the Turkish Government, but that the Turkish authorities would of course realize the urgent need of the United States, for war purposes, to avail itself of all shipping resources.

It appears that the various efforts of the Turks to charter neutral shipping have encountered serious difficulties, and the Embassy here feels that the only practical solution would be for this Government to authorize the purchase or charter by Turkey of two or three vessels under our control. Such action would be at a very considerable expense to our war effort. If this Government should now go beyond the undertaking it has already given to sell Turkey any reasonable amount of wheat and should also undertake to provide tonnage to transport it, we could do so only on the basis of a specific inducement which would compensate for the serious sacrifice we would make at this moment. Turkey may be able to offer such inducements in connection with strategic materials.

We are confident that the Turkish Government will appreciate our urgent necessities and the numerous refusals we have been forced to make to other friendly States whose demands for tonnage are similarly pressing. We want to accommodate Turkey in this matter, but can do so only on the basis of a distinct quid pro quo.

You may, in your discretion, discuss this matter in the friendliest spirit but in all frankness with the Turkish authorities. You may consider it preferable to await the return of Ambassador Steinhardt, with whom the subject was discussed at some length.

Hull

67 The Turkish Minister.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.24/521: Telegram

[Document 853]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, January 1, 1943—4 p.m.

1. Department’s no. 635, December 5. Turkish Embassy is again pressing the question of possible acquisition of ships by Turkey. The Department believes it desirable for you to discuss the matter with the Turkish authorities along the lines of the Department’s telegram under reference, and will be glad to learn the Turkish Government’s reaction.

Hull

Efforts by the American and British Governments to acquire Turkish chrome and to prevent its sale by Turkey to GermanyEfforts by the American and British Governments to acquire Turkish chrome and to prevent its sale by Turkey to Germany68

68 Continued from Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 936–974.

[854] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 11, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 10:02 p.m.]

867.24/326: Telegram

[855] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 13, 1942—6 p.m. [Received June 14—1:47 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M)/7209: Telegram

[856] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 20, 1942—10 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/15b: Telegram

[857] The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 18, 1942—2 p.m. [Received September 18—10:40 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/76: Telegram

[858] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, September 25, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 11:05 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/82: Telegram

[859] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 27, 1942—4 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/85a: Telegram

[860] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 30, 1942—7 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/82: Telegram

[861] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 5, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 9:52 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/96: Telegram

[862] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 6, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 11:06 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/97: Telegram

[863] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 10, 1942—6 p.m. [Received October 11—1:35 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/99: Telegram

[864] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 16, 1942—5 p.m. [Received October 17—10:56 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/107: Telegram

[865] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 21, 1942—4 p.m. [Received October 22—7:28 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/116: Telegram

[866] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, October 22, 1942—7 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/107: Telegram

[867] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 26, 1942—4 p.m. [Received October 27—7:42 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/117: Telegram

[868] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 29, 1942—4 p.m. [Received October 30—10:15 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/124: Telegram

[869] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/116: Telegram

[870] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 31, 1942—5 p.m. [Received November 3—9:50 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/131: Telegram

[871] The Chargè in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 4, 1942—6 p.m. [Received November 5—12:55 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/134: Telegram

[872] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 22, 1942—10 p.m. [Received November 23—12:47 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/150: Telegram

[873] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 28, 1942—4 p.m. [Received December 9—12:54 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/163: Telegram

[874] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 28, 1942—8 p.m. [Received November 30—1:48 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/157: Telegram

[875] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 6, 1942—10 a.m. [Received December 7—1:05 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/174: Telegram

[876] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, December 11, 1942—10 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/174: Telegram

[877] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 12, 1942—noon. [Received 2:11 p.m.]

841.24/1666: Telegram

[878] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 13, 1942—4 p.m. [Received December 14—6:40 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/187: Telegram

[879] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 13, 1942—6 p.m. [Received December 15—8:41 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/190: Telegram

[880] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, December 21, 1942—1 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/187: Telegram

[881] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 22, 1942—7 p.m. [Received December 23—7:05 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/205: Telegram

[882] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 23, 1942—7 p.m. [Received December 25—7:21 p.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/211: Telegram

[883] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, December 23, 1942—7 p.m.

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/190: Telegram

[884] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 27, 1942—2 p.m. [Received December 28—4:42 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/214: Telegram

[885] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 28, 1942—1 p.m. [Received December 29—6:30 a.m.]

811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/219: Telegram

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.24/326: Telegram

[Document 854]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 11, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 10:02 p.m.]

574. The British Ambassador69 told me this morning that in his opinion one of the principal German objectives in agreeing to furnish war materials to Turkey was to obtain larger chrome deliveries from Turkey in 1943. Having expressed this view to his Government he has today received instructions to take up with the Turkish authorities the renewal of the existing Anglo-Turkish chrome agreement70 which expires on January 8, 1943.

Steinhardt

69 Sir Hughe M. Knatchbull-Hugessen.

70 For a summary of this agreement, which was signed January 8, 1940, see telegram No. 158, September 25, 1940, 6 p.m., from the Chargé in Turkey, Foreign Relations, 1940, vol. iii, p. 952; for prolongation of the contract, in an agreement of December 23, 1941, see ibid., 1941, vol. iii, pp. 951–974, passim.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M)/7209: Telegram

[Document 855]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 13, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received June 14—1:47 a.m.]

598. My 574, June 11, 5 p.m. British Ambassador informed me yesterday Saraçoğlu71 had expressed readiness of Turkish Government to enter into negotiations for a new Anglo-Turkish chrome agreement.

Steinhardt

71 Sükrü Saraçoğlu, Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/15b: Telegram

[Document 856]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 20, 1942—10 p.m.

291. Your 598, June 13, 6 p.m.; your 574, June 11, 5 p.m.; and your 548, June 6, 3 p.m.72

1. The Department believes that in company with your British colleague, you should pursue in the immediate future negotiations for a new Anglo-Turkish chrome agreement. For your guidance the Department is summarizing in this telegram its thoughts on the general lines which might be followed in these negotiations as well as certain suggestions for your consideration in connection with the problem of chrome movement during the balance of this year. In the latter connection, your 548 of June 6 was most helpful.

2. It is the Department’s understanding (largely based on the Embassy’s despatch no. 1793 of November 3, 194173 ) that the essence of the Turkish-German chrome agreement is that upon the fulfillment by the Germans of certain conditions, the Turkish Government will authorize the exportation of an annual quantity of 90,000 tons of chrome for the period beginning January 15, 1943 and ending December 31, 1944, but that since Turkey has undertaken to sell to Great Britain all stocks of chrome ore above ground at the end of 1941 and the total production from January 1, 1942 to January 8, 1943, it is not possible, if we are alert, for Germany to purchase any chrome mined in Turkey prior to January 8, 1943, but on the contrary Germany must look for the satisfaction of its tonnage to production subsequent to January 8, 1943. The problem of minimizing Germany’s benefits under its chrome agreement with Turkey would appear to fall into two parts. First, the effective removal from Germany’s potential grasp by January 8, 1943 of the maximum tonnage now mined or in sight prior to that date. The second part relates to minimizing Germany’s actual benefit when the German-Turkish agreement begins to operate.

3. In connection with the first point above, the Department appreciates your constant and effective attention to this problem. It has no suggestions of importance to add to steps you have pursued for increased movement by rail and by water transport. The Department wishes however, to have explored the possibility that the military authorities in the Middle East could make available to Turkey one or more ships of medium tonnage which would operate in the coastwise chrome movement under the Turkish flag. In this same connection, do you see any possibility of diverting to this purpose the Danubian vessels which you reported in your 483 of May 2773 as being negotiated for by the Turkish authorities? In connection with the limitations placed on shipments from Guleman by the capacity of the rope-way from the mines to the loading station, have all possibilities been explored for an improvised expansion in the rope-way’s capacity or the utilization of other methods which might be installed even at greatly increased cost?

4. From the review of the chrome situation contained in your 548 of June 6, it is clear that however effective the efforts are to increase the movement of chrome to the accessible ports, a complete clearance at the mines, loading stations and inaccessible ports appears beyond the realm of practicality. Without slackening, therefore, in any way the combined US-British-Turkish efforts in this respect, it would appear necessary that we should at this time give consideration to (a) any available methods of reducing output for the balance of the year, particularly in the mining areas where your report indicates the largest stocks will remain by the year’s end and (b) efforts whereby we render unusable or unavailable the ore we are unable to lift.

In connection with (a) above, it is suggested that thought be given to all possible devices such as payment of bonuses for declaring a moratorium on production. If the Turkish authorities could be persuaded to a proposal of this sort, it is not believed that the increased expense to the US Government involved in making substantial penalty payments therefor would be an obstacle. Failing a practical possibility of securing Turkish agreement to such an arrangement, the suggestion has been made that at inaccessible ports such as Fethiye, it might be possible to move the ore out on rafts and dump it in deep water.

5. If no effective possibility is contained in paragraph 4 above, other methods of lessening production should not be ruled out. The Department would be interested in learning whether or not any such plans exist on the part of the British, and if so how effective and how easy to institute your judgment indicates they would be.

6. On the pessimistic assumption that by whatever methods, there will still remain in Turkey say 100,000 tons of ore above ground on January 8, 1943, what measures in your judgment might be taken to strengthen our legal claims thereon? Disregarding the question of penalty payments by this Government (which should not be considered for these purposes an obstacle) what further steps, if any, would you suggest to strengthen our position in this respect?

7. Turning now to the British suggestion regarding the form of our chrome agreement for 1943, we believe that their scheme has considerable merit. As we understand it, the purpose is to attempt to persuade the Turks to supply us predominantly with high grade ore while selling Germany as large a proportion of low grade ore as is possible. Admittedly this procedure rests on the rather hopeful assumption that the Germans have negotiated a normal contract with penalties or premiums for variation in ore content, and that the Turks are not committed beyond the provisions of such a normal contract. The Department would appreciate it if you would thoroughly explore with the British this scheme and afford the Department your comments as to its probable effectiveness. All of the above is on the assumption that the Turk-German agreement cannot be broken. As you know, this Government is prepared to consider any and all steps designed to further our objectives with regard to chrome as stated earlier in this telegram.

8. For your information, the present United Nations’ outlook can be summarized as follows: Consumption in 1942 will exceed moderately shipments received from all so-called “safe” sources for the rest of the year plus production of US domestic mines. Due to the outlook for increased US domestic production in 1943, no draft on our stockpile is indicated in that year on the basis of present estimates. Apart, however, from denial to Germany, the fact remains that not only are all receipts of chrome from Turkey highly important for the balance of 1942, but shipments from Turkey in 1943 in maximal amounts would be most welcome.

9. This telegram has been repeated to London.

Hull

72 Telegram No. 548 not printed.

73 Not printed.

73 Not printed.

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/76: Telegram

[Document 857]

The Ambassador in the United Kingdom (Winant) to the Secretary of State

London, September 18, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received September 18—10:40 a.m.]

5221. We were asked to call at the Foreign Office this morning and were handed the following memorandum: “His Majesty’s Ambassador at Angora was instructed in June 1942 to negotiate with the Turkish Government a new chrome agreement for a year from January 8, 1943, on which date the renewal of the existing agreement expired. Under their existing agreement with the Germans the Turks are bound to deliver in 1943, 90,000 tons to Germany, provided the Germans carry out their obligations under the Clodius agreement.75 The Turkish Government were therefore asked to conclude an agreement with us providing for an option to take up any chrome which the Turks were not forced to deliver to the Germans under the Clodius agreement.

2. In spite of repeated reminders it has not proved possible to make any progress with the Turkish Government regarding chrome for 1943. The Turkish Government on the other hand have been engaged in negotiations with the Germans, who are apparently attempting to expand them into a general attempt to secure long term contracts. As regards chrome in particular it seems likely that the Germans are attempting to persuade the Turks in the course of the negotiations now proceeding in Berlin to give them chrome in return for the armaments which they are prepared to supply to Turkey under the 100,000,000 mark credit. The Germans also appear to be attempting to obtain a lien on Turkish chrome supplies for the years following 1944.

3. His Majesty’s Ambassador at Angora reports that he is in close touch with his United States colleague and that they intend to speak on concerted lines to the Turkish Prime Minister.76 Instructions are now being sent to Sir H. Knatchbull-Hugessen to inform the Turkish Government that His Majesty’s Government confidently assume that they will receive at least equal treatment with the Germans as regards the chrome output for 1943; this we interpret to mean that at least 50% of the total Turkish output for 1943 will be available for us and that we shall receive equal treatment as regards grade, weight and transport facilities. Sir H. Knatchbull-Hugessen will press the Turkish Government strongly for an immediate assurance to that effect, adding that we shall be prepared to pay the same prices as the Germans have offered which we understand to be 250 shillings a ton. This applies, of course only to ore mined after January 8, 1943.”

The British understand from secret sources that a new Turkish-German chrome agreement is in fact on the point of being concluded, and that the Turkish delegation at Berlin is pressing hard for action whereas the Government at Ankara is showing some slight resistance to the pressure.

We were told that the proposed arrangement (numbered paragraph 3 above) could be agreed to by the Turks without violating the Clodius agreement of 1939 [1941]. The Foreign Office considers that rightly or wrongly the British have gotten themselves into the position where the chrome question has become more or less the “acid test” of Turkey’s attitude toward the Allies. They are consequently most anxious to work something out.

We were told that the British Ambassador at Ankara is in very close touch with Ambassador Steinhardt and that presumably the latter has telegraphed the Department. They have asked us to do likewise, however, by way of emphasizing the urgency and importance they attach to the question.

Winant

75 Commercial agreement between Germany and Turkey signed at Ankara, October 9, 1941. Dr. Carl Clodius was the German negotiator. For a summary of provisions of agreement, see telegram No. 388, October 17, 1941, 7 p.m., from the Ambassador in Turkey, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 964.

76 Sükrü Saraçoğlu became Prime Minister on July 9, 1942.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/82: Telegram

[Document 858]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, September 25, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 11:05 p.m.]

953. British Ambassador and I have conferred with Prime Minister on the general subject of chrome with particular reference to the desire of British Government to contract for deliveries from 1943 to 1947 inclusive as the existing contract expires on January 8, 1943.

Hugessen stated he was authorized to propose a contract for deliveries in 1943 and 1944 under which British would purchase entire output of Turk chrome over and above the existing commitment to Germany under the Clodius agreement, the price to be the same as that paid by the Germans. In addition he proposed to contract for entire output for the years 1945, 1946, and 1947 or for duration of the war and 1 year beyond, whichever is the less.

Prime Minister agreed in principle to a contract for 1943 and 1944 deliveries which would assure to the British the entire output over and above the existing commitment to Germany of 90,000 tons in each of these 2 years. He was somewhat vague, however, in giving an assurance that British would receive such part of 90,000 tons destined for Germany in 43 and 44 as they might not be entitled to by reason of a failure to meet their obligation to deliver war material to Turkey prior to shipment of chrome.

Insofar as concerns 45, 46, and 47, Saraçoğlu stated he had recently flatly rejected a German proposal to purchase entire Turk chrome output for these 3 years. He said he would prefer not to “tie his hands” but if Britain and the United States insisted he would contract to deliver to Britain or the United States 50% of total output in each of these years. He added it would be extremely difficult and might even be regarded as hostile for Turk Government to obligate itself at present time to deliver more than 50% of total output in these 3 years shortly after having refused to contract with Germany for any part of output during same years.

When reference was made to fact that unless production of mines in 43 is substantially greater than it has been in 42 there will be little chrome for the British after the provisions of the Clodius agreement have been met, Saraçoğlu blamed the British for the decline in production since 1940 stating that they had failed to provide the necessary material to maintain production and clearly implying that he believed this policy to have been carefully calculated to restrict the output. He then suggested that he [would] agree to furnish Britain with 100,000 tons of chrome in 1943 against deliveries of 100,000 tons of wheat. When asked how he expected to suddenly double the current production of the mines he replied that he would do it “even if I have to use a division of soldiers for the purpose”.

The Prime Minister rejected a suggestion that he enter into a contract with the British for 90,000 tons in 1943 and a like amount in 1944 with the understanding that if production in either of these years failed to total 180,000 tons Germany and Britain each receive one half of the actual production. He said that in view of the present limited production such a contract would be regarded by the Germans as deliberately intended to undermine the specific obligation of the Turkish Government under the Clodius agreement. However, he categorically agreed that no chrome would be provided for Germany in 1943 or 1944 other than the amounts stipulated in the Clodius agreement.

Towards the close of the discussion, Saraçoğlu referred to the great disparity between the price of 140 which the British are obligated to pay for deliveries to January 8, 1943 and the price of 270 which the Germans have agreed to pay after that date pointing out that there is already a tendency at the mines to still further restrict production in anticipation of the higher price to be received after January 8. He urged Hugessen to meet the German price immediately, notwithstanding the terms of the existing contract, and thereby stimulate production at once if the British desired larger quantities of chrome prior to January 8.

I understand that London already authorized Hugessen to offer 270 for all new chrome mined prior to January 8 but is not agreeable to paying more than the contract price of 140 for chrome already mined. In view of the fact that the mines are not under surveillance and that the stock piles can readily be tampered with, I am of the opinion that this distinction between new and old mined chrome will not serve the desired purpose. I regard it as highly desirable that Hugessen be authorized as soon as possible to pay 270 for all chrome mined prior to January 8. Failing such action, I am convinced only low grade ore will be furnished British prior to January 8 and a considerable amount of high grade ore mined prior to that date will be secreted in order to obtain benefit of much higher price to be paid by Germans after January 8.

I should appreciate Department’s views and instructions on the general subject of a new chrome contract as Hugessen’s negotiations have reached a stage at which the cooperation of our Government would be most helpful.

Steinhardt

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/85a: Telegram

[Document 859]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 27, 1942—4 p.m.

471. 1. The Department understands from British telegrams on chrome exchanged between London and Ankara (repeated to Washington) that you and your British colleague are in agreement that it is necessary to meet the German price of 270 shillings per ton on all present stocks as well as ore produced between now and January 8, 1943.

2. The Department further understands that the British Government agrees to the necessity of so amending their contract and has offered to share equally with the United States the cost of such increase in price.

3. The Board of Economic Warfare with the full concurrence of the Department is firmly of the opinion that the matter of price should be no obstacle in holding to a minimum German takings of Turkish chrome after January 8, 1943. The Board is prepared to issue to this end the necessary purchase authority.

4. You are therefore empowered in consultation with your British colleague to offer the Turks any price up to 270 shillings per ton for ore now above ground plus ore mined between now and January 8, 1943, provided that the Turks agree to cooperate fully and effectively along the following lines: a) Every single ton of ore now above ground and produced up to January 8, 1943 comes to us and not to the Germans.

b) Every necessary facility is afforded us for inspection and supervision of the whole course of production and the stock situation.

c) Assurances are given of continuing effective cooperation in the movement of ore to accessible ports and removal of ore from those ports.

5. It is believed here that there is no reason why our action on financial terms should be confined to merely meeting the Germans. The Department therefore suggests that you discuss with your British colleague the advisability of outbidding the Germans by offering a price, for example, of 300 shillings a ton. The Board of Economic Warfare is thoroughly sympathetic to this view. Please telegraph urgently your recommendation on this. The necessary authority for any further steps will be given promptly.

6. Estimates vary here and in London regarding tonnage to which the proposed increase in price will apply. Please telegraph on this point. Our present assumption is that present stocks and interim production to January 8, 1943 would be between 100,000 and 250,000 tons.

7. The Department will telegraph in the immediate future its views regarding general strategy of seeking to break impending German chrome agreement. This telegram is merely designed to give you necessary authority to deal with this aspect. Denial of chrome to the Germans to minimum figure is regarded as of most vital importance.

8. In addition to preemptive element, Turk chrome remains highly important to United Nations on supply grounds as well as having great importance in public judgment of Turkish policy. Please do not fail to make these points with the Turks. This telegram has been repeated to London.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/82: Telegram

[Document 860]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 30, 1942—7 p.m.

481. 1. Your 953 of September 25, 4 p.m. was received after the dispatch of the Department’s 471 of September 27, 4 p.m.77 The latter telegram, however, contained the necessary authority from this Government for your British colleague to pay 270 shillings per ton for chrome now above ground as well as for ore mined between now and January 8, 1943. The Department understands that your British colleague had been similarly authorized by London.

2. Your urgent consideration and report on the question of offering an even higher price for this ore is requested. There would appear to be definite advantages in making it positively attractive for the producers to sell us all high grade ore which could be mined prior to the expiration of the contract with the British.

3. It is the Department’s understanding that the British have exercised their option to buy all undelivered stocks of ore on hand on January 8, 1943. This is obviously important in order to secure legal title thereto and the Department would appreciate confirmation of this action.

4. The chrome problem, in the Department’s views, falls into three sections. The first relates to holding the Turks to the absolute fulfillment of the last letter of their contract with the British. Unilateral amendment of the British contract has now been authorized to the substantial financial benefit of the Turks and, as you are aware, we are prepared to go further in this direction. We are determined to leave no stone unturned in securing the Turks’ strict adherence to the terms of their contract and financial concessions on our part are of no moment compared to denying the chrome to the Germans and securing it for ourselves. If we grant concessions, however, we must obviously have satisfactory assurances that the Turks will do their part. In this connection please refer to paragraph 4 (a), (b) and (c) of the Department’s 471 regarding the character of the assurances to be sought.

5. The second phase of the problem concerns taking every possible step to prevent the Turks modifying the Germans’ obligations under the Clodius Agreement to the advantage of the Germans. Strong representations should be made in the effort to forestall any attempt on the part of the Turks (a) to relax delivery requirements stipulated of Germany; (b) to grant an increase over the maximum figure of 90,000 tons of chrome in each of the years 1943 and 1944, as is called for by the Clodius Agreement and the Arms Agreement toward which the latter looked; or (c) to anticipate 1944 chrome deliveries in 1943. In this connection every effort should be made to hold the Turks to their earlier informal assurances that we should receive equal treatment with the Germans in 1943 and 1944. If this proves impossible, a contract should be sought along the lines described in your telegram under reference, whereby the entire output above 90,000 tons in each of the 2 years, 1943 and 1944, should go to the British or ourselves. A specification of grades should also be sought to the end that Germany be forced to accept as large as possible a tonnage of low grade ore and we receive high grade ore in the maximum proportion attainable. Needless to say, continued pressure should be exerted to maintain the movement of ore to the accessible ports at the maximum level between now and the year end and thereafter, until the last ton to which we hold title has been cleared from Turkey.

6. While we are most concerned with intensifying in 1943 and 1944 the chrome deficiency with which the Germans are apparently confronted, it seems prudent to safeguard our position for the years following 1944. Please discuss with your British colleague this point. It would not appear to the Department necessary to actually conclude a contract for these future years, provided it were possible to secure the clearest of undertakings upon the part of the Turks to reach no agreement with the Germans for such future period prior to consultation with us, and with the further proviso that Turkey would deliver to the British or the United States a minimum of 50 percent of the total output in each of the years 1945, 1946 and 1947, or for the duration of the war and 1 year beyond, whichever is the less.

7. There is little appeal in a plan to increase markedly Turkish chrome production through furnishing machinery, etc. As the Department has stated before, Turkish chrome is of definite supply interest but this is substantially outweighed by preemptive considerations. To increase production would merely serve to increase the risk of Germany securing larger supplies in the future, while temporarily providing us with chrome which we would like, but if necessary can do without.

8. The measures described in the preceding paragraphs are designed to secure our minimum objective. We must hold at all cost what we are clearly entitled to. The third aspect of the problem, as the Department sees it, relates to an effort actually to break the Clodius Agreement, at least to the extent that it concerns chrome. The Department fully appreciates that the Clodius Agreement, including the understanding on chrome incorporated in it, has for nearly a year represented a fait accompli. The Department further realizes that the Turks possess a limited ability, or even desire, to repudiate it, unless we are in a position to provide very substantial counter-benefits. It is this possibility that we are prepared urgently and thoroughly to examine. Granted the will and even the availability of materials, it is self-evident that shipping limitations would represent a major difficulty. Please explore carefully with your British colleague the character and amounts of commodities or materials which might constitute an attraction sufficient to tempt the Turks to a calculated partial or total default on their deliveries to Germany under the Clodius Agreement. Wheat in large quantities is obviously a possibility. Please report fully on this subject with particular regard to goods of a character which the Turks need and which, even at great sacrifice, we could supply, but of which the Germans could give none at all. The various departments and agencies which would be concerned have not been consulted in this, but the Department believes that there would be every willingness to achieve the utmost in the form of deliveries of commodities, manufactured goods, machinery and equipment in extremely short supply if it could be demonstrated that by so doing the Clodius Agreement and hence Germany’s economic hold on Turkey could be ruptured. This line of thought should not be communicated to the Turks but should be explored with your British colleague and your comments reported to the Department.

9. If strenuous efforts fail to move the Turks from their obligations under the Clodius Agreement, then obviously our efforts must be directed along other lines. These would appear to be (a) a reduction in the physical availability or transport of chrome ore destined for Germany and (b) a delay or interruption in the delivery of German goods to Turkey. On the former, renewed consideration should be given by you in conjunction with your British colleague to various possible measures which were discussed in the Department’s 291 of June 20. The Department appreciates the thought given your reply at the time but would be interested in any modification that time may have effected in the Embassy’s judgment in the matter. Regarding (b) we have asked the British here for a careful examination and study in London.

10. In summary, the Department regards it as vitally important, predominantly for preemptive reasons, to assure first, strict adherence by the Turks to the British chrome contract and second, no amendment in Germany’s favor to the Turks’ existing commitments to Germany. Beyond that a bold line of attack on the Clodius Agreement itself is envisaged which, if it should fail, must be followed by every practicable measure to reduce Germany’s actual receipts of chrome to which she is or may be entitled.

11. This telegram has been sent to Ankara and repeated to London.

Hull

77 Stamp of Division of Defense Materials on telegram No. 953 indicates telegram was not received in that Division until September 28.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/96: Telegram

[Document 861]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 5, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 9:52 p.m.]

986. Your 481, September 30. Present status of chrome negotiations is as follows: 1. British Ambassador is presenting today to Prime Minister written proposals regarding purchase of chrome covering following points. a. The Turkish Government is informed British Government intends to purchase as provided in chrome purchase agreement of December 23, 1941 all chrome irrespective of grade or location produced in Turkey up to January 8, 1943. British Government assumes accordingly that (1) every ton of ore above ground by January 8 will be declared and sold to British Government on terms stated in purchase agreement, (2) every facility will be given representatives of British Government for inspecting, measuring and sampling stocks of chrome and for supervising permanent dumps in order to prevent pilferage and (3) Turk authorities will continue effective cooperation in transporting the ore to accessible ports and in regard to the removal of the ore from those ports. Notwithstanding the specific price laid down in the purchase agreement the British Government is ready as from September 25, 1942 to pay for all chrome ore hitherto undeclared whether already in stock or newly produced between that date and January 8, 1943 the same sliding scale price as that offered by German Government for chrome purchased under the Clodius agreement. (This notification represents a confirmation in writing of what the British Ambassador has already informed the Turks orally.)

b. As regards the purchase of chrome in 1943 and (four) [1944] British Government proposes that for every ton of ore delivered to the Germans between January 8, 1943 and December 31, 1944 in virtue of the existing obligations of Turkey under the Clodius agreement a ton of equal grade and accessibility shall be delivered pari passu to Great Britain. This is stated to mean that the British Government during that period will receive as much ore as German Government. All surplus ore after the completion of aforementioned deliveries mined between January 8, 1943 and December 31, 1944 shall be reserved for British Government. Turkish Government shall not refuse to sell to Great Britain or issue export licenses for chrome on ground of any hypothetical obligation to deliver chrome to Germany against some future delivery of war material or goods by Germany to Turkey. (The British Ambassador in his oral discussions with Prime Minister proposed that Turkey deliver to Great Britain all chrome over 45,000 tons produced between January 8, 1943 and December 31, 1944. Prime Minister rejected this proposal on ground that Turkish Government was obligated to deliver more than 45,000 tons of chrome to Germany in that period in the event that Germany effected certain deliveries. Hugessen states that in subsequent discussions with the Prime Minister of other possible solutions Saraçoğlu indicated that he would accept a proposal that Turkey deliver chrome to Britain pari passu with deliveries to Germany.)

With regard to the purchase of chrome after January 1, 1945 it is proposed that this matter be further discussed when the question of the deliveries of chrome in 1943 and 1944 has been settled. (As the Embassy has reported to the Department the British Ambassador proposed orally to the Prime Minister that Great Britain purchase the whole of the Turkish chrome output for 3 years starting from January 1, 1945 or for the duration of the war and 1 year thereafter whichever is the less. The Prime Minister stated that he could not agree to this proposal because he had already rejected a German proposal for the purchase of the entire Turkish chrome output in those years. He said that he was prepared to conclude an agreement that would ensure Great Britain 50% or total output in those years but he preferred that matter be left in abeyance on understanding that British Government would have a prior right to conclude an agreement in event of any other party seeking an agreement for Turkish chrome after January 1, 1945.)

2. British Ambassador discussed chrome negotiations with President Inönü on October 1. He took occasion to refer to certain remarks made by Prime Minister which seemed to indicate Turkish Government questioned right of British Government to purchase all chrome mined prior to January 8 and to point out to President Great Britain’s right in this respect was incontestable and a serious situation would result if chrome which Great Britain was entitled to purchase was withheld from her with a view to delivery to Germany. Hugessen also declared his Government considered it most important Germany should receive no chrome beyond the amount specified in the Clodius agreement and observed in this connection that chrome was the touchstone of Turkey’s attitude towards Great Britain. The Ambassador said that his Government noted with concern recent indications of a tendency to develop closer economic relations between Germany and Turkey and he expressed the hope that these relations would not undergo any further expansion. Hugessen states that the President’s attitude was a most friendly and sympathetic one. He said that he understood the British position and desired to help in every way possible.

Kelley

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/97: Telegram

[Document 862]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 6, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 11:06 p.m.]

989. My 986, October 5.

1. British Ambassador states Prime Minister adopted a most friendly and sympathetic attitude when Ambassador called upon him yesterday to present note containing proposals of British Government regarding purchase of chrome. Minister read note carefully. He did not question in any way right of British Government to acquire all chrome produced in Turkey up to January 8. Regarding proposals concerning purchases of chrome in 1943 and 44 Minister agreed to the principle of deliveries to Great Britain pari passu with those to Germany provided it would not interfere with delivery to Germans of 45,000 tons to which they were entitled if they delivered the war material stipulated in the Clodius agreement. He therefore suggested the pari passu principle should be made effective from March 31, 1943, date of the termination of the Clodius agreement, instead of January 8, 1943. In discussing this point, the Minister observed that under Clodius agreement the Germans were entitled to 45,000 tons of chrome only if they delivered the war material to the value of 18,000,000 Turkish pounds specified in the agreement and that he had flatly rejected a German contention that they were entitled to 45,000 tons of chrome irrespective of the amount of war material which they might have delivered. In order to obtain the additional 135,000 tons of chrome, Germans would have to conclude a new agreement providing for delivery of additional war material desired by the Turkish Government. Minister remarked in this connection that the Turkish Government could, of course, insist upon delivery of military equipment which the Germans would find it difficult or impossible to deliver. Minister concluded by saying that he would turn over the note to the Minister for Foreign Affairs who would have charge of the further negotiations.

2. Prime Minister brought up again the question of wheat.78 He declared that he needed wheat in order to strengthen his hand in chrome negotiations. While he did not propose that delivery of wheat be tied up directly with delivery of chrome, he referred several times to his need of wheat in connection with chrome negotiations although he did not specify in what way the supply of wheat would be of assistance to him.

It is my view as well as that of British Ambassador that we should endeavor to find a way to take advantage in chrome negotiations of Prime Minister’s obsession in matter of procurement of wheat with a view to reducing as much as possible deliveries of chrome to Germany during 1943 and 1944. It is not possible to make any concrete recommendations in this matter at present time inasmuch as it is not clear as yet how an offer to supply wheat to Turkey can best be worked into chrome negotiations. I consider it most significant that Prime Minister has of his own accord several times brought up question of supply of wheat to Turkey in connection with chrome negotiations. However, it is too early to say whether an undertaking on our part to supply substantial quantities of wheat in 1943 and 44 would result in the Germans finding it impossible to reach an agreement with the Turks with regard to war material to be supplied by Germany in exchange for the 135,000 tons of chrome.

In the opinion of the two Embassies, wheat is the only commodity which is of sufficient attraction to the Turks to induce them to endeavor to evade their obligations under the Clodius agreement.

3. With regard to the adoption of measures calculated to reduce Germany’s actual receipts of chrome to which she is or may be entitled under the Clodius agreement, I have discussed this question with my British colleague, and we both feel that it is premature, in view of the present status of the chrome negotiations, to consider at the present time the formulation of such measures. The advisability of such measures as well as their character will depend, of course, largely on the outcome of our negotiations with the Turks, the attitude taken by the Turks in the negotiations, and the extent of the deliveries of chrome to Germany by Turkey.

Kelley

78 For correspondence on this subject, see pp. 727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 835] ff.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/99: Telegram

[Document 863]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 10, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received October 11—1:35 a.m.]

1004. My 989, October 6.

1. British Ambassador has had two conversations with Minister for Foreign Affairs79 with regard to British chrome proposals. Minister agreed that British should have all chrome produced up to January 8. Pie raised objections to British request to be allowed to send representatives to inspect chrome but agreed that matter should be subject of further discussion. With regard to third condition (paragraph 4c of Department’s 47180 ) he said that he could not agree to give priority of transport to United States between January 8 and March 31 because it would affect Turkey’s obligations in regard to 45,000 tons of chrome to Germany.

At second meeting Numan requested Ambassador to allow Turks to have 10,000 tons of chrome which he subsequently reduced to 5,000 from British stocks for delivery to Sweden in connection with the chartering of certain Swedish vessels to go to the United States to lift wheat for Turkey. Numan indicated that British acquiescence in Turkish request would greatly facilitate the negotiations.

2. With regard to chrome in 1943 and 1944 the Minister agreed to give British complete equality of treatment after March 31, 1943. With reference to British proposal that all surplus ore should be reserved for British Government Numan observed that there would probably be no surplus and if there was he wished to reserve a small quantity for Turkish use. He agreed to British proposal that Turkish Government should not refuse to sell chrome to British on the ground of any hypothetic obligation to deliver chrome to Germany against some future delivery of goods to Turkey.

3. With regard to chrome after January 1, 1945 Numan agreed definitely to give the British priority of option to make an agreement for chrome after that date over all Axis countries including Hungary, Rumania, et cetera. However, he said that he desired to retain liberty to make compensation agreements with neutral countries such as Sweden and Switzerland for small amounts of chrome against manufactured goods to be delivered to Turkey. He would guarantee that none of such chrome would go to Germany directly or indirectly.

4. With regard to the deliveries of chrome to Germany in 1943 and 1944 under the Clodius agreement, the Minister made the following statements. He said that the Turkish obligation in regard to the 45,000 tons of chrome after January 8 was not contingent upon the delivery of the 18,000,000 Turkish pounds of war material stipulated in the agreement, but upon the delivery of the 55,000,000 Turkish pounds of goods stipulated in Schedule I. If Germany delivered [a portion, Turkey] would deliver a corresponding amount including the appropriate proportion of chrome. Nothing, however, would go to Germany before German deliveries to Turkey. (I have been informed by a reliable source that up to the present Germany has delivered only 16,000,000 Turkish pounds of the 55,000,000 Turkish pounds of goods stipulated in Schedule I and that the competent Turkish authorities do not expect Germans to deliver more than 30 to 35,000,000 Turkish pounds of goods on Schedule la before end of Clodius agreement on March 31.)

Regarding delivery of remaining 135,000 tons of chrome to Germany Foreign Minister emphasized Turkey was obligated to conclude before March 31 a supplementary agreement with Germany providing for delivery of 135,000 tons of chrome in return for war material to be supplied by Germany to Turkey if Germany were willing to furnish war material desired by Turkey. Numan said Germans have offered to Turkey almost every conceivable sort of war material and Turkey would be guilty of bad faith if she now stated she did not desire war material from Germany or made unreasonable demands in respect to kind of material desired. Numan said during recent negotiations in Berlin, Germans had offered Turks far more war material than they could pay for, up to a total of 400,000,000 reichsmarks. Turks had insisted on cutting down this amount to 100,000,000 reichsmarks. Germans then proposed that this figure be reduced to 80,000,000 reichsmarks and that a separate agreement be concluded covering delivery of war material to value of 20,000,000 reichsmarks against chrome. (20,000,000 reichsmarks represents value of 135,000 tons of chrome at price recently agreed between Turks and Germans for the 45,000 tons.) Numan said that it had not yet been definitely decided whether there would be one agreement covering delivery of 100,000,000 reichsmarks of war material, 20,000,000 reichsmarks of which would be paid for in chrome or whether there would be two agreements, one for 80,000,000 reichsmarks involving no delivery of chrome and one for 20,000,000 reichsmarks to be paid for entirely in chrome. Foreign Minister in response to arguments of British Ambassador against conclusion of a supplementary agreement with Germany involving delivery of 135,000 tons of chrome took very firmly the position that the Turkish Government would be violating its obligations under Clodius agreement if it sought to avoid the conclusion of the further agreement provided for in that agreement when the Germans were willing to supply the requisite war materials.

5. Although the Turks appear to have definitely decided that they must conclude and are well on the way to committing themselves to the conclusion of the supplementary agreement involving the supply of 135,000 tons of chrome to Germany I propose to see the Minister for Foreign Affairs as soon as the holidays permit with a view to ascertaining whether it is possible in any way to prevent or delay the conclusion or reduce the scope of supplementary agreement under consideration with Germans. If it proves impossible to move Turks from conclusion of supplementary agreement I shall press Foreign Minister as hard as possible to hold Germans to strict fulfillment of their obligations under Clodius agreement and not to agree to any amendments to that agreement in their favor. I shall emphasize importance of Turkish chrome to us from supply point of view and consequent necessity of our continuing to receive Turkish chrome insisting in this connection that we should receive at least equal treatment with Germans in 1943 and 1944.

Kelley

79 Numan Menemencioğlu.

80 Dated September 27, 4 p.m., p. 748 [Pg. 748 includes portions of Doc. 858 and Doc. 859].

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/107: Telegram

[Document 864]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 16, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received October 17—10:56 p.m.]

1029. My 1004, October 10. I had a lengthy discussion of the chrome situation with Foreign Minister this morning.

1. With regard to chrome produced up to January 8, Minister said entire output would belong to British. He said he had requested British to allow him to have 5,000 tons out of their stocks for delivery to the Swedes in connection with Turkish chartering of three Swedish vessels. He referred rather indignantly to British request for permission to send inspectors to mines to supervise chrome stocks. He said Turkish Government could not permit foreigners to travel about the country for purpose of checking up on Turkish Government. If British were allowed to do that in respect to chrome Turks would have to allow Germans to do same thing regarding products which they were buying. Explained to Minister purpose of British request pointing out that British had a chrome expert who visited ports and railway stations where British accepted chrome for purpose of sampling and grading ore and determining amount to be paid. I said that if British now accepted chrome at mines it would be necessary for this expert to examine stocks of ore at mines with a view to determining quality and quantity of chrome. His visit to mines would not be for purpose of checking up on Turkish Government as Minister seemed to think. He then said that he would discuss matter further with British and he thought that some arrangement could be worked out which would satisfy both parties.

2. With regard to deliveries of chrome to Germans under Clodius agreement Numan said that Turkey was obligated to deliver 45,000 tons of chrome to Germany under that agreement prior to March 31, 1943 if Germans supplied 55,000,000 Turk pounds of goods specified in Schedule I. If Germans delivered only a part of the goods, Turkey was obligated to furnish Germany a corresponding proportion of the Turkish goods specified, including an appropriate proportion of chrome. Numan refused to accept the contention that there should be no chrome deliveries until the entire 18,000,000 Turkish pounds of war material had been furnished.

I said that my Government earnestly hoped that Turkey would not agree to any modification of the German obligations under the Clodius agreement to the advantage of the Germans. He replied that you need have no anxiety on that score because he intended to hold the Germans strictly to their obligations. He declared “I will make no concessions to the Germans”. However, he went on to say that difficulties had arisen in connection with the execution of the agreement, in respect to prices, kinds of goods, et cetera and that some of the difficulties had been due to the fault of the Turks. Consequently, when the time came to make the adjustments which would be necessary he would be prepared to agree to adjustments in favor of the Germans which a neutral arbitrator would hold that they were entitled to. Outside of this he would not make any concessions to Germans but would hold them to strict fulfillment of Clodius agreement.

3. With regard to delivery of remaining 135,000 tons of chrome to Germany, Numan said that Turkey was obligated under Clodius agreement to conclude before March 31, 1943 a new agreement with Germany for supply of war materials if Germany were willing to supply war materials desired by Turkey. Germans had already declared that they were prepared to do so. He said that British had urged him to decline to conclude a new agreement with Germany for supply of war materials. Such action would involve Turkey’s repudiating its obligations under Clodius agreement and he had informed British that Turkey could not violate its commitments to Germany. Numan would not agree to contention that new agreement should be delayed until Germans had delivered 18,000,000 Turkish pounds of war materials specified in Clodius agreement. He pointed out, however, that Germans in order to obtain remaining 135,000 tons of chrome would have to furnish not only war materials to be specified in new agreement but also all war equipment stipulated in Schedule Ia of the Clodius agreement.

Numan assured me that the Turkish Government had never contemplated and would not consider furnishing additional chrome to Germany beyond the maximum figure of 90,000 tons in each of the years 1943 and 1944.

4. Numan said that the British had proposed pari passu treatment from January 8, 1943. He declared that such treatment was impossible from January 8 in view of Turkey’s obligation to deliver 45,000 tons of chrome to Germany between January 15 and March 31, 1943. He said that he was quite prepared and desired to give the British equal treatment after March 31 but that he could not do it on the basis proposed by the British, namely, that for each ton of chrome furnished to Germany, a ton of chrome should be supplied to Great Britain. This basis was impossible because if the total production in the period from March 31 to December 31, 1943 were only 50,000 tons, the Germans would receive under that formula only 25,000 tons whereas under Clodius agreement Turkey might be obligated to furnish Germany 45,000 tons during that period. In response to questions, Numan made it clear British could receive actual equal treatment with Germans from March to December 31, 1943, only if Turk chrome production during that period equalled twice amount which Turks would be obligated to furnish Germans.

I said that from his remarks it seemed the United States would receive almost no chrome produced in ’43. I pointed out as Minister knew we have been using all the chrome Turkey sold to Britain, the United States had tremendous need of chrome at present and need was constantly increasing. Now we were confronted with a situation wherein chrome, in which we stood badly in need, would no longer be available to us but would go to our enemy. Such a situation could not but cause a great concern in Washington. In reply Numan referred to fact Turkey had produced 208,000 tons of chrome a few years ago and said that he hoped that Turk production in 1943 would be large enough to permit our receiving a substantial amount. I observed that so far as I could judge Turk production during first 9 months of present year did not attain 90,000 tons. Numan said that he did not know how much had been produced during current year but he expected to obtain shortly exact figures from Etibank.80a He went on to say that he was aware, of course, that Turk chrome output had decreased in recent years primarily as a result of deterioration of equipment. There was a lack not only of means of transportation but even of picks. He blamed British for decline in production since Turks had for a long time been requesting British to furnish equipment necessary to maintain production at a high level but had received nothing from them.

5. I am convinced from my discussion with Foreign Minister that while Turks do not propose to make concessions to Germans in respect to execution of Clodius agreement, they are firmly resolved to carry out loyally their obligations under the agreement. They will not default on their deliveries to Germany of chrome to which Germany shall be entitled, they will not adopt an obstructive attitude in matter of conclusion with Germany of supplementary war materials agreement provided for under Clodius agreement, and they will not conclude with Great Britain any new chrome agreement containing provisions which might involve their defaulting on their chrome deliveries to Germany. Numan indicated that reasons which prompted Turks to conclude Clodius agreement enjoined upon them loyal fulfillment of their obligations under that agreement. Turkey’s position required that she endeavor to maintain friendly relations with Germany and avoid any acts obviously calculated to provoke Nazi rulers.

British Ambassador and myself will continue to press Turks for pari passu treatment in 1943 and ’44 and will endeavor to have this formula applied in practice in a manner best calculated to hamper procurement of chrome by Germans and to facilitate our obtaining largest possible amount of chrome. However, I do not believe that Turks will agree to any arrangement which might prevent their furnishing 45,000 tons of chrome to Germany between March 31 and December 31, 1943 in the event that Germany should carry out her obligations to Turkey. In my opinion, the only way in which the British [and we can curtail actual?] deliveries of chrome to Germany is through the exertion of pressure on the Turks to persuade them to hold the Germans to the strict fulfillment of their obligations and to refuse to modify the agreement to the advantage of the Germans in the event of Germany’s inability to carry out her obligations. In this connection, it is to be noted that a default by Germany on deliveries to Turkey is quite probable and that the Turks have, to a certain extent, a free hand in regard to agreeing to German proposals designed to modify or effect adjustments in the Clodius agreement. I have suggested to my British colleague that in his further negotiations he endeavor to obtain precise assurances from the Turks that they will make no concessions to the Germans in connection with the execution of the Clodius agreement but will hold them to the strict fulfillment of their obligations.

Repeated to London.

Kelley

80a State Bank of Turkey; one of six state-controlled banks, the Etibank’s special activities related to the development of mines and the marketing of minerals.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/116: Telegram

[Document 865]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 21, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received October 22—7:28 p.m.]

1046. My 1029, October 16. Foreign Minister requested British Ambassador to call upon him yesterday regarding chrome question apparently as result of representations made to Turkish Ambassador in London.

Numan repeated British would have all chrome mined or in stock up to January 8 and he made no reference to Turkish desire to obtain 5000 tons from British stocks. He also stated definitely after 1944 British would have first option to make an agreement and in any event he was prepared to let them have 50 percent of output.

Regarding 43 and 44 Numan declared it was not possible for Turks without breach of faith to decline to deliver any chrome until whole of 18,000,000 Turkish pounds of war material had been delivered and a further agreement signed. He said that first 45,000 tons of chrome must be regarded as becoming due after January 15 in proportion to actual deliveries of German goods under Schedule I. He said that Turkish Government had now decided that no agreement with regard to the delivery of remaining 135,000 tons of chrome would be signed with Germany until the entire 18,000,000 Turkish pounds of war material had been delivered. He said that instructions in this sense had already been sent to Berlin and that he would attempt to maintain this position in the event that Germans raised objections.

Numan made it clear that Turkish Government regarded themselves as obliged by Clodius agreement to furnish 135,000 tons of chrome to Germany if attendant conditions were fulfilled and that consequently it was not possible to give British pari passu treatment in 1943 and 44. Provided German deliveries of war material in Schedule I were made of corresponding value 45,000 tons of chrome must be regarded as a prior commitment to Germany. If quantities above that amount were available before further agreement has been concluded with Germany—that is, before Germany had delivered 18,000,000 Turkish pounds of war material, British might obtain chrome, provided they did not ask for quantity which would preclude Turks from delivering further 45,000 tons of chrome to Germany in 1943 if she on her side fulfilled necessary conditions. If further agreement were concluded with Germany, Numan would regard Germany as entitled to further priority up to quantities specified for 1943 and 1944. On the other hand he promised that the Turkish Government would do everything possible to increase production with a view to British receiving quantity above 90,000 tons produced in 1943 and 1944. Hugessen pressed very strongly for ton for ton treatment from January 8. Numan would not agree to this arrangement and said that Germany must have priority with regard to both the first 45,000 tons and the remainder.

Numan informed Hugessen that no war material at all had as yet been delivered by Germany under Clodius agreement. Total deliveries under the agreement amounted to only 19,800,000 Turkish pounds, of which only 7,000,000 related to Schedule I and therefore affected chrome. He said that delay in delivery of war material was due to changes made by Turks in Clodius specifications. For this reason a delay of about 9 months was inevitable before final deliveries of 18,000,000 Turkish pounds of war materials could take place. Hugessen was given to understand it was out of question for Turkish Government to insist on full delivery before March 31 and some further agreement would have to be drawn up. Numan declared there was no question of facilitating German deliveries by changes in war material specifications. He maintained war materials on original list were of simplest kind and ones which were easiest for Germans to deliver.

Department will note new development in chrome negotiations is decision of Turks not to sign agreement for delivery of 135,000 tons to Germany until entire 18,000,000 Turk pounds of war materials have been delivered. If Turks maintain this position Turk deliveries to Germany in ’43 will probably not exceed 45,000 tons in view of fact Germany will not complete deliveries until end of that year.

Kelley

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/107: Telegram

[Document 866]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, October 22, 1942—7 p.m.

532. Your 1029 of October 16, 5 p.m., your 1004 of October 10, 6 p.m., your 989 of October 6, 4 p.m. and your 986 of October 5, 4 p.m.

1. The Department is seriously disturbed regarding the course which the chrome negotiations appear to be taking.

2. It is clear from your 1004 of October 10 and confirmed by your 1029 of October 16 that with regard to chrome mined in 1943 and 1944, the Turks contemplate refusing the British and ourselves chrome we need, on the basis of an as yet unmatured obligation to supply Germany. The Department concurs in the interpretation given by the Minister for Foreign Affairs as reported in paragraph 4 of your 1004, namely that the Turkish obligation to deliver the first 45,000 tons of chrome in 1943 is contingent upon the delivery of the entire 55 million Turkish pounds worth of goods stipulated in Schedule Ia of the Clodius Agreement. Germany is therefore only entitled, in our view, to that proportion of this 45,000 tons of ore which actual German deliveries bear to the total of 55 million Turkish pounds worth of goods stipulated. This appears to us to be clearly the maximum extent of Turkey’s present commitment to Germany in the matter of chrome which the most scrupulous observance of her obligations to Germany would require. In the light of the Prime Minister’s indicated acceptance of a proposal that Turkey deliver chrome to Britain pari passu with deliveries to Germany (as reported in your 986), and even in the face of the reduced assurance (reported in your 986) which the Prime Minister gave the British Ambassador that equality of deliveries between Great Britain and Germany was agreed provided it did not interfere with the delivery to the Germans of the first 45,000 tons, Numan’s statement in paragraph 4 of your 1029 is disappointing. This later statement makes it clear that the Turks now intend to reserve 90,000 tons from 1943 production for Germany, regardless of the statement of the Minister reported in paragraph 2 of your 1004 that Turks would not refuse to sell us chrome on ground of any hypothetical obligation to Germany.

3. With regard to the Turks’ apparent decision to conclude the supplementary agreement involving 135,000 tons as reported in your 1004, it is the Department’s understanding that there is no obligation on Turkey’s part to negotiate such a supplementary agreement in the absence of Germany’s delivery in full of the 18 million Turkish pounds worth of war materials contained in Schedule Ia.

4. It would appear therefore that the Turks, (a) regardless of our need for chrome, are in effect reserving virtually all 1943 and 1944 production for Germany, and (b) negotiating with the Germans for payment of chrome in 1943 and 1944 when Turkey is under no compulsion or obligation as yet to conclude negotiations on any particular set of terms.

5. This record is difficult to reconcile with the attitude to be expected in a country which is allied to Great Britain and the recipient of lend-lease assistance from this country. It is planned to request the Turkish Ambassador here to call at the Department at which time he will be informed of the views of this Government in the sense of the preceding paragraphs.

6. The Department requests that you consult with your British colleague and concert your further efforts with him to the end that the President and the Prime Minister, in addition to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, are impressed with the deep concern shared by this Government and the British over the extent to which our needs for chrome are being neglected and Germany’s unmatured claims apparently are being facilitated.

7. Below are given the Department’s comments on various subsidiary points reported by you in your telegrams under reference: (a) The Department naturally welcomes the reaffirmation of British title to all chrome which will be above ground on January 8, 1943. The Department believes, however, that every care should be taken that the British and our interpretation of this point is explicitly agreed to by the Turks. In this connection information would be appreciated regarding the status of the British option to buy all such stocks, which option, it is the Department’s understanding, the British had expressed the intention to exercise. (b) It is believed that a grant of permission by the Turks for reasonable opportunities for supervision should be provided. It is not desired, however, to press this to the point of irritation, and the Department approves entirely the basis on which you placed the suggestion as reported in your 1029. Every effort should be made to obtain necessary transport facilities. All of the above deals merely with what the British and ourselves are clearly entitled to, plus the reasonable request for cooperation in rendering the exercise of ownership effective, (c) A priority of option on chrome after January 1, 1945, as described in your 1004, would appear to meet the longer term problem, at least for the purposes of the present negotiations, but such agreement should be formally secured and affirmed by the Turkish Government, (d) Retention by the Turks of nominal amounts of chrome for future deals with neutrals does not appear relevant to the heart of the current negotiations, and consequently every effort should be made to postpone discussion of this suggestion. Concurrence by this Government in such an arrangement in any event can by no means be forecast, and consequently no intimation of concurrence should be given at this time.

8. This telegram has been sent to Ankara, repeated to London.

Hull

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/117: Telegram

[Document 867]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 26, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received October 27—7:42 a.m.]

1067. My 1046, October 21. Minister for Foreign Affairs sent for British Ambassador on Saturday to hand him a written reply to aide-mémoire which Ambassador left with him on October 20, setting forth, under instructions from London, point of view of British Government relative to certain aspects of Turkish attitude in chrome negotiations. Turkish reply vigorously denies accusations (1) that changes which had been made (at request of Turkish Minister of National Defense) in list of war material to be supplied by Germany under Clodius agreement were designed to facilitate delivery of 135,000 tons of chrome to Germany and consequently violated directly Turkish assurances to Britain and (2) that promises had been given to British Ambassador in connection with negotiation of 100,000,000 mark credit agreement with Germany, which had been broken. Numan said that he would like to have no record kept and or words exchanged and suggested that Hugessen withdraw his aide-mémoire and he would take back his. Hugessen said that he could not do that without consulting London.

Numan went on to say that German Ambassador81 had called on him Friday with regard to delivery of chrome to Germany. Von Papen had asked for unconditional delivery of first 45,000 tons which Numan had refused. Von Papen accepted Numan’s contention that second agreement stipulated in Clodius agreement could not be concluded until entire 18,000,000 Turk pounds of war material had been delivered. Von Papen complained that Numan had told British that Germany had delivered only 7,000,000 Turk pounds of goods on Schedule of I–a whereas they had actually delivered 12,000,000 Turk pounds. Numan told Hugessen that 12,000,000 Turk pounds was as a matter of fact correct figure. Numan then inquired of von Papen with regard to delivery of the 18,000,000 Turk pounds of war material none of which had as yet been delivered and von Papen declared that German Government would deliver entire 18,000,000 before March 31, 1943. With regard to remainder of goods specified in Schedule I–a, von Papen intimated that he did not think that Germany would be about [able?] to deliver entire amount. Numan told Hugessen that he counted on total deliveries falling far short of 55,000,000 Turkish pounds. He said that if German deliveries fell short by 40%, Turkish deliveries, including chrome, would be proportionately reduced. He said that difficulties had arisen in connection with prices of goods to be delivered by Turkey because Turkish prices had risen recently to such an extent that they exceeded prices fixed in price agreement of last June. Some agreement would have to be made about this.

With regard to question of pari passu treatment for British, Numan said that situation was not encouraging in view of drop in output. Etibank had informed him that it would not be possible to deliver 45,000 tons of chrome to Germany between January 8 and March 31, 1943, and that total production in 1943 would be low. In course of discussion of further agreement for delivery of 135,000 tons of chrome to Germany, Numan pointed out that condition 3 of letter of October 9 (enclosure 11 Embassy’s 179382 ) provided for delivery by Turkey of chrome to Germany before receiving goods from Germany. This was Numan’s interpretation of “dès lors”. However, Numan declared that while Turkey would deliver a first consignment at once further deliveries would be dependent on arrival of German goods.

Hugessen is now awaiting written reply to his letter of October 5 to Prime Minister which Numan has promised to expedite.

Kelley

81 Franz von papen.

82 Not printed.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/124: Telegram

[Document 868]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 29, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received October 30—10:15 p.m.]

1086. Your 532, October 22. After consultation with my British colleague I had a further conversation regarding chrome negotiations yesterday with Minister for Foreign Affairs. I told him that my Government was seriously disturbed by course which chrome negotiations appeared to be taking. It was beginning to look as if regardless of our need for chrome Turkey was in effect reserving all its 1943 and 1944 production for Germany. I emphasized our need of chrome and stated that we expected Turk Government to hold Germany to strict fulfillment of her obligations. Numan said that he could assure me unofficially that Turkey would hold Germany to strict fulfillment of her obligations and that I could so inform you. He would not make any concessions to Germany which would facilitate her obtaining chrome when she failed to fulfill her obligations.

I discussed at length with him situation which would arise if Germany failed to deliver before March 31 entire 55,000,000 Turk pounds of goods specified in Schedule I–a. He confirmed his previous statements that if Germany delivered only part of that amount she would receive only a corresponding proportion of 45,000 tons of chrome. He said that if Germany delivered half of 55,000,000 Turk pounds worth of goods she would receive 22,500 tons of chrome. I said that in such event we assumed that part of 45,000 tons of chrome in which Germany was not entitled by deliveries before March 31 would be definitely lost to Germany. He objected to this interpretation. He said that if Germany delivered after March 31 additional amounts of 55,000,000 Turk pounds worth of goods she would be entitled to receive in payment Turk goods specified in Schedule I including a proportionate amount of chrome. If she eventually delivered entire 55,000,000 Turk pounds of goods she would receive entire 45,000 tons of chrome. During long discussion which ensued on this point Numan refused to accept my contention that Turkey was not obligated to furnish any part of the 45,000 tons of chrome to Germany in payment for German goods on Schedule I–a delivered after March 31.

Numan confirmed to me his statement made to the British Ambassador that he would not conclude supplementary agreement for delivery of 135,000 tons of chrome until Germany had delivered in full the 18,000,000 Turkish pounds of war material stipulated in Schedule I–a. He hoped that Turkey’s chrome production in 1943 would be large enough to permit delivery to United States of substantial amounts in that year. In this connection he observed that in any event we would possess on January 8 more chrome than we would probably be able to transport from Turkey in 1943. He said that we had not shipped during current year very much chrome considering that Turkey’s entire production was available to us. I observed that while we had shipped out of Turkey this year much less chrome than we had hoped, this situation was not the result of any lack of interest on our part in procuring chrome, as he seemed to think, but due to Turkey’s failure to place at our disposal adequate tonnage to move chrome from inaccessible to accessible ports and sufficient railway cars to transport chrome from interior points and the Guleman Mine to seaboard. I took the occasion to point out that the number of ships and freight cars made available to us during present month was very much less than what we had been promised and as a result the movement of chrome in October had been greatly hampered. I urged on him the necessity of our receiving more assistance from Turkish Government in respect to ships and cars for movement of chrome during next 10 weeks. Numan observed that Turkey was confronted with great difficulties in matter of transportation and that economic life of the country was suffering greatly from lack of adequate tonnage and rolling stock.

In concluding Numan said there was no need for anxiety on our part that he would ease up on Germans in connection with execution of Clodius agreement and that you could rest assured that the only chrome which Germany would receive would be that to which she was entitled under the most strict interpretation of agreement. He promised that we would get every ounce of chrome over and above that which Turkey had to deliver to Germans.

Kelley

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/116: Telegram

[Document 869]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, October 29, 1942—11 p.m.

557. Your 1067 of Oct. 26, 4 p.m. and your 1046 of Oct. 21, 4 p.m.

1. The Department’s 532 of October 22, 7 p.m. was dispatched before your 1046 arrived.

2. The Department, altho uncertain as to its ultimate usefulness, welcomes the Turks’ decision you report in your telegram under reference to conclude no agreement with the Germans regarding the further 135,000 tons of chrome until the war material on list Ia has been delivered in full. If the Turks maintain this position, and if 9 months as you estimate will be required for full delivery of the war material, it might well be argued that the Turks are relieved of any obligation regarding the 135,000 lot of chrome by reason of the fact that the documents covering this matter under the Clodius Agreement stipulated that the supplementary compensation agreement for chrome was to be concluded prior to March 31, 1943. Under these circumstances, in the Department’s view, the Turks could consider themselves free to negotiate an agreement with the British or ourselves to provide us with all chrome mined in 1943 and 1944 after reservation of 45,000 tons to cover their maximum chrome liability to Germany, and such an agreement, it appears to us, could be negotiated now subject only to the condition that it would not become operative until April 1, 1943, and then only if by that date Germany had failed to deliver in its entirety the 18 million Turkish pounds worth of war materials stipulated in list Ia of the Clodius Agreement. Such a contract with us appears to be entirely compatible with the Turks’ position that they cannot enter an agreement which would prevent their meeting their contingent obligations to the Germans, and if the Turks mean what they now say, the formula outlined above should be acceptable. Please consult your British Colleague regarding a proposal along these lines, and telegraph the Department your views and his comments. The Department remains convinced of the propriety of continuing to press for pari passu treatment, after the 45,000 tons to which Turkey is definitely committed now of German deliveries made, particularly in view of the informal assurances in this regard you have reported to have been received. The proposal suggested above represents a possible line of attack in the event that the establishment of the principle of equal treatment proves finally impossible.

3. The Department is not clear as to the present status of the offer to pay the Turks 270 shillings per ton for all unaccepted chrome above ground on September 25, 1942, plus all newly mined chrome up to January 8, 1943, in the light of Numan’s statement reported in paragraph 3 of your 1046 that it was not possible to give the British pari passu treatment in 1943 and 1944. The British Embassy here is under the impression that pari passu treatment in these years was an additional condition attached to the payment of the 270 shillings price. As you are aware, no such condition was attached to this Government’s agreement to increase the price and its willingness to share in the added expense. Information on the present status of this offer would be appreciated.

4. In accordance with paragraph 6 of the Department’s 532, please continue to concert your actions with those of your British Colleague in such manner as to secure the maximum effect from your collaboration, making personally the representations necessary.

Hull

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/131: Telegram

[Document 870]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 31, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received November 3—9:50 p.m.]

1097. My 1086, October 29. British Ambassador called on Minister of Foreign Affairs shortly after my visit for the purpose of conveying to him London’s reaction to Turkish reply to British aide-mémoire. A large part of the discussion revolved around the passages in the Turkish reply which particularly displeased London. Numan went into a long explanation with a view to assuring Hugessen that no discussions regarding chrome had taken place during Berlin negotiations and that the 100 million mark agreement was entirely distinct from chrome. Numan indicated, however, that the Turkish Government was thinking, in the event that the further agreement for 135,000 tons of chrome were concluded, of arranging to have chrome deliveries during 1943 and 1944 count towards the service of 100 million mark agreement, thereby avoiding the necessity of providing additional goods for that purpose. When Hugessen pointed out that British Government did not regard chrome as a matter of “secondary importance”, a phrase used in Turkish reply in referring to chrome, Numan retorted that a matter of primary importance would be a demand for the passage of German troops through Turkey.

Numan declared that British could rely on him to take advantage of any loopholes that might become apparent in Clodius agreement. However, he could not honorably depart from obligations undertaken, and he pointed out in this connection that in 1940–41 when British position was extremely precarious, and the danger to Turkey all the greater, he had not departed from alliance with British. He had refused pressing German demands during Clodius negotiations last year. It would be dishonorable for him now to take advantage of German weakness in order to break his obligations.

Numan declared that no negotiations whatsoever existed at present in regard to further agreement for 135,000 tons of chrome. With regard to negotiations for 100 million mark agreement, Numan said that the details were still under discussion but that, unless some unexpected difficulty arose, the agreement might be signed by middle of November. With regard to question of German delivery of the 55 million Turk pounds worth of material in Schedule I–a, Numan said that he proposed to let matters take their course and see whether Germans actually delivered the total. In response to Hugessen’s inquiry whether, in the event of failure of Germany to supply entire amount and of consequent delivery to them of only part of the 45,000 tons of chrome, the remainder of the 45,000 tons would go to the British, Numan said that it certainly would. (While this statement appears to be in conflict with Numan’s statements to me, reported in second paragraph of my 1086, it is possible that Numan meant merely that any chrome left over at that time would go to British and not that Germans would not get remainder of the 45,000 tons later, upon effecting necessary deliveries. Hugessen proposes to discuss this point in his next conversation.)

During discussion Numan mentioned possibility of a German threat and Hugessen asked him whether he seriously thought that in present circumstances such a danger was real. His reply indicated that he did not think the danger serious but was unwilling altogether to discount it.

In connection with a statement by Hugessen that British were somewhat distrustful at Turkish attitude, Numan, after declaring that this distrust was unfair and unjustified, went on to say that although he had never mentioned it previously, he thought he ought to let Hugessen know that not only himself but also “higher quarters” had for some time felt that real policy of the British in regard to supply of war material to Turkey was to keep Turkey weak. He alluded to shortcomings in deliveries in Orbay list83 and in subsequent undertakings in regard to war material. He referred to British reluctance to supply Turkey with more than her current consumption of gasoline for fear that if stocks were accumulated, it might be an inducement to Germany to invade country. Numan said that he had heard from countrymen of Hugessen that British Government was anxious not to strengthen Turkey too much as she might become a threat to Russia. He could assure Hugessen that Turkish Government had no intention whatever of undertaking any form of aggression against Russia but, on the other hand, it felt justified in taking all necessary precautions against a possible threat from Russia later on. He had an impression that conversations had taken place between Soviet and British Governments in which Soviet Government had expressed objections to supply of war material to Turkey, and that British were going slow in regards to these supplies in order to satisfy Soviet Government. In discussion which followed, Hugessen declared that Numan’s idea that British wished to keep Turkey weak was absolutely false, and that he had never heard at any time of the conversations with Soviet Government referred to by Numan.

Hugessen explained the reasons why British were not always able to fulfill their undertakings; Britain was at war and hampered by war conditions; priority must be given to her Allies who were actually at war; et cetera. While Numan was willing to admit some of Hugessen’s arguments, he was not prepared to depart entirely from the point of view he had expressed. He said everything would depend on delivery of the material recently promised by British Prime Minister.84

In concluding the conversation, it was agreed to have after the holidays a further joint discussion of the matter before the Turks replied to Hugessen’s letter of October 5 to Prime Minister.

Kelley

83 See footnote 17a, p. 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 797].

84 Winston S. Churchill.

The Chargè in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/134: Telegram

[Document 871]

The Chargè in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 4, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received November 5—12:55 p.m.]

1116. Your 557, October 29.

1. I have discussed with my British colleague proposal suggested in Department’s numbered paragraph 2 and we are in accord that such a proposal may very well be made to Turks in the event that establishment of principle of equal treatment proves finally impossible. It should be noted in this connection that Numan has already taken the position that he cannot hold Germans to March 31, 1943, as last day for delivery of the 18 million Turk pounds worth of war materials in view of fact that Turks have been responsible for some at least of delay which will occur in delivery of this material.

2. With regard to the present status of offer to pay Turks 270 shillings per ton for all ore accepted after September 25, 1942, the mine owners have been advised informally through Etibank that British intend to pay this price. Technically and formally, the payment of this price is dependent upon fulfillment of several conditions, one of which is the receipt of pari passu treatment in 1943 and 1944. However, I understand that British propose to pay increased price irrespective of fulfillment of conditions in question and that mine owners are proceeding on basis that they will receive increased price.

3. The next stage in the negotiations will be the reply of Turkish Government to British Ambassador’s written proposals of October 5. Numan has promised to work out the main lines of reply in discussion with Hugessen.

Kelley

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/150: Telegram

[Document 872]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 22, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received November 23—12:47 p.m.]

1189. My 1116, November 4.

Foreign Minister handed British Ambassador Friday a draft of reply he proposes to make Hugessen’s note of October 5 to Prime Minister (my 986, October 5). Draft is now under study by British and ourselves and Hugessen intends to discuss draft with Numan before latter sends reply in an endeavor to obtain best possible basis for further negotiations.

A close translation of draft reply is as follows: 1. Turk Government agrees to sell exclusively to Great Britain total amount of chrome produced in Turkey up to January 8, 1943. British Government will be good enough to agree that this acceptance which does not follow from basic agreement concluded in Paris in 1940 constitutes a concession which Turk Government is happy to make to British interests.

It is therefore agreed that: (a) Every ton of ore produced which is above ground by January 8, 1943 will be declared and sold to British Government in accordance with terms of purchase contract and subject to new price.

(b) The lists of stocks of chrome mentioned above will be placed at the disposition of Embassy under the guarantee of Turkish Government.

(c) After the first delivery to be effected in pursuance of previous engagements Turkish authorities will cooperate effectively in transporting ore to accessible ports in accordance with accedence which will permit the fulfillment equally of obligations to other countries.

2. Turkish Government takes note of the increase in price from September 25, 1942 for all chrome ore hitherto undeclared whether already in stock or newly produced between above mentioned date and January 8, 1943.

3. With respect to the conditions mentioned in article 5 of note of British Ambassador, Minister for Foreign Affairs is anxious to observe: (a) That the principle of pari passu could not be applied to detriment of [apparent omission] to other countries.

(b) All surplus ore up to December 31, 44 not obligated in pursuance of an already existing agreement or of an agreement to be concluded in accordance with conditions specified in such contract could be reserved for British Government.

4. Turkish Government is decided not to conclude any new agreement as to sale of chrome after 45.

Foreign Minister agrees to accord prior right to conclusion of an agreement having as a basis nondiscrimination against British Government in respect to exportation of chrome to be effected by Turkey. He is anxious however to observe if delays are caused by British Government in concluding such contract after receipts of Turkish proposals. This provision of priority could not be maintained.

II. Numan has replied informally in writing to certain questions raised by Hugessen regarding meaning of certain provisions of Clodius agreement. Essence of Turkish reply is as follows: The 45,000 tons forms part of goods to be furnished by Turkey in return for supply of German goods signified in Schedule I–a; principle of equilibrium governing exchange of goods between Germany and Turkey under Clodius agreement requires Turkey to deliver only proportion of 45,000 tons of chrome which corresponds to proportion of 55,000,000 Turkish pounds of German goods furnished by Germany; there is no direct connection between any particular item in Schedule I and any particular item in Schedule I–a; agreement relative to supply of 135,000 tons of chrome cannot be concluded until after delivery of entire 18,000,000 Turk pounds of war material “even if this delivery is effected after March 31, 1943”; and delivery of 135,000 tons of chrome will take place “in accordance with a cadence taking count of terms of delivery stipulated in special contracts for war material. Consequently if these terms are not observed by Germany cadence of deliveries could suffer as result of it.” With regard to last statement reply states that this point of view is based only on spirit of Clodius agreement and as it does not follow explicitly from text of letter attached to that agreement it should for moment be considered only as a unilateral interpretation.

III. In connection with discussion at last meeting between Hugessen and Numan of the 100,000,000 marks arms agreement (my 1097, October 29 [31], Numan agreed if delivery of the 135,000 tons of chrome were included in that agreement to make the delivery of the chrome dependent upon the delivery of the entire 100,000,000 reichsmarks of war material by Germany.

Kelley

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/163: Telegram

[Document 873]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 28, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received December 9—12:54 p.m.]

1211. For Merchant85 from Jackson.86 Following is a round-up of impressions and facts on chrome situation after 10 days here.

1. Biggest surprise is official British Embassy’s attitude which does not reflect spirit of urgency and action which you have conveyed and which I read into copies of cables from London to Ankara. Specific evidences of this attitude are hard to describe without being unfair because British here have a plausible reason for every item and against every suggestion. However, here are some of ideas which make up their policy. (a) Germans legal and moral right to full 180,000 tons chrome under Clodius agreement if they deliver required goods is accepted as an unassailable fact.

(b) Decreases in this tonnage can be accomplished in only three ways: (1) Nondelivery by Germany which would bring about proportionate nondelivery by Turkey.

(2) Secret Turk cooperation in delaying mine operations and transportation. The degree to which this will operate in our favor depends on how friendly Turks feel towards us and how frightened they are of Germans at any given time.

(3) It may be possible for us to obstruct and delay chrome deliveries to Germany by off-record deals such as helping feed transportation workers who are not included in recently promulgated emergency relief measures and who presumably will be grateful and reciprocate anything we do for them.

(c) Any attempt at this time to initiate hard business negotiation with Turks by offering any kind of inducement to break or make a dent in Clodius agreement will get nowhere. British will not accept argument that new offers and inducements should be tried anyhow on off chance that they might succeed because British claim such action would be construed by Turks as impugning Turk honor and would so antagonize them as to jeopardize future opportunities for further discussions.

(d) They do not fully share London’s concern over chrome and while they recognize its importance they find it difficult to picture this metal as a direct weapon in winning war.

(e) They have many political considerations on their minds which make them greatly fear to antagonize Turks. This feeling dampens any aggressive spirit.

(f) If our attitude is as summed up by Finletter,87 “It looks hopeless but we have got to try”, British reply to this is, “We must not try anything except what is listed in (b) for fear of making the situation worse”.

2. Next surprise, and this is particularly important in view of foregoing, was degree to which our role is secondary to British. Existing chrome agreement is a British-Turkish contract and new agreement will be also an arrangement with Turks negotiated by British. British consider chrome agreement basically as a British affair. Although the atmosphere is of utmost friendship and informality with fullest exchange of information our position in discussions with British is actually limited to making suggestions which, if unacceptable to British here, can only be pursued further by making issue of matter which entails reference to London. Our discussions of chrome directly with Turks are subsidiary to British-Turkish negotiations and must be at a time and along lines which fit in with British program.

3. Although Turks feel that Allied war position has greatly improved they do not consider German invasion threat eliminated. Consequently there will be some stiffening of Turk attitude toward Germany, but not to extent of provoking her.

4. Draft of Turkish reply to British Ambassador’s letter, October 5 (Embassy’s 1189, November 22) besides confirming our right to all chrome above ground on January 8, whether at mines or delivery points, contains enough unclear points for genuine improvements to be made if Turks will play ball.

5. Mechanics of the Clodius agreement do not seem to be working out for either side because: (a) Latest information on German deliveries is they have delivered nothing in war materials. Turks accept German representations that Turkish changes in specifications have caused legitimate delays which effectively cancel March 31 deadline. However, Germans have so far delivered about 14,000,000 Turk pounds of 55,000,000 stipulated in Schedule I which gives them claim to about 11,000 tons chrome.

(b) Turks have fallen down on their reciprocal deliveries to Germany.

(c) Best expert opinion estimates 6 to 12,000 tons chrome can be mined during first quarter of ’43 and Germans are reported to have discovered this only recently.

This confusion will work either for or against us depending on how Turks choose to use it.

6. Confidentially British Ambassador left for London on 23. This will give you opportunity more effective contact if you want to persuade London to change Ankara-British attitude to a more positive direct program. In any event I consider it highly important British Ambassador should be impressed with absolute necessity for constant alertness to seize every opportunity presented by Turks. [Jackson.]

Kelley

85 Livingston T. Merchant, Assistant Chief of the Division of Defense Materials.

86 Charles D. Jackson, Special Assistant to the Ambassador in Turkey.

87 Thomas K. Finletter, Acting Chief of the Division of Defense Materials.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/157: Telegram

[Document 874]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 28, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received November 30—1:48 a.m.]

1215. My 1189, November 22. British Chargé88 in absence of Ambassador who has left for London has discussed draft reply with Foreign Minister along lines agreed upon between this Embassy and British Embassy.

1. Numan agreed to omit second sentence in paragraph numbered 1 replacing it with sentence in paragraph numbered 2.

2. With regard to paragraph numbered 1 (b) British Chargé stated that he welcomed Government guarantee which he assumed covered protection of stocks from pilferage. He pointed out that inspection and assessment of stocks fell in a different category being a commercial matter and that it was only reasonable that buyer should have facilities to see what he was buying. He thought that there was nothing more natural than that representatives of the two Governments should visit the mines together to assess the stocks. He inquired whether if paragraph in question stood as drafted he could be assured that question of inspection of stocks would be dealt with to British satisfaction when it came to negotiating detailed purchase contract.

Numan was not prepared to commit himself precisely, but said that anything that was commercially necessary could be agreed with Etibank when purchase contract was negotiated.

3. British Chargé asked for elucidation of first 12 words of paragraph 1 (c). Numan assured him they were intended to relate to first 45,000 tons under Clodius agreement and nothing more. Upon being urged to specify this he said he desired to avoid any mention of Clodius agreement in order to avoid possible difficulties with Germany. He had no objection British Ambassador sending him a letter that it was his understanding from conversations passage in question related only to first 45,000 tons under Clodius agreement. When it was pointed out to him present wording might mean Turk cooperation in transport would not begin until 45,000 tons had been entirely delivered to Germany, Numan said this was not intention and he agreed to change “after” to “reservation being made with respect to”.

4. Regarding paragraph 3 (b) Chargé said phrase “up to December 31, 44” might mean British had to wait until end of 44 before surplus became available. He pointed out several other phrases in this paragraph such as “already existing” and “an agreement to be included” were too indefinite. He therefore proposed following alternative text: “At end of each calendar month (or alternatively at end of each period of 3 months) up to December 31, 1944 all chrome ore not delivered by Turkey to other countries in virtue of an agreement existing at the date of present letter shall be sold to British Government at price mentioned in paragraph 1 above”. Numan said it would be impossible for him to agree to so precise an arrangement which he thought would be impossible to work in practice. He would, however, try to draft an alternative passage to give effect more vaguely to same idea. He said his intention was that all of remaining stocks of chrome on December 31, 1944 after fulfillment of obligations to Germany should be Britain’s and that any surplus before that date should be delivered to British provided that transport was available without prejudice to obligations to Germany.

5. With regard to paragraph 4 Numan agreed to insert “for the moment” before “decided”. British Chargé also suggested that last two words of sentence should be replaced by “extracted after January 1, 1945”. With regard to rest of paragraph he pointed out that second sentence gave British only most-favored-nation treatment and referred to export, not to sale. He recalled earlier conversations in which Ambassador was informed that it was intention to reserve at least 50% of output for British. He said last sentence was offensive and suggested that it should be replaced by following: “It is understood that the quantity provided for in the contract would be not less than 50% of Turkish output if British Government so desired and that priority could not be maintained if negotiations were unduly delayed”. Numan said he could not agree to specific mention of 50% as this would involve him in difficulty with Germany. He wished to reserve freedom to sell chrome after 1944 to countries other than Germany and Britain and wording proposed would make it clear that such chrome was going to be deducted from German share.

He said that nondiscrimination referred not only to conditions, but to quantities and assured British, therefore, of as much chrome as Germany. Numan said he would reconsider whole paragraph and let British Chargé have a redraft. He suggested possibility of putting in a specific tonnage instead of a percentage. He did not like phrase “unduly delayed” and said he would propose in his redraft an option for a definite period, say 3 months, from proposal to conclude an agreement.

British Chargé states that Numan made it clear during discussion that he could not agree to anything in writing which Germans could twist around as being incompatible with Turkey’s obligations to Germany. He referred several times to this consideration with a view to indicating that there was a considerable difference between what Turkey could do in writing to meet British viewpoint and what she could do in practice.

Kelley

88 J. C. Sterndale Bennett.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/174: Telegram

[Document 875]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 6, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received December 7—1:05 a.m.]

1240. My 1215, November 28. British Chargé has received from Numan revised draft of Turkish reply to Hugessen’s letter of October 5. New draft reads in translation as follows: 1. “Turkish Government agrees to sell exclusively to Britain total amount of chrome produced in Turkey up to January 8, 1943.

2. Turkish Government takes note of increase in price from September 25, 1942 for all chrome hitherto undeclared or declared subject to new price whether already in stock or newly produced between September 25 and January 8, 1943. It is agreed that: (a) Every ton of ore produced which is above ground by January 8, 1943 will be declared and sold to British Government in accordance with terms of purchase contract.

(b) List of stocks mentioned above will be placed at disposition of Embassy under guarantee of Turkish Government.

(c) Reservation being made with respect to delivery of a maximum quantity of 5,000 [45,000] tons to be effected in pursuance of previous engagements to other countries, Turk authorities will cooperate effectively in transporting ore to accessible ports in accordance with a cadence which will permit equally the execution of other agreements in force. (Letter of October 19, 1941 and eventual agreements resulting therefrom.)

3. With respect to conditions mentioned in article 5 of note of British Ambassador, Minister for Foreign Affairs is anxious to observe: (a) That the principle of pari passu could not be applied to detriment of previous obligations of Turkish Government to other countries.

(b) It is agreed that up to December 31, 1944 the total amount of chrome not engaged by virtue of an agreement existing at date of present letter or to be concluded in accordance with conditions specified in such an agreement shall be reserved for British Government and up to said date deliveries could be made to it without prejudice to execution of aforementioned undertakings.

4. Turkish Government is for the moment decided not to conclude any new agreement for the sale of chrome produced after January 1, 1945.

Foreign Minister agrees to conclude agreements for eventual sale of chrome for export after January 1, 45. First contract will be concluded with British Government. Following conditions will be observed in this contract: a. No other country, in subsequent contracts, will be better treated than British Government in respect to quantities and conditions of delivery of chrome.

b. Without prejudice to foregoing paragraph a, minimum of 40 percent of total amount of chrome sold for export will be in any case reserved for British Government.”

After study by British and ourselves a further discussion will be had with Numan with regard to points in draft which are considered unsatisfactory.

Kelley

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/174: Telegram

[Document 876]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, December 11, 1942—10 p.m.

646. The Embassy’s 1189 of November 22, 10 p.m., 1215 of November 28, 8 p.m., the Embassy’s 1211 of November 28, 4 p.m., the final section of which was not received until Dec. 9, and the Embassy’s 1240 of December 6, 10 a.m.

1. From the telegrams under reference it appears that the Turks have definitely refused the principle of pari passu as discussed earlier in the negotiations.

2. The Department approves thoroughly a most careful scrutiny of the language of the reply of the Minister of Foreign Affairs to the British Ambassador’s note of October 5th to the end that it contains no ambiguity as to the rights and concessions it has been possible to secure to date. It is requested that the Embassy take an active part in this study and freely and forcefully suggest to the British any changes which it regards as desirable.

3. Assuming that the phraseology of the document under discussion is satisfactory, it should secure for us a certain minimum position at the present time.

4. Future action to assure the maintenance of this minimum position would appear to fall into two categories. The first would be continuing diplomatic efforts to urge on the Turks the policy of an unrelentingly strict interpretation of Germany’s obligations under the Clodius Agreement. The second type of action is touched on in B 3 of paragraph 1 of the Embassy’s 1211. This line involves utilization of every method in our power of securing the friendly cooperation of every Turk, however lowly, directly or indirectly concerned in the movement of ore which the British will own. This would extend from the Eti Bank officials to the individual workers, and the Department believes that neither time in preparation nor expense in execution should be spared in the campaign. The first major point in this connection would seem to be promptly placing in effect the decision to pay the producers 270 shillings per ton for ore unaccepted on September 25 and for ore mined between that date and December 31, 1942. The Department assumes this is being done but would appreciate being informed of the latest information on this specific point as well as reports on plans as they are developed along this general line.

5. While anxious in any way to strengthen our hold on what we have, there is reluctance here to accept what would appear to be the inevitable; i.e. that no concessions greater than those contained in the Foreign Minister’s draft reply can be obtained. The Embassy is relied on to keep us informed of any and all action here which could advance your efforts. It is also urged that the Embassy maintain its attitude that these negotiations are equally as important to this Government as to the British, and hence that the Embassy’s fullest participation has the Department’s complete approval.

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 841.24/1666: Telegram

[Document 877]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 12, 1942—noon.
[Received 2:11 p.m.]

1271. In conversation with Foreign Minister yesterday he informed me that he was sending that day his reply to British Embassy in connection with chrome negotiations. He said that his reply constituted substantial agreement with the British terms and outlined the understanding as follows: 1. British are to receive all chrome above ground on January 8, 1943. Prior to that date Turk Government will furnish British Embassy with certified list of the quantities of chrome above ground at the various stock piles.

2. After January 8, the Germans will receive only a percentage of the 45,000 tons of chrome corresponding to percentage of the 55,000,000 Turkish pounds of material delivered by Germany. Numan stated that as matters stood today deliveries of only 11,000 tons of chrome were obligatory.

3. Between January 8 and March 31 no deliveries of chrome will be made to either the British or the Germans other than the percentage referred to in preceding.

After March 31 the deliveries to Germany and Britain will be on an equal footing, the Germans, however, receiving only such tonnage as their deliveries after March 31 entitle them to. All chrome in excess of obligatory deliveries to Germany under the contract will go to the British in 1943 and 1944.

4. The Turkish Government will make no agreement with either the British or Germans for deliveries after January 1, 1945 but the British will have priority tantamount to an option in respect to concluding an agreement covering production after said date. Insofar as concerns the obligation to Germany to conclude an agreement covering an additional 135,000 tons, Numan stated that he would not obligate his Government to make deliveries of all or any part of the 135,000 tons unless and until the 18,000,000 Turkish pounds of war material had been delivered to Turkey.

As soon as the Turkish Government’s formal reply is received by the British Embassy I shall discuss with Sterndale Bennett the extent to which it meets the British terms.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/187: Telegram

[Document 878]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 13, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received December 14—6:40 a.m.]

1278. Embassy’s 1240, December 7 [6], and 1271, December 12.

1. The British Chargé has received under date of December 11 the formal reply of the Turkish Government to Hugessen’s letter of October 5. The text is the same as the draft with the following exceptions. a. First sentence of paragraph 2 reads as follows after “chrome ore”: “Declared after this date, whether already in stock or newly produced between above mentioned date and January 8, 1943.”

b. In paragraph 3 (b) “engaged” has been replaced by “deliverable” and “reserved for” by “sold to”.

c. The following phrase has been added to the end of first sentence in paragraph 4: “And intended for exportation.”

Second and third sentences in paragraph 4 have been changed to read as follows: “If the Government of the Republic decides in the future to conclude agreements for eventual sale of chrome for exportation after January 1, 1945, it is understood that the first contract will be concluded with British Government.”

2. The British Chargé endeavored to obtain insertion in paragraph 3 (b) of some specification of time when chrome not delivered to Germany shall be sold to the British Government. British Chargé proposed successively periods of 1 month, 3 months and 6 months. Numan insisted that his acceptance of any time limit in the agreement would get him into trouble with the Germans. He assured the British Chargé, however, that he proposed to supervise himself the deliveries of chrome to Germany and that he would take advantage of every loophole to reduce these deliveries to the minimum.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/190: Telegram

[Document 879]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 13, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received December 15—8:41 a.m.]

1280. In discussing yesterday with British Chargé the written reply which he has now received from Turkish Government to the British chrome proposals (see my 1278, December 13) he stated that in his opinion the reply was substantially satisfactory and went as far to meet the British desiderata as the Turks could be persuaded to put into writing. He added that he had received definite oral assurances from the Foreign Minister that in implementing this written agreement it was his intention to furnish to Germany the absolute minimum tonnage of chrome obligatory under the existing Clodius agreement and to make available to Britain all tonnage above this amount. In this connection it should be noted that unless further deliveries of materials specified in Schedule Ia of the Clodius agreement are made by the Germans they will thus receive only about 11,000 tons of chrome. British Chargé and I are agreed and Jackson is in accord that we should now devote our principal efforts to the following practical considerations.

1. A careful check of the accuracy of the certificates to be furnished specifying the amounts of chrome above ground at the various stock piles as of January 8. British have satisfactory means of effecting such a check except at the Guleman mines. An endeavor will be made to include in the purchase contract permission to visit the Guleman mines which are in a restricted military zone.

2. Arrangements for the transportation to accessible ports at the earliest possible date of all chrome above ground as of January 8 which should amount to not less than 100,000 tons and including inferior grades perhaps to as much as 200,000 tons.

3. Impeding the receipt by the Germans of such tonnage of chrome as they may become entitled to.

4. Constant and increasing pressure on the Turkish authorities with a view to inducing them not to extend the time limit for German deliveries of specified materials beyond March 31 or in any event to agree to a minimum extension thereof.

5. Coordinating with the Department and the British Foreign Office the information to be furnished the press as to the progress of the chrome negotiations.

As the American correspondents in Ankara continue to make almost daily inquiry concerning the progress of these negotiations and to avoid a repetition of the erroneous impression recently given by them to the American public that the Turkish Government is disposed to favor Germany in the matter of chrome, it seems highly desirable that the Department authorize a statement at the appropriate time indicating that the outcome of the negotiations has been satisfactory from our point of view and that this be done before the American correspondents in Ankara place their own interpretation on inadequate information gleaned from unauthorized sources. However, it is advisable that any such statement be discussed with Numan before it is authorized.

In the light of the written reply received by the British Embassy and the oral assurances given by Numan to the British Chargé and myself it would seem that the objectives summarized in paragraph 10 of the Department’s 481 of September 30, 7 p.m. are well on the road to attainment.

I should appreciate the Department’s comments with respect to the foregoing.

Steinhardt

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/187: Telegram

[Document 880]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, December 21, 1942—1 p.m.

673. Your 1240, December 6; 1271, December 12; and 1278, December 13. The Department and BEW89 are preparing instruction responsive to the cables cited in the foregoing, and you will receive this shortly. It finds itself uncertain on one point, that is, as regards the obligations assumed by the Turkish Government in regard to deliveries during 1943 and 1944 of chrome newly mined after January 8, 1943.

Are the conditions given in topic number 3 of the Turkish reply as reported in your 1240 to be read as corresponding to the report given in numbered paragraph 3 of your 1271 based on conversation with the Foreign Minister?

Department would appreciate immediate response including any further interpretation of the agreement on this point as the Embassy may be in a position to make.

Hull

89 Board of Economic Warfare.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/205: Telegram

[Document 881]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 22, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received December 23—7:05 a.m.]

1338. Department’s 673, December 21, 1 p.m. Conditions given in topic number 3 of Turkish reply as reported in my 1240 (stated in my 1278, December 13 to have been amended as result of final discussions) represent formal reply of Turkish Government in writing. Paragraph 3 of my 1271 represents oral statements made to me by Foreign Minister.

Any difference Department may find between text of formal reply and statements made to me by Foreign Minister is readily explained by statement of British Chargé to Kelley that Numan had indicated “that there was a considerable difference between what Turkey could do in writing to meet British viewpoint and what she could do in practice” (see my 1215, November 28) and British Chargés statement to me that written reply “went as far to meet British desiderata as [the Turks could] be persuaded to put into writing” (see my 1200 [1280], December 13).

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/211: Telegram

[Document 882]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 23, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received December 25—7:21 p.m.]

1345. Embassy’s 1278, December 13.

1. British Chargé has formally replied to Turk note of December 11. Reply states that British Government is happy to accept Turk Government’s note together with Hugessen’s letter of October 5 as basis of Anglo-Turk arrangements regarding disposal of Turk chrome production. British Government assumes that paragraph 3 (b) of Turk note “will be so interpreted as not to exclude either sale to His Majesty’s Government of any chrome that may be available at any given time or the issue of export licenses therefor on grounds that such chrome is or may be required to meet hypothetical obligations, that is, as payment for goods not actually delivered to Turkey. His Majesty’s Government wish to place on record their hope that Turk Government will be able to meet them on this point.” The reply continues that Chargé is authorized by his Government to make a formal offer to pay for all chrome declared after September 25, 1942 on a sliding-scale price calculated on basis of 270 shillings a ton for 48% ore.

2. Referring to the last sentence of paragraph 4 of the Department’s 646 of December 11. Concurrently with the delivery to the Foreign Office of the British Chargé’s reply he sent formal notification to the Etibank of the decision of the British Government to pay the producers the increased price. In this connection, I desire to point out as stated in the Embassy’s 1016 [1116], November 4 that the mine owners were informally advised through the Etibank several months ago that the British intended to pay 270 shillings per ton for all ore accepted after September 25.

3. The Department will doubtless observe the unusual language of the British Chargé’s reply in referring to the acceptance of “the Turkish Government’s note together with Hugessen’s letter of October 5, as the basis of Anglo-Turkish arrangements.” The purpose of this phraseology is to place the British and ourselves in a position to reopen the discussions with Numan in the event that the Turkish Government should fail at any time to take advantage of every loophole to reduce deliveries to Germany to the minimum.

Steinhardt

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/190: Telegram

[Document 883]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, December 23, 1942—7 p.m.

685. Your 1271, December 12, noon, 1278, December 13, 4 p.m. and 1280, December 13, 6 p.m.

1. In view of your and the British Chargé’s agreement that Numan’s written reply constitutes the maximum written assurances obtainable at this time, the Department approves concentrating immediately on the first four practical considerations you list in your 1280. The Department assumes from the same telegram that continuing pressure in connection with your fourth point should result in the Turks holding to the March 31 deadline stipulated, or at worst granting a short extension. Success in this respect it seems will hold the Germans to only a fraction of the ore for which they conceivably might be permitted to qualify in 1943. Clear title to all aboveground stocks on January 8 and other assurances, though phrased somewhat ambiguously in Numan’s note, strengthen the minimum position of the British under their contract concerning which until a few months ago it had been assumed there was no doubt.

2. With respect to the fifth point listed in your 1280, the Department is of the opinion that the time is not appropriate for any public expression of satisfaction over the outcome of the negotiations to date. In the first place, until it is known how much the Germans will be permitted to qualify for and actually obtain in 1943 and 1944, the result of the negotiations up to this point is not clear. In the second place, it appears to the Department that officially expressed satisfaction on our part in the press would not only mislead the Turks, but run the risk of exposing them to increased German pressure in the matter. The Department is giving serious thought to this matter and will advise you as soon as possible.

3. The Department assumes that the British are taking extreme care technically in exercising their rights in ample time and appropriate form under the terms of their contract. Study of the contract here suggests the advisability of considering an offer to pay the Turks in advance at the increased price for the ore to be acquired with final adjustments to be made when the quantity is definitely certified, the ore weighed, sampled, tested, declared, received and definitively invoiced, since the existing contract apparently means that title does not pass until the British definitively receive the ore. The Department would appreciate being informed of action as taken by the British in this connection.

4. The Department assumes that if an appropriate opportunity occurs, you will revert to the possibility of approaching the Turkish authorities along the lines of the suggestion contained in the Department’s 557 of October 29.

5. Has the increased price been officially notified to the Turks?

6. For your confidential information, representatives of the British Embassy here have been informed of the concern created by certain aspects of the British Embassy in Ankara’s attitude with respect to chrome as reported in the Embassy’s 1211, and it is presumed that the British Ambassador on his visit to London will be fully acquainted with the high importance the British Government attaches to chrome.

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/214: Telegram

[Document 884]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 27, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received December 28—4:42 a.m.]

1359. Department’s 685, December 23. Your paragraph 2. We did not have in mind that Department volunteer a statement but merely that it be prepared to meet inquiries that doubtless will be made by press on occasion of some development in chrome situation, such for example as signing of new purchase contract between British and Turks or reports from Istanbul of first movement of chrome to Germany. It would seem preferable that Department meet any such inquiries by a brief statement that a new agreement has been reached without necessarily disclosing any terms thereof or signifying its satisfaction or dissatisfaction rather than by a refusal to reply to inquiries by press which might create impression that Turkey had rebuffed United States and Great Britain. I think it would be most unfortunate to permit any note of dissatisfaction with outcome of negotiations to be voiced by American press inasmuch as Yalcin’s89a article written during his visit to United States and given considerable publicity here and in which he emphasized American discontent with Turkey’s attitude on subject of chrome created a bad impression in Turkish Government circles which construed American position to be tantamount to a demand that Turkey categorically specify in writing its intention to violate its written agreement with Germany even before date for German performance has expired. Any expression of dissatisfaction by Department or American press would doubtless add to this irritation whereas absence of a note of dissatisfaction would indicate American confidence in Turkish Government’s intention to do its utmost to meet our wishes.

I do not believe that officially expressed satisfaction would tend to mislead the Turks or run the risk of exposing them to increased German pressure, as the Turkish attitude will be entirely influenced by such deliveries as the Germans may make and not by political or diplomatic pressure. The foregoing is merely an expression of my views in the premises and is not to be construed as suggesting that an official expression of satisfaction be voiced by the Department but rather as urging that the American press should not be encouraged to express dissatisfaction.

Your paragraph 3. This subject is being discussed with the British.

Your paragraph 4. The Department may rest assured that an appropriate opportunity will be sought to suggest to the Turkish Government the proposal outlined in the Department’s 557, of October 29.

Your paragraph 5. Answered by my 1345, December 23.

Steinhardt

89a Huseyin Cahid Yalcin, eminent Turkish publicist.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.20 Defense (M) Turkey/219: Telegram

[Document 885]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 28, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received December 29—6:30 a.m.]

1326. In connection with Jackson’s telegram to Merchant, (my 1211, November 28) and paragraph 6 of the Department’s 685, December 23, Jackson and I are agreed that the attitude of the British Embassy in Ankara throughout the chrome negotiations has accurately reflected the spirit of the instructions received by it from London. In effect the negotiations have been conducted by London down to the most minute detail. Jackson and I have seen a sufficient number of the instructions received by the Embassy from London to vouch for this. Thus for example the protracted delay in agreeing to a price of 270 shillings and the subsequent delay in giving official notification thereof, originated in London as the result of a desire to distinguish between old and new mined chrome.

By reason of the foregoing Jackson and I suggest that any observations the Department may contemplate making in London with respect to past or future negotiations concerning chrome be addressed to the source which controls them rather than to the British Embassy in Ankara which acts under specific instructions from London as to every detail.

Steinhardt

Expression of regret by the United States for the landing of American bombers on neutral Turkish territory; internment of planes and crews; escape of one plane and crewExpression of regret by the United States for the landing of American bombers on neutral Turkish territory; internment of planes and crews; escape of one plane and crew

[886] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 12, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 3:54 p.m.]

811.248/546: Telegram

[887] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 12, 1942—8 p.m. [Received June 13—1:40 p.m.]

811.248/549: Telegram

[888] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 12, 1942—10 p.m. [Received June 13—3:15 p.m.]

811.248/550: Telegram

[889] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 13, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 5:14 p.m.]

811.248/550: Telegram

[890] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 13, 1942—11 a.m.

811.248/546: Telegram

[891] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 13, 1942—3 p.m. [Received June 14—12:38 a.m.]

811.248/553: Telegram

[892] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 14, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 5:10 p.m.]

811.248/568: Telegram

[893] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 15, 1942—7 p.m. [Received 11:32 p.m.]

811.248/576: Telegram

[894] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 17, 1942—8 p.m.

811.248/576: Telegram

[895] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 18, 1942—2 p.m. [Received 8:56 p.m.]

811.248/581: Telegram

[896] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 18, 1942—7 p.m. [Received 9:42 p.m.]

811.248/580: Telegram

[897] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 19, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 2:05 p.m.]

811.248/582: Telegram

[898] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 19, 1942—5 p.m.

811.248/581: Telegram

[899] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 20, 1942—4 p.m.

811.248/582: Telegram

[900] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 22, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 9:38 p.m.]

811.248/589: Telegram

[901] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 22, 1942—7 p.m. [Received 11:22 p.m.]

811.248/590: Telegram

[902] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 23, 1942—3 p.m.

811.248/590: Telegram

[903] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 25, 1942—2 p.m. [Received June 26—1:50 a.m.]

811.248/603: Telegram

[904] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, July 8, 1942—8 p.m.

811.248/603: Telegram

[905] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 10, 1942—2 p.m. [Received July 11—1:29 a.m.]

811.248/633: Telegram

[906] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, September 24, 1942—7 p.m. [Received September 25—2:05 a.m.]

811.248/731: Telegram

[907] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 11, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 2:29 p.m.]

811.248/741: Telegram

[908] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 31, 1942—2 p.m. [Received November 1—5:38 a.m.]

811.248/764: Telegram

[909] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 15, 1942—8 p.m. [Received December 16—4:01 a.m.]

811.248/809: Telegram

[910] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 16, 1942—11 a.m. [Received 4:27 p.m.]

811.248/812: Telegram

[911] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 16, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 10:20 p.m.]

811.248/813: Telegram

[912] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, December 17, 1942—8 p.m.

811.248/812: Telegram

[913] The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, December 30, 1942—9 a.m. [Received December 31—11 p.m.]

811.248/824: Telegram

[914] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 30, 1942—noon. [Received 9:46 p.m.]

811.248/823: Telegram

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/546: Telegram

[Document 886]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 12, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 3:54 p.m.]

581. At 9:15 this morning an Army Liberator (B24D) “Little Eva”, 6 over 111609, with following crew: Lieutenants Walker, West, Canterbury, Davis; Sergeants Lippincott, Jones, O’Connor, Owens and Albertson landed on the civil airport in Ankara.

At 9:18 American Army Liberator (B24D), 2 over 111596, with crew of Lieutenants Brown, Swar, Meredith and Humphreys; Sergeants Taylor and Charles; Corporals Coward and Cullom landed on the civil airport in Ankara.

At 10:05 American Army Liberator (B24D), 19 over 111597, “The Blue Goose”, landed on the civil airport in Ankara. I have not yet been able to ascertain the names of the crew of the third plane.

The first two planes appear to be intact. The third plane landed with the inside port engine out of commission and the outside port engine leaking badly and barely functioning. As a result this plane ran off the runway but appears to have sustained no damage. Turkish staff officer told me in strict confidence that a fourth Liberator was reported at 9:30, Elazig, but had not yet made a landing and may therefore have reached either Iraqi or Syrian territory. No safe landing or crash of fourth Liberator had been reported to Turkish officials up to the time of filing of this telegram.

Crews of all three planes in Angora have been treated by the Turkish officials with utmost courtesy and consideration. They were immediately taken into dining room of the civil air station and given breakfast.

At the time of my arrival at airport at 9:30 only very junior Turkish officials were present who considerately turned their backs while I spoke briefly with two of the commanding officers. These officers informed me that the entire flight consisted of 14 planes objective being a bombing raid on Ploesti. Insofar as their planes were concerned they had bombed at daybreak from 15,000 feet and believed their bombs had been effective. However they saw no fires explaining that they were first to arrive. They met limited anti-aircraft fire and saw virtually no enemy planes. They expressed opinion that the raid had been a complete surprise to the enemy. From quick observations none of the planes bear any marks of gun fire. They did not know whereabouts of the other 10 planes.

At this point an official of the Foreign Office arrived and politely explained to me that it would be necessary for the Turkish authorities to interrogate the crews before the Embassy would be allowed access to them. He assured me however that they would be given treatment generally accorded guests. From my personal observations all three crews appeared to be in very good health although extremely tired.

I should appreciate immediate instructions.

Repeated to Cairo.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/549: Telegram

[Document 887]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 12, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received June 13—1:40 p.m.]

585. I have just learned unofficially that the fourth Liberator, referred to in my 581, June 12, landed about noon today at Diyarbekir.

Repeated to Cairo.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/550: Telegram

[Document 888]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 12, 1942—10 p.m.
[Received June 13—3:15 p.m.]

588. My 585, June 12, 8 p.m. As yet unconfirmed report indicates that a fifth Liberator has landed at Arifiye near Izmit with 2 motors damaged and 3 of the crew injured.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/550: Telegram

[Document 889]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 13, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 5:14 p.m.]

590. Fourth Liberator referred to in my 585, June 12, 8 p.m., appears to have succeeded in reaching Syrian territory.

The Turkish General Staff informed me this morning that fifth Liberator landed at Arifiye with 3 of the crew injured and that a sixth American airplane as yet unidentified as to type has landed at Yalova with crew of 3 of whom 1 is dead.

General staff also states that it has received an as yet unconfirmed report that a seventh American airplane has landed at Mudanya.

Repeated to Cairo.

Steinhardt

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.248/546: Telegram

[Document 890]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 13, 1942—11 a.m.

271. Your 581, June 12, 11 a.m. All the facts regarding the operation are not yet available but a preliminary investigation reveals that the flight took off from belligerent territory with instructions to avoid passing over Turkish territory in approaching the enemy objective or in returning to base. Furthermore, the range of the planes was such that they could easily make the necessary flight without passing over Turkish territory.

It is surmised, therefore, that the planes which came down on Turkish soil did so because of engine trouble of the leader’s plane, and that the two other planes merely followed their leader in accordance with their general instructions.

Please seek Urgently an interview with the Prime Minister90 or the Minister for Foreign Affairs,91 whichever you consider more appropriate, and, in informing him of the foregoing, express the profound regret of this Government that American planes were forced to land on neutral Turkish territory and assure him that the landing was not in any way premeditated or intentional.

I am making a similar statement92 to the Turkish Ambassador93 here.

If upon the receipt of further and complete facts it appears necessary or desirable to make an additional statement to the Turkish Government instructions will be sent to you.

Hull

90 Refik Saydam.

91 Sükrü Saraçoğlu.

92 Memorandum of conversation not printed.

93 Mehmet Münir Ertegün.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/553: Telegram

[Document 891]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 13, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received June 14—12:38 a.m.]

594. My 590, June 13, 11 a.m. The Foreign Office has just advised me telephonically that an eighth Liberator succeeded in crossing the Turkish frontier into Syria. The Foreign Office also confirms the safe landing of 1 plane in Mudanya and the safe landing of 1 plane in Arifiye with 2 members of the crew injured from gunfire received over Rumanian territory and that the plane which landed at Yalova was shot down by Turkish anti-aircraft guns having flown directly over a heavily fortified and forbidden zone. Only 3 members of the crew were on board of this latter plane of whom 2 are slightly wounded and third is in a dying condition. The Foreign Office expressed its deep regret over the occurrence at Yalova.

Repeated Cairo.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/568: Telegram

[Document 892]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 14, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 5:10 p.m.]

599. My 594, June 13, 3 p.m. The Foreign Office informed me last night that the report communicated by it to me earlier in the day to the effect that one of our Liberators had landed at Mudanya and that another had been shot down by Turkish anti-aircraft guns at Yalova was incorrect.

The plane located at Mudanya although flying at a very low altitude did not stop in Turkey and apparently succeeded in reaching Syria.

The plane that passed over Yalova was warned away from the forbidden zone by anti-aircraft fire. This plane landed very shortly thereafter at Arifiye. The Foreign Office explained that the appearance of this plane over Yalova, the accompanying anti-aircraft fire and the subsequent report of an accident in Yalova in which 1 man fatally and 2 slightly injured had led to the erroneous report given me earlier in the day.

The Turkish General Staff now states that only 4 Liberators have landed in Turkey of which 3 are in Ankara and 1 is in Arifiye. Although detailed information has not as yet been received the General Staff believes that the plane at Arifiye is not seriously damaged and that none of the crew are seriously injured.

The following are the names of the members of the third crew that landed in Ankara: Lieutenants Cave, Zielsel and Wicklund, Sergeants Durfee, Perrone and Pearce and Corporal Story.

Repeated to Cairo.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/576: Telegram

[Document 893]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 15, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received 11:32 p.m.]

607. Department’s 271, June 13, 11 a.m. I called on the Minister for Foreign Affairs this morning. After informing Saraçoğlu that flight took off from belligerent territory with instructions to avoid passing Turk territory in approaching enemy objective or in returning to [base, I expressed] profound regret of our Government that our planes had been forced to land on neutral Turk territory and assured him that landing was not in any way premeditated or intentional. Saraçoğlu replied that Turk Government quite understood circumstances, that it had assumed landing of our planes in Turkey to have been unintentional adding “such things happen in war time and have become rather common occurrences”.

At this point observing that I was making a note of what he was saying he remarked, “Don’t bother to make notes. I authorize you to draft my reply in any language you see fit which will make it clear to your Government that I quite understand the situation.” He laughingly inquired whether my instructions said anything about the planes to which I replied in negative. He then said, “Too bad I had hoped the American Government might be going to make a gift to us of the planes as we need four good transport planes very badly.”

He then read to me cable he had received this morning from Turk Ambassador in Washington to effect that Secretary had expressed regret of American Government at the incident.

It is already clear that landing in heart of capital of these large American bombers has impressed Turk officialdom and Turk public with extent of our participation in European war to a far greater degree than could any words on subject. In no quarter has there been slightest criticism or unfavorable comment. The crews are being treated as honored guests and the planes inspected by large crowds including the highest officials of Government and a surreptitious visit by President.94 The net effect of the incident has been wholly favorable to us. Under these circumstances and as it is most unlikely that the Turks would dare in view of international law return these planes to us during the continuance of the war particularly as they are and will be under the constant surveillance of Axis agents, I am of the opinion that their prompt gift to the Turkish Government for use as transport planes would create a profoundly favorable impression.

Furthermore it is by no means unlikely that the gift of these planes to the Turk Government might prompt it not to ask the officers to give their parole and to turn its back at an opportune moment to their departure from Turkey. There is the additional consideration that the planes are at present inaccessible to the officers who are very much concerned at the presence on board of certain highly secret instruments both American and British which they fear may fall into the hands of Axis agents who might succeed in bribing the Turkish guards.

I am reasonably certain that should our Government decide to make an immediate gift of these planes to the Turk Government I would have no difficulty in obtaining permission for the crews to assist in the reconditioning of the planes which would afford them an opportunity to deal with the instruments referred to above.

Steinhardt

94 Ismet Inönü.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.248/576: Telegram

[Document 894]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 17, 1942—8 p.m.

282. Your no. 607, June 15, 7 p.m. General Arnold, Chief, United States Air Corps, requests cautious procedure in connection with any negotiations looking towards presentation of planes to Turkey. First and foremost, War Department desires to obtain permission for secret instruments to be removed from planes and for the personnel to leave Turkey without parole. These would be cardinal points of any agreement to transfer planes to Turkey.

The Department will be glad to discuss with General Arnold any suggestions regarding the planes which you may receive from the Turkish authorities. As regards the personnel, the Department realizes that some time might elapse before the men could all be conveniently released. An assurance now by the Turkish Government as to its ultimate intentions might be considered satisfactory on this point.

Please reply as soon as possible.

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/581: Telegram

[Document 895]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 18, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received 8:56 p.m.]

625. My 607, June 15. Turkish military authorities yesterday proposed to Colonel Jadwin that our officers give their parole. I have advised Colonel Jadwin to inform Turkish authorities that no reply will be made to their proposal until instructions have been received by Embassy from Washington.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/580: Telegram

[Document 896]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 18, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received 9:42 p.m.]

632. My 625, June 18, 2 p.m. Numan Bey96 telephoned me this morning that a lengthy telegram had been received last night by the semi-official Anatolian Agency from Berlin charging Turk neutrality had been intentionally violated by our planes on outward bound as well as return flight. In connection with publication of telegram from Berlin Numan Bey said he had instructed Anatolian to add a full statement to effect State Department had informed Turk Ambassador in Washington and the United States Ambassador in Ankara had informed Turk Foreign Office specific instructions had been issued to pilots not to fly over Turk territory and that they had complied with their orders excepting in case of individual planes which had been compelled to make forced landings in Turkey and that in consequence any violation of Turk neutrality had been wholly unintentional and occasioned only by necessity. Also interrogation by Turk military authorities of pilots now in Ankara fully confirmed statements made by the United States Ambassador in Ankara and to Turk Ambassador in Washington and Turkish Government was accordingly entirely satisfied there had been no intentional violation of Turkish neutrality.

Steinhardt

96 Numan Menemenğlu, Secretary General of the Turkish Foreign Office.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/582: Telegram

[Document 897]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 19, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 2:05 p.m.]

636. Department’s 282, June 17, 8 p.m. I think it would be most unwise at this stage to endeavor to obtain permission to remove secret instruments from planes as in seeking such permission we would of necessity disclose their presence which apparently has not yet been discovered by Turk authorities. I am informed total destruction of these instruments could readily be accomplished under cover of noise of motors once crews have access to planes.

Suggestion in my 607, June 15, 7 p.m. that an immediate unconditional gift be made of planes to Turk Government was prompted by my desire to obtain access to planes for the crews at once so that they might destroy instruments before their existence is discovered by Turk authorities or Axis agents.

Insofar as concerns permission for personnel to leave Turkey without parole I am quite clear Turk Government will not give such permission for to do so would be a clear violation of international law. On the other hand, as I pointed out in my previous telegram gift of planes might induce Turk authorities not to ask officers to give their parole which would afford them an opportunity to escape at a later date, with or without the tacit consent of Turk authorities.

In my opinion it would be a mistake to endeavor to bargain with Turk authorities or to seek to impose conditions in respect of planes now in their possession and under their control. I believe that immediate gift of planes without any qualification other than a strong intimation that we will expect them not to ask the officers to give this parole and not subject them to too great surveillance some weeks from now is as far as we should go. I believe this course would result in a request that the crews recondition the planes which would afford them an opportunity of destroying the secret instruments.

I have received no suggestion regarding the planes from Turk authorities other than the very broad hint from Saraçoğlu reported in my 607.

I should appreciate prompt reply.

Steinhardt

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.248/581: Telegram

[Document 898]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 19, 1942—5 p.m.

287. Department’s 282, June 18 [17], 8 p.m. and your 625, June 18, 2 p.m. General Arnold requests that the following telegram be sent to you: “The presentation of the four planes to Turkey, for use as transports, is approved, our officers and crews acting as instructors in the use of the planes. Please request the Turkish Government in turn not to place the officers and personnel on parole but to treat them as a military mission to Turkey. It is hoped that eventually the Turkish Government may wink at their departure from Turkey. The presentation of the planes should not include secret military instruments. These are to be turned over immediately and unconditionally to you. The Turkish authorities should understand this requirement since the planes are to be used as transports. If our crews can be put in control of the planes as suggested above, they would find an early opportunity to remove or destroy the instruments referred to. Unless you are reasonably certain that a presentation of the planes to Turkey will accomplish most of our objectives, withhold their disposition and continue negotiations.”

The Department requests you to proceed in accordance with the above.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.248/582: Telegram

[Document 899]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 20, 1942—4 p.m.

289. Your 636, June 19, 1 p.m. General Arnold is in accord with the Department’s views that the Department’s telegram no. 287, June 19, 5 p.m. affords adequate basis for action you suggest in your telegram under reference.

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/589: Telegram

[Document 900]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 22, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 9:38 p.m.]

653. I am today in receipt of following telegram from Cairo: “June 14, 5 p.m. Your 594, June 13, to Department previous repeated to this Legation.

Major General Maxwell, United States Military North African Mission, informs me that Colonel Craw, who is now in Cairo, has been ordered by Colonel Halverson to proceed to Turkey to obtain ‘release’ of United States planes and crews. Maxwell suggests that as this problem now appears to be a diplomatic matter under your jurisdiction that you inform him through this Legation and advise Washington if you wish any assistance from the mission or from any member of Halverson’s command including Craw.”

I do not know of any assistance that the mission, Colonel Craw or any member of Colonel Halverson’s command could render Colonel Jadwin, Captain Brown, and myself. I am of opinion that Colonel Craw’s arrival in Ankara during course of negotiations would have a harmful rather than helpful effect on Turks as it would tend to magnify an incident which Turks have thus far joined us in minimizing.

Department will note that telegram from Cairo under reference refers to the “release of United States planes and crews” as though their release were a matter of right. This point of view tends to support the statements made to Colonel Jadwin and myself by several officers that they were informed before the take off that if they landed in Turkey they would not be interned.

For detailed information concerning flight I refer Department to Colonel Jadwin’s cables 178, June 15, 181, June 17 and 182, June 18, to War Department.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/590: Telegram

[Document 901]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 22, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received 11:22 p.m.]

655. Following telegram has been sent to Cairo.

Your June 14, 5 p.m.,96 received today.

Please thank Major General Maxwell, Colonels Halverson and Craw for me and inform them I do not know of any assistance they could render at this time in connection with negotiations arising out of landing of United States Army planes and crews in Turkey. I am of opinion Colonel Craw’s arrival in Ankara at this time might be harmful rather than helpful as it would tend to magnify the incident which Turks have thus far joined us in minimizing.

In connection with any future flights that may be contemplated please invite Craw’s attention to the fact that “release” of belligerent planes and crews that land in neutral Turkey is not a matter of right but is governed by clearly defined rules of international law on the subject.

Steinhardt

96 See supra.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.248/590: Telegram

[Document 902]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, June 23, 1942—3 p.m.

294. Your 653, June 22, 1 p.m. and 655, June 22. The following telegram has been sent to Cairo.

“Your June 14, 5 p.m. to Ankara. General Arnold is instructing Colonel Halverson that disposition of planes and personnel in Turkey is now a subject of diplomatic negotiations being conducted by the State Department and that no military official should proceed to Turkey in connection with the matter.

Repeated to Ankara.”

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/603: Telegram

[Document 903]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 25, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received June 26—1:50 a.m.]

663. My 607, June 15, 7 p.m. Department’s 287, June 19, 5 p.m. and 289, June 20, 4 p.m. The present status of my negotiations with Saraçoğlu is as follows: 1. The Turkish authorities have withdrawn their formal request that the personnel give their parole. The request will not be renewed during the continuance of the negotiations.

2. The personnel will immediately receive the freedom of the city of Ankara subject to the understanding that they are not to make any attempt to escape while the negotiations are in progress.

3. Nothing is to be removed from the planes during the negotiations.

4. The Turkish Foreign Office is at present engaged in a study of the propriety under international law of accepting the planes as a gift from the Government of the United States for transport purposes and after the elapse of a reasonable period of time requesting the Government of the United States to exchange the 4 B–24’s for 8 A–30’s (see Department’s 267, June 12, 4 p.m.,97 advising that the Munitions Assignments Board has approved 12 A–30 airplanes for Turkey).

5. Saraçoğlu informed me that some time ago the German Embassy had proposed that the 3 German, 11 Italian, 1 British and several Russian, Greek and French interned aviators all be released and that he had been giving serious consideration to the proposal when the 28 American aviators had suddenly been added to the list, whereupon he had assumed the German proposal would be promptly withdrawn. He learned to his surprise yesterday that the German Embassy has renewed its proposal since the internment of our 28 aviators. He now views the German proposal with suspicion as he believes it to be an attempt to create a precedent in anticipation of increased German forced landings in Turkey resulting from probable extensive Axis aerial operations in the eastern Mediterranean in the near future. I share his suspicions.

As Saraçoğlu has explained to me that he desires to discuss the matter further with the Turkish General Staff the foregoing is merely an interim report. I shall not make any commitment of any kind until the terms have first been submitted to the Department for its approval.

Steinhardt

97 Not printed.

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.248/603: Telegram

[Document 904]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, July 8, 1942—8 p.m.

325. Your 663, June 25, 2 p.m. Would appreciate information regarding present status of your negotiations regarding bombers.

Hull

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/633: Telegram

[Document 905]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, July 10, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received July 11—1:29 a.m.]

724. Department’s 325, July 8, 8 p.m. There has been no change in status of negotiations regarding American bombers and crews interned in Turkey since my 663, June 25, other than a remark made to me by Numan Bey a few days ago in response to my most recent inquiry on the subject. He replied, “The legal aspects of the matter are being studied in an endeavor to arrive at a solution satisfactory to you and to us.”

As Department is aware Turk Government is influenced more by developments on Egyptian front than by those on any other front as position of Turkey would be seriously compromised by an Axis break-through toward its southern boundary. Thus the changing fortunes of campaign in North Africa is immediately reflected in general attitude of Turk Government in its dealings with belligerents. Recent British reverses in Egypt have tended to make Turk Government extremely cautious in taking any action which would not be in strict conformity with rules of international law or which might give offense to Axis. For this reason the past 2 weeks have not been propitious to press for a solution of the matter which might not be strictly in accordance with rules governing internment. It must also be borne in mind that Axis planes and aviators have been interned in Turkey for quite some time.

Sudden death of Prime Minister with resultant changes in Government has inevitably delayed a consideration of this matter by Turk authorities particularly as any decision will have to be approved by the highest authorities. In view of changes in Government it will probably be at least a week before higher officials will be able to give further consideration to this matter.

At best Turk authorities will move slowly and deliberately in arriving at a decision which does not strictly conform to international law and which might in consequence cause Axis resentment or provoke Axis demands.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/731: Telegram

[Document 906]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

Ankara, September 24, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received September 25—2:05 a.m.]

951. In course of a lengthy conversation yesterday with Prime Minister98 I brought matters enumerated below to his attention and received following replies.

1. Secret instruments which are part of equipment of United States Army bombers interned in Turkey.

Saraçoğlu gave peremptory instructions in my presence that interned aviators be given access to instruments for purpose of delivering them to Embassy. Seals are to be broken in presence of aviators and coding machines and codes are to be delivered to Embassy. $15,000 of United States currency carried by planes is likewise to be delivered to Embassy.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Steinhardt

98 Sükrü Saraçoğlu, former Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.248/741: Telegram

[Document 907]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 11, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 2:29 p.m.]

1008. Embassy’s 951, September 24, paragraph 1. Embassy obtained possession today of the 3 bomb sights and other secret instruments which were part of the equipment of the 3 United States Army bombers interned in the Ankara airport. Arrangements have been made to obtain the bomb sight and secret instruments in the bomber interned at Arifiye upon the conclusion of the holidays here. As soon as the Embassy has obtained possession of all the instruments I shall forward them by special courier to the appropriate authorities in Lydda.

Kelley

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 811.248/764: Telegram

[Document 908]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 31, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received November 1—5:38 a.m.]

1096. My 1008, October 11. Embassy forwarded with the courier who left Ankara last night the 4 bomb sights and other secret instruments which were part of equipment of the 4 United States Army bombers interned in Turkey. The courier is accompanied by the Assistant Military Attaché Captain Brown who will look after the security of instruments until their delivery to appropriate authorities in Lydda.

Please inform Ambassador Steinhardt.99

Kelley

99 Temporarily in the United States.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/809: Telegram

[Document 909]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 15, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received December 16—4:01 a.m.]

1295. A few weeks ago one of our 4 Liberator planes interned in Turkey was sent by the Turkish authorities to Eskisehir together with the following 8 American internees: Lieutenant Nathan Brown, Lieutenant Walter Swarner, Lieutenant Robert Humphreys, Lieutenant Wilbur West, Lieutenant Eugene Ziesel, Sergeant Jimmie Briscoe, Sergeant Ula Taylor, Sergeant George Charles.

Yesterday while these eight internees were working on the Liberator they departed with the plane for parts unknown. I suggest that Colonel Maguire at Lydda or General Andrews at Cairo may by now have knowledge of the present whereabouts of this plane and the eight internees.

The Foreign Office this afternoon informally protested against the taking of the plane and requested its immediate return pointing out that connivance by the Turkish Government in the escape will be charged by the Axis.

The Department will recall that the 4 planes (2 of which are damaged) were turned over to the Turkish Government in return for certain favors including the delivery to the Embassy of the secret instruments. For this reason I recommend that the plane be returned at once. As the eight aviators under instructions from the Embassy never gave their parole I see no reason for their return. In the event that the plane is returned I anticipate little difficulty in making necessary arrangements with Turkish Government for immediate departure of crew that brings it in.

Any publicity whatsoever in connection with foregoing will seriously jeopardize possibility of escape for remaining internees.

Please inform General Arnold of the foregoing.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/812: Telegram

[Document 910]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 16, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received 4:27 p.m.]

1302. Supplementing my 1295, December 15, I urge that no time be lost in returning Liberator to Eskisehir. If plane is returned immediately and the secret of its departure with 8 of internees continues to be kept it is by no means impossible that the Turkish military authorities may put no obstacles in the way of a repeat performance.

Any reply to my 1295 or to this telegram should be marked to be decoded only by the Ambassador.

Please inform General Arnold of the foregoing.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/813: Telegram

[Document 911]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 16, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 10:20 p.m.]

1304. With further reference my 1295, December 15 and 1302, December 16. It is my understanding that, if crew which brings Liberator back to Eskisehir wear civilian clothing and carry American passports which have been duly visaed by Turkish Consul, there should be no difficulty in arranging for their immediate departure from Turkey.

Captain Frederick Nesbitt and Captain Lyman Smith, two more of our interned aviators who under instructions from Embassy have not given their parole, escaped yesterday from their quarters in Ankara and are now on board the British steamer Gienbank which is about to sail from Iskenderun for Port Said.

Please inform General Arnold.

Steinhardt

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 811.248/812: Telegram

[Document 912]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, December 17, 1942—8 p.m.

664. To be decoded by the Ambassador. Your 1295, December 15 and 1302, December 16. Your reports have been conveyed to General Arnold, who is most appreciative of your efforts. He is issuing instructions to American military authorities in Cairo to return plane to Turkey. Different crew in civilian clothes will be used, and personnel will be supplied with American passports and Turkish visas.

The War Department is taking this action in view of your understanding that new crew will not be subject to internment under this procedure.

Hull

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State 811.248/824: Telegram

[Document 913]

The Minister in Egypt (Kirk) to the Secretary of State

Cairo, December 30, 1942—9 a.m.
[Received December 31—11 p.m.]

2276. My 2225, December 20, 5 p.m.1 Following telegram has been sent to Ankara.

“December 29, 9 a.m. Legation’s December 24, noon.

Army now advises that 30 days required repair plane and requests you inform Washington whether you consider time element still sufficiently important warrant sending another B–24 to Turkey in substitution.

Please repeat here for Army’s information any recommendation you make to Washington.”

Kirk

1 Not printed.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 811.248/823: Telegram

[Document 914]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 30, 1942—noon.
[Received 9:46 p.m.]

1373. The following telegram has been sent to the Legation at Cairo.

December 30, noon. Your December 29, 9 a.m.2

I see no present necessity for sending another B–24 to Turkey in substitution for the Liberator that is damaged at Aleppo provided our Army authorities in Cairo can give me definite assurances that the repairs to the damaged plane will actually be completed within 30 days and the plane returned at once thereafter to Eskisehir.3

Repeated to Department.

Steinhardt

2 See supra.

3 After being repaired the plane was returned to Turkey by a civilian crew in March 1943.

Representations by the United States regarding application of Straits Convention to passage of Axis vessels through StraitsRepresentations by the United States regarding application of Straits Convention to passage of Axis vessels through Straits

[915] The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 25, 1942—10 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/24469: Telegram

[916] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, September 30, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 10 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/24583: Telegram

[917] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson)

Washington, October 24, 1942—4 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/25076a: Telegram

[918] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson)

Washington, October 24, 1942—8 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/25076b: Telegram

[919] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

Kuibyshev (Moscow), October 26, 1942—3 p.m. [Received October 26—1:40 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25076: Telegram

[920] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

Kuibyshev (Moscow), October 27, 1942—9 p.m. [Received October 28—6:08 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25112: Telegram

[921] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, October 29, 1942—10 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/25112: Telegram

[922] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, October 31, 1942—9 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/25112: Telegram

[923] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 4, 1942—4 p.m. [Received 9:51 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25259: Telegram

[924] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 5, 1942—8 p.m. [Received November 6—12:25 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/25271: Telegram

[925] Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. Charles E. Bohlen of the Division of European Affairs

[Washington,] November 18, 1942.

851.85/684

[926] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 26, 1942—5 p.m. [Received December 27—5:50 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/26722: Telegram

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 740.0011 European War 1939/24469: Telegram

[Document 915]

The Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, September 25, 1942—10 p.m.

467. We have been shown a copy of a note which the German delegation in Paris addressed to the French Government in Vichy on September 13, demanding the cession of about 140,000 tons of idle French merchant shipping for immediate use in the Black Sea. A definite reply to this demand has not been made, but it is indicated that the French Government will agree to accord to Germany at least 75,000 tons of foreign (i. e. non-French) tonnage now being used for French supply needs and may accord additional French tonnage as well, even though the demands are entirely outside the terms of the Armistice Convention.

Please inform the Turkish authorities in strictest confidence of the above and request they keep secret the source of the information. You may inquire of the Turkish authorities regarding their attitude towards the passage of such vessels through the Dardanelles. Although the German Government will doubtless endeavor to classify as merchant vessels any such ships obtained from France and sent to the Black Sea, it is obvious that the only use of such vessels will be directly connected with armed hostilities and that they should be regarded in fact as auxiliary naval vessels. Auxiliary vessels would naturally be denied passage through the Straits in accordance with Article 19 of the Montreux Straits Convention.4

Hull

4 Signed July 20, 1936, League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. clxxiii, p. 213.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/24583: Telegram

[Document 916]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, September 30, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 10 p.m.]

963. Your 467, September 25. I have informed Secretary General of Foreign Office5 (the Foreign Minister6 still being in the hospital following his recent operations) of the demand made by the German delegation in Paris on French Government for French shipping for immediate use in the Black Sea. I pointed out to him that this shipping would undoubtedly be utilized in connection with Axis military operations in Black Sea area and that the vessels would function in fact as auxiliary naval vessels.

Secretary General stated that this was the first information which Turk Government had received with regard to this matter. He said that the question of the passage of these vessels through the Straits would present a problem which would require careful study and consideration. He promised to keep me informed of developments in the matter.

Kelley

5 Sevki Berher.

6 Numan Menemencioğlu.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson) 740.0011 European War 1939/25076a: Telegram

[Document 917]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson)

Washington, October 24, 1942—4 p.m.

535. Some days ago the Department learned that the German Government had demanded that France turn over about 140,000 tons of idle French merchant shipping for immediate use by Germany in the Black Sea.

The Department has discussed with the British Government the advisability of pressing the Turkish Government to refuse passage for the vessels through the Dardanelles, on the grounds that the vessels will unquestionably be used in some manner closely identifiable with military operations and that consequently they should be considered as naval auxiliaries rather than merchant vessels under the Montreux Straits Convention. The British Government has expressed concurrence in this view, but has pointed out that the Soviet Government should be consulted before the Turks are urged to make such a determination, since a ruling of this kind might, at some future time, be cited by the Axis as grounds for urging the Turkish Government to refuse permission for Soviet merchant vessels to leave the Black Sea.

Both the British authorities and ourselves believe that the balance would be in our favor if the Turks should refuse all transit of merchant vessels which may in fact be assimilable to naval auxiliaries, but we naturally wish to make certain that the Soviet Government concurs before instructing Ankara.

Please discuss the matter immediately with the Soviet Foreign Office and report its views. The matter is of much urgency, since the British Government has received word that the transfer of the tonnage is about to take place and arrangements are being made for the vessels to sail.

Hull

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson) 740.0011 European War 1939/25076b: Telegram

[Document 918]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson)

Washington, October 24, 1942—8 p.m.

537. Information has come to the British Government indicating that one or possibly more of the French ships referred to in the Department’s telegram No. 535 to Kuibyshev may arrive soon at the Dardanelles. Please make every attempt to obtain the views of the Soviet Government regarding the questions raised in the above-mentioned telegram at the earliest possible moment and inform both Ankara and Department.

Hull

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25076: Telegram

[Document 919]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

Kuibyshev (Moscow), October 26, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received October 26—1:40 p.m.]

933. Department’s 535, and 537 of October 24 arrived only today. I presented the matter to Lozovski7 this afternoon who hopes to have a reply for me tomorrow.

Henderson

7 S. A. Lozovsky, Assistant People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25112: Telegram

[Document 920]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Henderson) to the Secretary of State

Kuibyshev (Moscow), October 27, 1942—9 p.m.
[Received October 28—6:08 a.m.]

947. Department’s 537, October 24, 8 p.m. and my 933, October 26, 3 p.m. Lozovski handed me an aide-mémoire this evening which states in substance that: (1) The Soviet Government agrees with the American and British Governments that the French tonnage will be used as auxiliary ships in the Black Sea and that the passage of these ships through the Straits would be a clear violation of the Montreux Convention.

(2) The Soviet Government considers that it would be fully expedient for the Government of the United States to make the planned representations to the Turkish Government with regard to this matter and proposes on its part that the American, British, and Soviet Governments make joint representations to the Turkish Government regarding the necessity of refusing to permit the ships in question to pass through the Straits and thus of not allowing the use of these ships for military purposes.

Repeated to Ankara.

Henderson

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 740.0011 European War 1939/25112: Telegram

[Document 921]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, October 29, 1942—10 p.m.

556. With reference to Kuibyshev’s 947, October 27, 9 p.m., repeated to you, the Department desires that you make representations to the Turkish authorities along the lines indicated, either jointly with your British and Soviet colleagues, or separately, if the latter appears more appropriate after you have consulted with your colleagues.

The matter is of much urgency, since the British Government understands that one or more of the vessels may be approaching the Dardanelles.

For your information, the British contemplate attempting to delay the vessels in Istanbul by legal proceedings if the representations to the Turkish authorities are not successful.

Ambassador Steinhardt8 is inclined to believe that the Turkish authorities may decide to permit no transit through the Dardanelles, in either direction of course, of merchant vessels which are in fact assimilable to naval auxiliaries.

Hull

8 Temporarily in the United States.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 740.0011 European War 1939/25112: Telegram

[Document 922]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, October 31, 1942—9 p.m.

563. British Government feels strongly that a separate rather than a joint approach should be made to the Turkish Government regarding passage through the Dardanelles of the vessels from France. The Department feels accordingly that you should disregard previous instructions as to alternate courses of action in this matter and take the initiative in approaching the Turkish authorities. This would be followed by a similar approach on the part of the British in accordance with the policy outlined in the British Foreign Office’s telegram no. 6680 to its Embassy in Washington, repeated to Ankara. The Soviets could thereafter follow suit if they desired.

Hull

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25259: Telegram

[Document 923]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 4, 1942—4 p.m.
[Received 9:51 p.m.]

1115. Your 563, October 31. I saw Minister for Foreign Affairs this morning and after informing him of facts in matter stated that it was clear that Germans wanted to send the vessels through Straits only for purpose of their taking part in or facilitating military operations in Black Sea area. The only use to which such vessels would be put under present circumstances would be directly connected with armed hostilities. Consequently it was opinion of my Government that the ships should be regarded not as merchant vessels but as auxiliary naval vessels which they were in fact and therefore denied passage through Straits in accordance with article 19 of Montreux Straits Convention.

Numan replied that the provisions of Montreux Convention with regard to the definition of auxiliary naval vessels were very precise and Turk Government would be precluded by these provisions from classifying merchant vessels which were to be used for military purposes as auxiliary naval vessels. He did not recall that article 6 of annex 2 classified as auxiliary naval vessels, merchant vessels which might be used in connection with a military purpose, therefore, did not see how Turk Government under Montreux Convention could deny these ships passage through Straits. He added however, that he would refer matter to legal adviser of Foreign Office with a view to seeing if there were any technicalities particularly ones which might become evident when vessels requested passage which would permit Turk Government to deny them passage.

Kelley

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/25271: Telegram

[Document 924]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, November 5, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received November 6—12:25 a.m.]

1126. My 1115, November 4. British Ambassador9 made representations today to Foreign Minister regarding passage through Straits of ships obtained by Germany from French Government and Minister took same position as he did in his conversation with me.

Soviet Chargé also called Minister today regarding matter and received a reply similar to those received by British Ambassador and myself. Soviet Chargé has been in some perplexity with regard to execution of his rather rigid instructions which directed him either to call on Minister for Foreign Affairs jointly with his British and American colleagues or if visits were made separately to make his visit on same days those made by Hugessen and myself. After being informed that both Hugessen and myself had received instructions that I should make first approach he decided to make his representations today.

Kelley

9 Sir Hughe M. Knatchbull-Hugessen.

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. Charles E. Bohlen of the Division of European Affairs 851.85/684

[Document 925]

Memorandum of Telephone Conversation, by Mr. Charles E. Bohlen of the Division of European Affairs

[Washington,] November 18, 1942.

I telephoned Mr. Gromyko10 in regard to the question of the French ships concerning which he made inquiry of you11 this morning. On the basis of information received from NE,12 I told him that it was our understanding that the ships in question were originally Norwegian ships which had been seized by France in 1940 and were to be delivered to Germany, and that since there was reason to believe that these ships were expected to leave Marseille, representations concerning them had been made in Ankara.

Mr. Gromyko inquired whether we knew the date of the transfer of these ships to Germany.

After inquiring again of NE on this point I told Mr. Gromyko that we had no definite information that they actually had been transferred to German registry but only that there had been an agreement to do so, and that furthermore it was not certain whether or not these ships had ever left Marseille.

10 Andrey Andreyevich Gromyko, Counselor of the Soviet Embassy.

11 Presumably the Acting Chief of the Division of European Affairs, Ray Atherton.

12 Division of Near Eastern Affairs.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/26722: Telegram

[Document 926]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, December 26, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received December 27—5:50 a.m.]

1354. Embassy Naval Attaché has drawn my attention to four Axis barges which passed through Bosphorus headed for Aegean on December 23. He states that although these barges give every appearance of being commercial vessels they are obviously intended for military purposes and that he is informed that a considerable additional number have been assembled along Black Sea coast and a number during past year.

British Chargé with whom I discussed matter this morning states that under instructions from London he is protesting to Foreign Office today. I told him that unless he received satisfactory assurances from Foreign Office on subject I would protest at once against passage of any more of these barges.

Steinhardt

Clarification of statement by Ambassador Mac Murray regarding Turkish-Soviet relationsClarification of statement by Ambassador Mac Murray regarding Turkish-Soviet relations

[927] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, January 21, 1942—6 p.m. [Received 11:45 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/18771: Telegram

[928] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, January 22, 1942—7 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/18771: Telegram

[929] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, January 23, 1942—8 p.m.

740.0011 European War 1939/18771: Telegram

[930] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, January 26, 1942—8 p.m. [Received January 27—2:52 a.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/18928: Telegram

[931] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, January 27, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 9:30 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/18983: Telegram

[932] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, January 30, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 8:03 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/19096: Telegram

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/18771: Telegram

[Document 927]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, January 21, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received 11:45 p.m.]

34. Referring to the Tass press despatch forwarded yesterday and the German communiqué forwarded today relating to an alleged statement of Ambassador MacMurray13 published in the Baltimore Sun, I consider it highly important that a categorical denial of this statement appear in the Turkish press as soon as possible. This might take the form of a denial made by Ambassador MacMurray or a statement made by you at a press conference which would be published by the Anatolian Agency as a news item coming from the United States or a letter written by myself to the Anatolian Agency for publication in the Turkish press.

As the Department will have observed this alleged statement has been seized upon by German propaganda agencies for utilization in the campaign which they have been carrying on to arouse enmity towards the Soviet Union. Turkish-Soviet relations constitute the weakest link in the chain binding Turkey to Great Britain and it is of the utmost importance, in my opinion, that we do everything feasible to diminish if not to eliminate entirely the distrust and suspicion of Moscow existing among the Turkish leaders. The British Ambassador has been working for many months with this object in view and he is quite disturbed that the Germans have now been given a weapon which they can make use of to aggravate Turkish suspicion of Moscow just at a time when he and his Government felt that they were making some progress in diminishing Turkish mistrust on this point. While the Turkish Government has apparently not permitted any comment on the Tass communiqué to appear in the Turkish press, Turkish newspaper readers among whom there exists already considerable suspicion of Russian aspirations with regard to the Dardanelles and anxiety with regard to role which Moscow will seek to play in nourishing [post-] war Europe, will undoubtedly draw conclusions of a nature calculated to facilitate German propaganda against Moscow.

Kelley

13 John Van A. MacMurray, Ambassador to Turkey, on home leave in the United States prior to resigning; Laurence A. Steinhardt, Ambassador in the Soviet Union, was transferred to Turkey where he assumed charge on March 5, 1942.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 740.0011 European War 1939/18771: Telegram

[Document 928]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, January 22, 1942—7 p.m.

22. Your no. 34, January 21, 6 p.m. The pertinent portions from the Baltimore Sun article of January 8 were as follows: “The main sour note in Turkey’s Allied relations, Mr. MacMurray said, is that nation’s relations with Russia.

‘Turkish-Russian relations have not been very cordial since the war began,’ he said, ‘and they have tended to get worse. The difficulties between the two nations have not been straightened out.’

The former Ambassador attributed the strained relations to Russia’s about-face in 1939, when the Soviets signed their sensational pact of friendship with Germany.14

‘The Turks were profoundly disillusioned,’ the diplomat said. ‘After the World War, they were very close friends—with a sort of Damon and Pythias friendship. They were both outcasts from the diplomacy of the Western World, and hence became very close.’

This, Mr. MacMurray said, made Russia’s 1939 about-face worse in Turkish eyes.

‘It was not an unfriendly act by an old enemy, but a betrayal by a close friend,’ the former envoy said.

And, to make matters worse, there was the matter of the Straits of Bosporus and the Dardanelles.

‘Reports have been public that before Germany attacked, Russia had tried to make a deal on the Straits at Turkey’s expense,’ Mr. MacMurray said.”

It has not been possible to get in touch with Mr. MacMurray since receipt of your telegram under reference. The subject has been discussed with the Turkish Ambassador, who has been furnished with a complete text of the article. The Turkish Ambassador does not find in the article anything which should disturb the Turkish or even the Russian Government. He points out that the Turkish press in June, 1941, was full of the rumors to which Mr. MacMurray referred, and that he stated merely that these reports were public.

You may discuss the matter with the Turkish Foreign Minister, in much the same manner as we have discussed it here, and inquire whether the Turkish Government believes any useful purpose would be served in giving the matter further official notice.

An instruction is being sent to Kuibyshev authorizing discussions with the Soviet Government if considered necessary.

Hull

14 For correspondence on the improvement of German-Soviet relations following the Treaty of Non-Aggression, signed at Moscow, August 23, 1939, see Foreign Relations, 1940, vol. i, pp. 539 ff. For text of treaty, see Documents on German Foreign Policy, 1918–1945, series D, vol. vii, pp. 245–247.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 740.0011 European War 1939/18771: Telegram

[Document 929]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)15

Washington, January 23, 1942—8 p.m.

26. Your 34, January 21, 6 p.m. For such use as in your discretion you may desire to make of it, there is set forth below the text of a letter addressed by Ambassador MacMurray today to the editor of the Baltimore Sun for publication in that paper on January 24, relating to his interview published on January 8.

A copy of this letter will be brought to the attention of the Turkish Ambassador.

“It appears that German propaganda, with the purpose of creating dissension among the United Nations, is giving currency to a misquotation of the interview which I gave to one of your correspondents and which was published in the Sun of January 8th last. In the course of that interview I referred to the fact that Turkish opinion had been perplexed and troubled by the reports (actually originating in Germany) which had been widely published during the summer of 1941, to the effect that Russia had tried to make a deal with Germany concerning the Straits of the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles at Turkey’s expense. This has been widely misrepresented by the Nazi press and radio as a statement by me that the Soviet Government had in fact made such an attempt—a statement which I did not make and would not have been in a position to make: and this falsification has even been cited in support of equally false Nazi propaganda to the effect that the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Great Britain16 on his recent visit to Moscow offered its Russian ally a free hand in regard to the Straits.

There has also been a direct attribution to me of the opinion that the conclusion of the Soviet-German Treaty of August 23, 1939, constituted a betrayal of Turkey by the Soviet Government, whereas a reading of the interview should make clear that I was not expressing an opinion but referred to the concern which the Soviet-German Treaty had tended to create at that time in the minds of some Turkish circles.

I should appreciate it if you would be good enough to publish this letter in order to place on record its correction of the unscrupulous perversions of my remarks which Nazi propaganda is putting about.”

Hull

15 The same, mutatis mutandis, was sent on the same date to the Chargé in the Soviet Union as telegram No. 29.

16 Anthony Eden.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/18928: Telegram

[Document 930]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, January 26, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received January 27—2:52 a.m.]

55. Department’s 26, January 23, 8 p.m.; and 22, January 29 [22], 7 p.m. The full text of the letter of Ambassador MacMurray (as communicated by Embassy) together with a Reuter despatch from Washington summarizing the letter, has been published by Anatolian Agency and both were printed in this morning’s semi-official Ulus. Turkish press has also published a British news agency despatch containing allegedly the full text of Mr. MacMurray’s interview.

The Ambassador’s letter has been very helpful. The Soviet Ambassador told me yesterday evening that he was very much pleased with the letter and remarked that he had been quite disturbed when the first press reports concerning the interview came to his attention because they appeared to indicate that the Ambassador was giving credit to the reports spread by German propaganda relative to Molotov’s visit to Berlin.17 He remarked that the Soviet authorities would not have taken notice of Mr. MacMurray’s interview if the German propaganda agencies had not first sought to exploit it (this is not true at least as far as Turkey is concerned because the first report published here was the Tass communiqué).

The Turkish Foreign Minister18 told me this morning that there was no need in his opinion of doing anything further about the matter. He said that the Turkish Government had not been disturbed at all by Mr. MacMurray’s interview and remarked confidentially that the interview was such as he might well have written himself. He thought that the Soviet authorities had been over zealous in taking the matter up since they had played into the hands of the Germans’ propaganda agencies. He said that the Turkish Government had the greatest confidence in Mr. MacMurray and he could assure me that the interview did not lessen their affection and esteem for him.

The Ankara radio has handled the matter very well. After summarizing what the Tass and DNB had to say concerning the interview the commentator pointing out that the text of the interview indicated clearly that neither of the parties to the controversy had taken the pains to examine it carefully inasmuch as Ambassador MacMurray had made no specific affirmation relative to the actual formulation of claims on the Straits by Russia but merely referred to the rumors current on this subject. The commentator concluded by saying that during his stay in Turkey, Ambassador MacMurray had won the sympathy and respect of the Turkish people and there now existed no reasons for the Turkish people to change their sentiments in regard to him. All Turks deeply regretted his departure and wished him success in his new work.

I have discussed the matter with the British Ambassador19 and he agreed that no useful purpose would be served by giving the matter further official notice. It is believed that Ambassador MacMurray’s letter will make it exceedingly difficult for the German propaganda agencies to make any further use of their perversion of his remarks in their campaign in Turkey to stir up animosity against the Soviet Government with a view to weakening the bonds between Turkey and Great Britain.

Kelley

17 For correspondence concerning Molotov’s visit to Berlin, see Nazi-Soviet Relations, 1939–1941, pp. 195 ff.

18 Sükrü Saraçoğlu.

19 Sir Hughe M. Knatchbull-Hugessen.

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/18983: Telegram

[Document 931]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, January 27, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 9:30 p.m.]

56. My 55, January 26, 8 p.m. The Turkish press has not used Izvestia article in which Ambassador MacMurray was accused of supporting German propaganda concerning Russian claims to the Straits as a topic of editorial comment, but this article and the subsequent German propaganda press despatches have resulted in a number of editorials commenting on the attempts of foreign propaganda agencies to influence public opinion in Turkey and on the question of the Straits in some of which Mr. MacMurray’s interview has been mentioned.

Deputy Sadak, who is considered to represent Foreign Office opinion, writing in Aksham of January 22, mentions the news concerning the interview as an example of foreign propaganda directed at Turkey and asserts that Turks are satisfied with the assurances given by the British Government regarding recent Moscow talks. Tan, of the same date, asserts that no propaganda of any kind will influence Turkish public opinion or bring about a change in Turkish policy and Vatan declared that the future of the Straits depends not on present propaganda but on Soviet policy after the war has terminated in the event the democracies win. Deputy Yalchin, in Yenisabah of January 24, referring to Axis propaganda concerning Eden’s visit to Moscow and Mr. MacMurray’s interview, declares that it is not only his personal conviction but also the firm opinion of authoritative circles in Ankara that Turkey does not entertain the slightest doubt regarding the sincere and just intentions of her friends and allies.

The French language journal D’Orient of January 24, in its daily review of the international situation, states it is clear after finally reading the correct text of Mr. MacMurray’s interview as published in the Baltimore Sun that, except for being American from beginning to end and being made without reservation and in complete freedom, it contains nothing which would foster a controversy or prove the correctness of the German allegations.

Kelley

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/19096: Telegram

[Document 932]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, January 30, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 8:03 p.m.]

58. I have been informed by a person in confidence of President that latter was very much pleased with Ambassador MacMurray’s interview in Baltimore Sun and considers it an excellent expose of Turkey’s position.

Kelley

Willingness of the United States to assist in the improvement of relations between the Soviet Union and Turkey; explanation of Turkish-Soviet relations by the Turkish Foreign MinisterWillingness of the United States to assist in the improvement of relations between the Soviet Union and Turkey; explanation of Turkish-Soviet relations by the Turkish Foreign Minister

[933] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 22, 1942—5 p.m. [Received 7:58 p.m.]

761.67/363: Telegram

[934] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, March 25, 1942—10 p.m.

761.67/363: Telegram

[935] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 11, 1942—10 a.m. [Received June 12—8:05 a.m.]

741.67/176: Telegram

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 761.67/363: Telegram

[Document 933]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 22, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received 7:58 p.m.]

194. The Soviet Ambassador20 told me yesterday in the strictest confidence that he had called on Saraçoğlu21 2 days ago and had asked him to tell him frankly what measures the Soviet Government could take to improve its relations with the Turkish Government and which would remove the obvious mistrust which existed. He said Saraçoğlu had replied that he would be very glad to consider any proposals the Soviet Government might care to make which would tend to improve the relations between the two countries. The Ambassador then asked me what sort of proposal I thought might appeal to the Turkish Government. I replied that without any knowledge on the subject I assumed the Turkish Government was primarily concerned with the security of its present frontiers not only during the continuance of the war but thereafter and suggested that he consider the matter along these lines.

As the Ambassador has already given evidence that it is his desire to discuss with me his efforts to improve Turkish-Soviet relations I should appreciate an expression of the Department’s views on this subject.

Repeated to Kuibyshev.

Steinhardt

20 Sergey Alexandrovich Vinogradov.

21 Sükrü Saraçoğlu, Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 761.67/363: Telegram

[Document 934]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, March 25, 1942—10 p.m.

101. Your 194, March 22, 5 p.m. The Department approves of any proper efforts which you may be able to undertake to assist in the improvement of Soviet-Turkish relations upon the Soviet Ambassador’s indication of his desire for your assistance or advice. It leaves to your discretion the extent to which you may participate in this matter without going beyond what would be welcomed by both the Turkish and Soviet authorities.

It is difficult for us to make specific suggestions with regard to any remarks which you might make while discussing Turkish-Soviet relations with the Soviet Ambassador since the mutual distrust between Turkey and the Soviet Union is based largely on fundamental differences in world outlook on the part of the two regimes and on historic conflicts in interests which cannot be eliminated by gestures or discussion.

It is, nevertheless, believed that a display on the part of the Soviet Government of somewhat more confidence in Turkish diplomatic, consular, and military officials in the Soviet Union and the showing of some special attention and the extension of unusual courtesies to them would have a helpful effect.

It is understood that the Turks are not as much alarmed as they were formerly at reported Soviet separatist activities in Northern Iran.22 If however Soviet-Turkish relations are to be improved, the Soviet Government by act and deed should make special efforts fully to allay Turkish suspicions that the Soviet Union has any annexational aims with regard to Iran.

Turkish suspicions of Russian ambitions with regard to the Dardanelles are so deep that it will be extremely difficult to remove them. The Soviet officials might, however, find ways during conversations with Turkish officials to impress upon them privately, and to express willingness to make public declarations to the same effect if desired, that the Soviet Union desires no rights or privileges in the Dardanelles which have not already been accorded to it by treaty. It may be observed that the Straits Convention23 was negotiated to the satisfaction of the Turkish Government.

Welles

22 For correspondence regarding Soviet activities in Northern Iran, see pp. 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361] ff.

23 Signed at Montreux, July 20, 1936, League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. clxxiii, p. 213. For correspondence, see Foreign Relations, 1936, vol. iii, pp. 503 ff.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 741.67/176: Telegram

[Document 935]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 11, 1942—10 a.m.
[Received June 12—8:05 a.m.]

571. For President, Secretary and Under Secretary. Saraçoğlu asked me to call at Foreign Office yesterday. He said that in view of certain recent developments he wanted to give me background of Turk-British and Turk-Soviet relations during recent years.23a

Relations between Turkey and Soviet were most cordial prior to negotiations which led up to Montreux Convention, both nations living up to spirit as well as letter of their treaty not to enter into political negotiations with a neighboring nation without consulting the other and not to conclude any agreement without concurrence of the other. Prior to meeting of Montreux Conference Turkey and Soviet exchanged views and although differences of opinion existed among the other nations Turkey and Soviet were in complete accord at time conference convened. On arriving at Montreux, Turks ascertained that without their knowledge Soviets had changed their position. This aroused certain amount of suspicion in Ankara. In order to overcome the resultant difficulties Britain acted as mediator and found solution acceptable to Turkey and Soviet. In consequence Turkish policy was reoriented away from Soviet and towards Britain, notwithstanding which, Soviet resumed its friendly attitude towards Turkey and former cordial relations were resumed.

When Germany manifested aggressive designs in respect to Czechoslovakia and Danzig, British inquired whether Turkey was prepared to associate itself with other nations in maintaining peace. Turks replied that they would prefer to discuss relations with Britain first. Resulting discussions ultimately led to Anglo-French-Turkish alliance.

When British and French went to Moscow in 1939, relations between Soviet and Turkey were cordial and the two countries exchanged views concerning progress of discussions taking place in Moscow. While Anglo-French-Soviet negotiations24 went badly, the Anglo-French-Turkish discussions went well. Soviets became uneasy and when a breakdown of their negotiations with the British and French threatened, sent Potemkin25 to Ankara.

Saraçoğlu suggested to Potemkin the conclusion of a Turkish-Soviet treaty on the one hand and an Anglo-French-Turkish treaty on the other, thus constituting Turkey a bridge across the gap between Britain and France and the Soviet Union. Saraçoğlu believed that his proposal would induce the Soviets to come to an agreement with the British and French lest they be “left out”. Potemkin proposed to Saraçoğlu that the conclusion of the Soviet-Turkish treaty be delayed pending the completion of the Anglo-French-Turkish negotiations. To this Saraçoğlu agreed. When the latter negotiations were completed Saraçoğlu was invited to Moscow and took with him drafts of the proposed Soviet-Turkish and Anglo-French-Turkish treaties. While he was en route to Moscow the Soviets attacked Poland.

During the first 4 hours of their 6–hour conference, Stalin26 discussed principally the proposed Anglo-French-Turkish treaty and in the course of the discussion suggested certain changes of a minor nature in the draft Saraçoğlu had brought with him. Saraçoğlu expressed the opinion to Stalin that the British would agree to these changes. Up to this point in their conference, Stalin had been extremely pleasant to Saraçoğlu and most disagreeable to Molotov.27 Stalin then briefly referred to the proposed Soviet-Turkish treaty in general terms indicating that the draft was substantially satisfactory. As Saraçoğlu rose to leave, Stalin handed him a memorandum and suggested that he take it with him and study it. Saraçoğlu glanced at the memorandum and on seeing the word “Straits” said that he could not accept the memorandum, returned to his seat and the discussions continued. Saraçoğlu stated that he could not discuss the Straits, to which Stalin replied that there was nothing proposed in the memorandum which was not “natural” and that if Saraçoğlu would examine the memorandum carefully he would find that “it merely sought information” adding that the Montreux Convention gave Turkey many rights in connection with the control of the Straits and that he merely wished to know how the Turkish Government intended to exercise these rights. Saraçoğlu replied that if he were to tell Stalin how Turks intended to exercise their rights under Montreux Convention, any such statement would be tantamount to a commitment and Turkey would lose its freedom of action. Saraçoğlu then proceeded to point out other objections to the memo. Stalin reached for the paper, tore it up, threw it on floor and stamped on it. Notwithstanding Stalin’s obvious displeasure at Saraçoğlu’s attitude, former said he would sign Soviet-Turk treaty. Thereupon Saraçoğlu requested British and French to accept minor changes suggested by Stalin in proposed Anglo-French-Turk treaty and they agreed to do so.

Saraçoğlu was not informed by Stalin or Molotov that at very time Soviets were negotiating with him, they were negotiating with Von Ribbentrop.28 After obtaining agreement of British and French to changes suggested by Stalin, Saraçoğlu notified Kremlin he was ready to sign both Soviet-Turk and Anglo-French-Turk treaties. Reply he received was to effect Kremlin was about to suggest further changes in Anglo-French-Turk treaty. Saraçoğlu answered he could not remain in Moscow any longer and left immediately thereafter. He was courteously treated on his return trip including having a Soviet warship placed at his disposal. By time he reached Istanbul, Anglo-French-Turk treaty29 had been signed at his direction. Speed with which treaty was concluded without further consulting Soviets, resulted in a coolness between Soviets and Turkey. From that time on Soviets no longer kept Turkey informed of their negotiations with neighboring powers and after a while Turks ceased furnishing similar information to Soviets. While relations between [the] two countries continued “correct”, former friendship and intimacy no longer existed.

When Iran was occupied by Soviets and British,30 Turks were kept informed by British and received no information from Soviets. A guarantee of integrity of Iran was given to Turkey by British. Subsequently, Soviets gave Turkey a similar guarantee. However, as Soviet guarantee was word for word that previously received from British, Saraçoğlu regards guarantee “as a British child.”

Day before Molotov’s recent visit to London,30a British renewed to Turk Government their unqualified guarantee of Turkey’s territorial integrity including “Straits and all Turk interests”. At same time British expressed belief Soviets would give a similar guarantee to Turkey. Soviets, however, have not given a similar guarantee such as was given at time of occupation of Iran, but instead have informed Turkey they consider Soviet-Turk treaty of 194131 to be in full force and effect; pointed out Soviets have accepted Atlantic Charter;32 and invited attention of Turk Government to agreement between Soviet and Britain that neither country would make peace without consent of other. These assurances are not in writing but were read by Vishinsky to Turk Chargé in Kuibyshev.

Saraçoğlu then read to me telegram received within past few days from Turk Ambassador in London giving substance of a talk with Eden.33 Telegram informed Saraçoğlu that Eden was disturbed at attempts of Axis propaganda to cause trouble between Turkey and Soviet and expressed concern of British Government lest recent agreement by Germany to deliver war material to Turkey be utilized by Germans as they had done in case of Yugoslavia for purpose of infiltrating into Turkey by means of technicians and specialists. Turk Ambassador reassured Eden on both these counts and then referred to recent unfriendly attitude of Soviet towards Turkey. Eden replied that the new 20-year alliance between Britain and Soviet34 should go far towards reassuring Turkey.

Saraçoğlu then told me that it was his intention to instruct Turk Ambassador in London to inform Eden that Britain had been relying upon Turkey since 1939 and that it could confidently continue to do so, and that Turkey had no ambitions vis-à-vis the Soviet, British could give Soviet any guarantees it desired to this effect on behalf of Turkey.

Saraçoğlu concluded this phase of his remarks with the remark “Turkey does not wish a foot of territory from anyone and will not yield a foot of its territory to anyone”.

Saraçoğlu then stated that toward end of 1941 he had received a telegram from Turk Ambassador in Washington, which quoted a letter of Sir Wilmot Lewis,35 published in London Times, to effect that Soviet had territorial aspirations in regard to Baltic States, Rumania and Poland, and to the Straits and remarked that he had paid little attention to this report at the time. However, he had recently received further telegrams from Ambassador in Washington, two of which again quoted Sir Wilmot Lewis. In first of these telegrams Lewis was quoted as having stated that now and at end of the war “Soviet eyes will be on Poland and Turkey because these countries have ambitions against the Soviet Union”. The second also quoted remarks of Lewis with regard to Turkey and Straits. Saraçoğlu observed that he was somewhat concerned at Lewis’s continued references to Turkey and Straits as he believed he might reflect views of at least one or more individuals in British Foreign Office.

Saraçoğlu then remarked he noticed that the American correspondents in Kuibyshev had recently been sending telegrams to their newspapers in the United States, supporting the view that the Soviet Union “must have strategic frontiers” and said that a continuance of this course could only result in encouraging the Soviet Union to make unreasonable territorial demands.

Saraçoğlu stated that he had inquired of Hugessen36 as to whether Molotov, during his recent stay in London had made any demands which would affect Turkey and that the Ambassador had assured him that no such demands had been made. He added that the Turkish Ambassador in Washington had expressed the opinion to him that Molotov would have even more difficulty in Washington than in London, were he to advance any demands affecting Turkey.

In conclusion Saraçoğlu expressed the hope that the Department would inform him of any phase of any negotiations that it might have with the Soviet Government which might in any manner affect Turkish interests.

I may add to the foregoing my personal conviction that the Turks will faithfully adhere to their alliance with Britain and that no amount of German blandishment, trickery or threats will swerve them from this course. While they may make minor concessions to Germany from time to time in order to relieve the pressure to which they are being constantly subjected, I am convinced they will not go over to the Axis and that they will fight if attacked.

Steinhardt

23a This diplomatic setting is described in Harry N. Howard, “Germany, the Soviet Union, and Turkey during World War II,” Department of State Bulletin, July 18, 1948, pp. 63 ff.

24 See Foreign Relations, 1939, vol. i, pp. 232 ff.

25 Vladimir Petrovich Potemkin, Assistant People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union. The Ankara visit (April 29–May 5, 1939) was one of several made by Mr. Potemkin to the capitals of the countries of Eastern and Southeastern Europe at this time; see Max Beloff, The Foreign Policy of the Soviet Union, 1929–1941, vol. ii, 1936–1941 (New York, 1949), pp. 240–242.

26 Iosif Vissarionovich Stalin, President of the Council of People’s Commissars (Premier) of the Soviet Union.

27 Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov, Soviet People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs.

28 Joachim von Ribbentrop, German Foreign Minister; for Soviet negotiations, see Foreign Relations, 1939, vol. i, pp. 312 ff.

29 Treaty of Mutual Assistance, signed at Ankara, October 19, 1939, League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. cc, p. 167.

30 For correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, pp. 383 ff.

30a For reports concerned with the visit of Mr. Molotov to London and Washington during May and June, 1942, see vol. iii, pp. 543–596, passim.

31 Joint Soviet-Turkish Declaration, March 24, 1941; see telegram No. 79, March 24, 1941, 6 p.m., from the Ambassador in Turkey, Foreign Relations, 1941, vol. iii, p. 836.

32 For text, see ibid., vol. i, p. 367; with regard to Soviet acceptance of the Charter, see bracketed note, ibid., p. 378.

33 Anthony Eden, British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

34 Anglo-Soviet treaty of alliance, signed at London May 26, 1942, League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. cciv, p. 353. For correspondence concerning the negotiation of this treaty, see Foreign Relations, 1942, vol. iii, pp. 490–566, passim.

35 Washington correspondent of the London Times.

36 Sir Hughe M. Knatchbull-Hugessen, British Ambassador in Turkey.

Misuse by the Soviet Government of information furnished by the United States regarding the attempted assassination of German Ambassador von Papen in AnkaraMisuse by the Soviet Government of information furnished by the United States regarding the attempted assassination of German Ambassador von Papen in Ankara

[936] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, February 25, 1942—5 p.m. [Received February 26—12:25 a.m.]

867.00/3123: Telegram

[937] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 6, 1942—1 p.m. [Received March 7—12:42 a.m.]

867.00/3125: Telegram

[938] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 6, 1942—6 p.m. [Received March 7—1:47 a.m.]

867.00/3124: Telegram

[939] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 11, 1942—3 p.m. [Received 8:09 p.m.]

867.00/3126: Telegram

[940] The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State

Bern, March 12, 1942—noon. [Received 5:30 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/20247: Telegram

[941] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) to the Secretary of State

Kuibyshev (Moscow), March 17, 1942—noon. [Received 12:48 p.m.]

740.0011 European War 1939/20395: Telegram

[942] The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, March 24, 1942—8 p.m. [Received March 24—6:32 p.m.]

867.00/3129: Telegram

[943] The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston)

Washington, March 25, 1942—9 p.m.

867.00/3129: Telegram

[944] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 31, 1942—2 p.m. [Received April 1—9:02 a.m.]

867.00/3132: Telegram

[945] The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, April 1, 1942—midnight.

867.00/3132: Telegram

[946] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 11, 1942—8 p.m. [Received 9:38 p.m.]

867.00/3136: Telegram

[947] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 17, 1942—3 p.m. [Received April 18—2:18 a.m.]

867.00/3140: Telegram

[948] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 17, 1942—7 p.m. [Received April 18—4:12 a.m.]

867.00/3139: Telegram

[949] The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Standley) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 21, 1942—8 p.m. [Received 9:15 p.m.]

867.00/3142: Telegram

[950] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 28, 1942—11 a.m. [Received April 29—3:20 a.m.]

867.00/3148: Telegram

[951] The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 24, 1942—1 p.m. [Received 8:03 p.m.]

867.00/3170: Telegram

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3123: Telegram

[Document 936]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, February 25, 1942—5 p.m.
[Received February 26—12:25 a.m.]

103. I understand that the American correspondents have telegraphed full details of bomb explosion which occurred yesterday morning on the principal boulevard of Ankara only a few yards from the German Ambassador and Frau von Papen who were walking from their residence to the German Embassy.36a So far as can be learned no evidence has been found proving that an attempt on the Ambassador’s life was intended and so great was the force of the bomb destroying practically all evidence including the man presumably carrying it that it is doubtful whether such evidence ever can be found.

The Turkish authorities have not attempted to suppress the news of this event and have apparently allowed foreign correspondents to emphasize possibility that political assassination was real motive. In fact the official communiqué issued last night mentions “the probability that this evil act was directed against the Ambassador” and also states that the Minister of Foreign Affairs37 and Secretary General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs38 as well as representatives of the President39 and of the Prime Minister40 had called on the Ambassador to inquire after his health.

Today’s semi-official Ulus declares that the news has disgusted all of Angora as no doubt all of Turkey and that such incidents cannot be permitted in this country; also that it has “caused a feeling of joy that the Ambassador of the Reich whom we love and respect to the highest degree and whose conception German-Turkish friendship has had a great effect on the relations between the two countries as well as Madame von Papen should have escaped unharmed from the explosion. We congratulate them and express to them our most sincere sentiments. The repercussions of yesterday’s incident have called forth a new manifestation of German-Turkish friendship and of the respect and affection which we bear the German Ambassador to Turkey.”

Kelley

36a For Ambassador von Papen’s own account of this episode, see his Memoirs, pp. 485–487.

37 Sükrü Saraçoğlu.

38 Numan Menemencioğlu.

39 Ismet Inönü.

40 Refik Saydam.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3125: Telegram

[Document 937]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 6, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received March 7—12:42 a.m.]

123. An official communiqué published in this morning’s Ulus concerning the bomb explosion reported in the Embassy’s 103 February 25, 5 p.m. states that the police investigation has revealed the following details to date: That the man carrying the explosive material was born in Yugoslavia in 1917 and had completed his college studies there; that his name was Omer Tokat and was the son of a teacher; that having become a Communist there he came to Turkey in June 1940 and enrolled as a foreign student in the Istanbul law faculty; that [by] taking [advantage] of the general provisions concerning emigrants (those of Turkish origin) he had acquired Turkish nationality in June 1941; that he was carrying a revolver whose number had been effaced; that his identity and that of his comrades was established 2 days after the explosion and the latter were arrested; that they are also natives of Yugoslavia where they grew up and became Communists and that they emigrated in recent years and took Turkish nationality; that from the depositions of the accomplices under arrest it is learned that certain foreigners of Angora and Istanbul whose identity has also been established had arranged with them an attempt against the life of two personalities of a foreign power; that an investigation is likewise being carried out concerning these foreigners; that it is proved that the Angora attempt was directed against the person of Ambassador von Papen.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3124: Telegram

[Document 938]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 6, 1942—6 p.m.
[Received March 7—1:47 a.m.]

124. Reference my 123, March 6. I have been informed in confidence by an entirely reliable source that the accomplices of the man killed in the bomb explosion, who have now been arrested by the Turkish police have by their confessions implicated several members of the Soviet Embassy in Ankara. My informant further states that one of the accomplices has taken refuge at the Soviet Consulate General in Istanbul, that the Consul General has thus far refused to allow the police to interrogate him and that the police have requested the Soviet Ambassador’s permission to enter the premises threatening to enter by force if necessary.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3126: Telegram

[Document 939]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 11, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received 8:09 p.m.]

143. In a conversation with Kelley41 yesterday the Secretary General of Foreign Office stated Soviet Consul General in Istanbul has surrendered to Turkish police the individual referred to in my 124, March 6, 6 p.m., who took sanctuary in the Consulate. He said police have also arrested an employee of the Soviet Commercial Delegation in Istanbul, this individual having been taken off a train at Kayseri by the police. It appears that one member of the Soviet Embassy in Ankara is considered by the police to be involved but Turkish authorities have not made any demand for his surrender. Secretary General emphasized Turkish Government intended to probe matter to the very bottom and was determined to take whatever measures were necessary to prevent occurrence of another incident of this sort in Ankara. He made it clear Turkish authorities are convinced of the guilt of the Soviet nationals who have been implicated.

Secretary General indicated Soviet Ambassador42 has been very helpful in the matter.

I am inclined to believe one or more members of Soviet Embassy will shortly find it convenient to leave Ankara permanently.

Repeated to Kuibyshev.

Steinhardt

41 Robert F. Kelley, Counselor of Embassy in Turkey.

42 Sergey Alexandrovich Vinogradov.

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/20247: Telegram

[Document 940]

The Chargé in Switzerland (Huddle) to the Secretary of State 43

Bern, March 12, 1942—noon.
[Received 5:30 p.m.]

1011. Source44 Legation’s 997, March 1145 just received following urgent message from Berlin contacts:

Attempt on Von Papen’s life in Ankara organized by Himmler46 with Hitler’s approval. Last May Himmler presented to Hitler a plan to “dispose” of Von Papen in manner appearing to be foreign attack on new German Reich. Group leader Wulff, assigned task by Himmler of preparing the assassination, proceeded to have agents win confidence of group of communistically inclined Serbs and Croats in occupied part of Yugoslavia. In this group several men found who believing they were acting “for Moscow” were “shipped” to Turkey with instructions to form contacts with Russian diplomatic and consular personnel there, purpose of German agents being to compromise the Russians when attempt at assassination would be later made. The Yugoslavs believed and probably even today believe sincerely they were acting under orders of Moscow. Von Papen himself perhaps does not yet know background of plot although he will be informed upon his arrival in Germany.

At present Nazi leadership in Berlin exerting maximum effort to make it appear plausible to Turks that Russians actually organized attempt on life of Von Papen, hoping thereby to lighten task of inducing Turkey to renounce completely Anglo-American-Russian friendship and permit passage German troops through Turkey.

Sole element of good fortune for Allies in the affair is that the would-be assassins had not succeeded in making contact with any important Russian diplomatic or consular officials who in fact had nothing whatsoever to do with the affair.

[Here follows paragraph on possible Bulgarian participation in spring offensive.]

Legation note: The informant reports that his Berlin contacts consider it urgent that the foregoing version of the attempt against Von Papen be conveyed to interested governments in time to prevent any possible irreparable damage to Allied relations with Turkey, though himself admitting a possibility that the incident may have failed of this purpose because the Russians actually knew nothing of it and the Turkish investigation has in consequence not been able to prove their implication. The reliability of the version is of course subject to verification. The Legation has found previous information from the source quoted to be reasonably reliable as a whole and in detail. The sensational report which on its face seems incredible may nevertheless also be given consideration along with reports which have followed the mysterious deaths of high ranking German officials and military officers.

Huddle

43 Except for first paragraph, repeated by the Department to the Chargé in the Soviet Union as telegram No. 122, March 14, 10 p.m., and to the Ambassador in Turkey as telegram No. 82, March 14, 10 p.m.

44 A German acquaintance of the Second Secretary of Legation (Chase) who was in touch with the anti-Nazi movement in Germany; for purposes of security and convenience he was given the code name of “Mr. Schwaben”.

45 Not printed.

46 Heinrich Himmler, Reichsführer-SS and Chief of the German police with rank of State Secretary.

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) to the Secretary of State 740.0011 European War 1939/20395: Telegram

[Document 941]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) to the Secretary of State 47

Kuibyshev (Moscow), March 17, 1942—noon.
[Received 12:48 p.m.]

232. I informed Vyshinski48 last night of the report regarding the recent attempt on Von Papen’s life as presented in the Department’s 122, March 14.49 Vyshinski expressed great appreciation, and said the information confirmed other reports reaching the Soviet Government indicative of efforts by Germany to provoke a conflict between Russia and Turkey.

Thurston

47 Repeated to the Ambassador in Turkey as Department’s telegram No. 85, March 19, 4 p.m.

48 Andrey Yanuaryevich Vyshinsky, Assistant People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union.

49 See footnote 43, p. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940].

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3129: Telegram

[Document 942]

The Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, March 24, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received March 24—6:32 p.m.]

85. Vice Commissar Dekanosov inquired of me this evening whether the Soviet Government might advise the Turkish Government that the American Government had supplied the information regarding the German origin of the attempt on Von Papen which I recently conveyed to Vyshinski.

I replied that although I had no doubt that the information was furnished in order that it might be employed as the Soviet Government saw fit, I would have to request instructions with respect to its attribution to my Government.

Prompt instructions are requested.

Thurston

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston) 867.00/3129: Telegram

[Document 943]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Chargé in the Soviet Union (Thurston)

Washington, March 25, 1942—9 p.m.

139. Your 85, March 24, 8 p.m. You may inform the Vice Commissar that Steinhardt has already mentioned the report in question to the Turkish authorities. The Department would have no objection to the report being mentioned by the Soviet Government in discussions with the Turkish Government. In such discussions, however, it should be clearly understood that although the report emanated from a source which at times has been found to be reliable, the American Government is not in a position to confirm it and, therefore, cannot be responsible for its authenticity.

You should make clear that no public reference which might be made to this report should indicate that it has come through an American source.

Welles

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3132: Telegram

[Document 944]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, March 31, 1942—2 p.m.
[Received April 1—9:02 a.m.]

234. Department’s 82, March 14, 10 p.m.50 The Secretary General asked me to call at the Foreign Office this morning. He told me the Soviet Ambassador had recently made a demand of the Turkish Government for permission to interview the two Soviet nationals under arrest for complicity in the bomb explosion and for their immediate release (my 225, March 2851 ). He added Ambassador had based his demand on instructions from his Government which apparently were result of information received from Government of United States.

Numan Bey then stated Vishinsky had told Turkish Ambassador in Kuibyshev Soviet Government was “absolutely persuaded attempt was made by the Gestapo” but that he was unable at the time to give him any further information. In a second conversation Ambassador reported Vishinsky as having made following statement “I told you this attempt was made by the Gestapo through group leader Wulff and Soviet Government’s information came from a positive source but I could not tell you the source. Now however I am authorized to tell you the source was United States Embassy in Kuibyshev and that Embassy received its information from its Government in Washington which in turn obtained it from positive sources.” Numan Bey added substantially the same statement had been made to him by Soviet Ambassador in Ankara on instructions from Kuibyshev. Numan Bey said that as the public trial was to commence tomorrow morning and as the Turkish Government was extremely desirous of bringing out all of the facts, his Government would appreciate it very much if the Government of the United States would furnish it with such evidence as it might have that the bomb explosion was of Gestapo origin. I replied that while I would of course at once transmit his request to the Department, I very much doubted that evidence or even information susceptible of legal proof could be furnished as it was hardly likely that evidence of this character was available. To this he replied that while he recognized that legal proof probably was not available he nonetheless felt obligated to make the request by reason of the fact that the Soviet Government was apparently resting its case on information received from the Government of the United States.

Although Numan Bey made no reference to the recent broadcast of the Boston Radio (my 223 of March 28, 1 p.m.52 ) charging Nazis with responsibility for the bomb explosion, I am inclined to the view that this broadcast coupled with the information furnished the Soviet Government has caused Turkish authorities to suspect that the United States is attempting to discredit the Turkish police investigation, its official communiqués, and the impending trial, by placing responsibility for the bomb explosion on the Gestapo.

Having regard to the use already made by Soviet authorities of the information furnished by the Department, it is not to be excluded that counsel for Soviet defendants may make reference thereto in the course of the public trial.

Repeated to Kuibyshev.

Steinhardt

50 See footnote 43, p. 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940].

51 Not printed.

52 Not printed.

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) 867.00/3132: Telegram

[Document 945]

The Acting Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt)

Washington, April 1, 1942—midnight.

118. Your 234, March 31, 2 p.m. In reply to a telegraphic inquiry from Thurston, the Department sent him the following telegram on March 25:

[Here follows text of telegram No. 139, March 25, 9 p.m., to the Chargé in the Soviet Union, printed on page 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943].]

Welles

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3136: Telegram

[Document 946]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 11, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received 9:38 p.m.]

257. My 234, March 31, 2 p.m. and Department’s 118, April 1. midnight. In conversation with Secretary General of Foreign Office, I informed him of contents of Department’s telegram of March 25, to Thurston.53 I emphasized that it had been made clear to Vyshinsky by Thurston that American Government was not in a position to confirm the report, could not be responsible for its authenticity, and desired that no public reference which might be made to the report should indicate that it had come through an American source.

Numan Bey expressed his appreciation and dismissed the matter casually with the remark that Vyshinsky had obviously exaggerated in his talk with the Turkish Ambassador.

Repeated to Kuibyshev.

Steinhardt

53 Telegram No. 139, p. 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943].

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3140: Telegram

[Document 947]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 17, 1942—3 p.m.
[Received April 18—2:18 a.m.]

284. Soviet Ambassador called on me this morning to express concern at the course the bomb explosion trial is taking. He said his Government felt that the Soviet defendants were not receiving a fair trial. He added that the attitude of the Soviet press and radio had been prompted by headlines which appeared in the Turkish press over accounts of the proceedings in court. He clearly implied without saying so that relations between the two countries were deteriorating as a result of the trial.

I invited the Ambassador’s attention to the moderate tone of Turkish press to the fact that there was a profound difference between Turkish and Soviet court procedure and that the trial was in its early stages and emphasized the undesirability of permitting the trial to impair relations between the Soviet Union and Turkey.

Repeated to Kuibyshev.

Steinhardt

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3139: Telegram

[Document 948]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, April 17, 1942—7 p.m.
[Received April 18—4:12 a.m.]

286. Minister for Foreign Affairs asked me to call to see him this morning. He told me that some time ago Soviet Ambassador invited him to dinner and after assuring him of the complete innocence of the two Soviet defendants in bomb explosion trial requested their release and permission for them to return to the Soviet Union (see my 234, March 31, 2 p.m.) implying that such a gesture on part of Turkish Government might go far towards improving Turkish-Soviet relations. Minister met this request with a review of Turkish-Soviet relations recalling the great friendship conceived during their revolutions pointing out that Turkey had staunchly stood by Soviet Union when it was without friends among other nations; that Turkish-Soviet relations had been most cordial until Soviet at time of negotiation of Montreux Convention54 had given notice to the world that relations between the two countries were no longer as close as they had been; that subsequently the two countries had resumed their former friendship; that relations had remained most cordial until time of the visit of Potemkin55 to Ankara there had been minor difficulties that had later been satisfactorily settled. Since outbreak of war Turkish Government had endeavored to maintain close and friendly relations with Soviet Union with little success but Turkish Government was not prepared to purchase Soviet friendship at the cost of its independence or integrity of its courts.

He said he had made it quite clear to the Ambassador his Government was not disposed to interfere with its established court procedure.

The Minister then told me that following conversation with Soviet Ambassador there had been some improvement in Soviet attitude but recent outburst by Soviet press and radio threatened to impair again relations between two countries. He said he was doing his best to prevent any further deterioration and notwithstanding Soviet press attacks he had restrained Turkish press from attacking Soviet Union.

Minister stated he was informally advising British Ambassador and myself of foregoing without requesting or even suggesting either of us take any action in matter. I told the Minister I had already emphasized to Soviet Ambassador the undesirability of permitting trial to impair relations between Soviet and Turkey (see my 284, April 17). I gained impression Saraçoğlu entertains hope Washington and London on their own initiative will use their influence with Soviet Government to bring about a cessation of press and radio attacks on conduct of the trial.

Repeated to Kuibyshev.

Steinhardt

54 Regarding the Regime of the Straits, signed July 20, 1936; for text, see League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. clxxiii, p. 213. For correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1936, vol. iii, pp. 503 ff.

55 Vladimir Petrovich Potemkin, Soviet Deputy Commissar for Foreign Affairs, visited Turkey April 29 to May 5, 1939.

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Standley) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3142: Telegram

[Document 949]

The Ambassador in the Soviet Union (Standley) to the Secretary of State

Moscow, April 21, 1942—8 p.m.
[Received 9:15 p.m.]

120. Ankara’s 286, April 17, 4 [7] p.m. and other related telegrams. While I am unaware of the nature of recent Soviet broadcasts regarding the Ankara bombing trial, the tone of the Soviet press on this subject would hardly appear to have warranted the withdrawal of the Turkish Ambassador or Saraçoğlu’s reference to an “outburst”. A survey of the press both here and in Kuibyshev fails to disclose any serious campaign against either the trial or Turkey in general, although articles and despatches of critical nature have appeared.

Repeated to Ankara.

Standley

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3148: Telegram

[Document 950]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

[Extract]

Ankara, April 28, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received April 29—3:20 a.m.]

333. For President, Secretary and Under Secretary. My former colleague Aktay, Turkish Ambassador to Moscow,56 arrived in Ankara day before yesterday. He has told me following: (1) Shortly before his departure from Kuibyshev he called on Vishinsky and made a strong protest against Soviet radio and press criticism of bomb explosion trial in Ankara. Up to time his departure he had received no reply. However, he gained impression from Vishinsky’s attitude at time of his protest that Soviet authorities will refrain at least for time being from further criticism. The Ambassador expressed opinion that Soviet Government will not further strain Turkish-Soviet relations. He referred to the unusually considerate treatment accorded him at time of his departure. He said he had been given a special plane to Baku on 24 hours’ notice and that the train from Baku to Turkish frontier had made record time. Aktay holds the view that Soviet Government is much less concerned with conduct of trial and the fate of the two Soviet defendants than with the publicity given the trial which reveals a continuance of the practice of interfering in the internal affairs of other countries.

(2) Since his arrival in Ankara Aktay has conferred with President Inönü and Saraçoğlu. He does not anticipate further deterioration in Turkish-Soviet relations. He believes that if Soviet Government refrains from further criticism of conduct of the trial relations between the two countries will improve. He was given to understand by the President that Turkish relations with the other great powers are regarded as satisfactory and that every reasonable effort will be made to place Turkish-Soviet relations on a similar basis.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Steinhardt

56 Laurence A. Steinhardt was Ambassador to the Soviet Union prior to his appointment to Turkey, January 12, 1942.

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State 867.00/3170: Telegram

[Document 951]

The Ambassador in Turkey (Steinhardt) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, June 24, 1942—1 p.m.
[Received 8:03 p.m.]

658. The Soviet Ambassador called to see me this morning. He has received instructions to return to Moscow immediately and is leaving tomorrow. A special plane will meet him at Soviet frontier. In conversation yesterday with Turkish Ambassador to Moscow, Aktay expressed opinion conviction of Soviet defendants in bomb explosion trial was unjust but insisted trial was without political implications and told him convicted men would be released “in 3 months if war comes to an end that soon”.

Vinogradov called on Saraçoğlu yesterday to inform him of his departure for Moscow. Saraçoğlu emphasized Turkey’s desire to remain neutral and to maintain friendly relations with Soviet Union. He stressed fact that conviction of Soviet defendants was without political significance and pointed out Turkish Government was powerless to interfere with operation of the courts. He requested Vinogradov to explain situation to his Government. Vinogradov made no attempt to conceal his concern at unexpected order to return to Moscow immediately by special plane. He is convinced his Government views trial and convictions as entirely political and seems to fear he may be called upon to bear the brunt of his Government’s displeasure. In saying goodbye he frankly remarked he did not know when or whether he would return to Ankara.

Repeated to Kuibyshev.

Steinhardt

[The Turkish Appellate Court ordered a new trial. The new trial resulted in re-conviction of all defendants although sentences for Soviet nationals were a little less severe.]

Representations by the United States regarding taxation of American colleges in TurkeyRepresentations by the United States regarding taxation of American colleges in Turkey57

57 For previous correspondence on this subject, see Foreign Relations, 1930, vol. iii, pp. 873 ff.

[952] The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 29, 1942—11 a.m. [Received October 30—2:14 p.m.]

367.1164 R 54/172: Telegram

[953] The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, November 3, 1942—4 p.m.

367.1164 R 54/172: Telegram

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State 367.1164 R 54/172: Telegram

[Document 952]

The Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) to the Secretary of State

Ankara, October 29, 1942—11 a.m.
[Received October 30—2:14 p.m.]

1084. I took up with the Minister for Foreign Affairs58 this morning the situation confronting the American colleges as a result of the steps being taken by the tax authorities to collect the minimum profits tax from the colleges. I pointed out that the tax authorities had been restrained during the past 7 years from collecting this tax by administrative action taken by successive Prime Ministers and that the late Prime Minister59 had had drafted a law which would have accorded exemption to the colleges. Following his sudden death the matter had been let drop and the new Prime Minister60 had not taken steps to restrain the tax authorities from collecting this tax from the colleges. I said that I was confident that the present Prime Minister would not take a less favorable attitude toward the colleges than his predecessors among whom was the President of the Republic.61 I pointed out that all the Prime Ministers and Ministers of Education during the past 7 years as well as many other Turkish leaders had recognized the injustice of the application of this tax to the colleges. Inasmuch as the courts had held unanimously that the law applied to the colleges, the only method of protecting the colleges pending the definitive solution of the question through new legislation or reinterpretation of existing law was through administrative action. I said that the matter was urgent in view of the fact that the tax authorities had confiscated on October 22 the bank guarantees deposited by the colleges amounting to approximately 12,000

Turkish pounds and were about to take action against the colleges themselves with a view to collecting the remainder of the taxes in arrears.

Numan said that he would take the matter up with the Prime Minister at once with a view to preventing any further action against the colleges.

Kelley

58 Numan Menemencioğlu.

59 Refik Saydam.

60 Sükrü Saraçoğlu.

61 Ismet Inönü.

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley) 367.1164 R 54/172: Telegram

[Document 953]

The Secretary of State to the Chargé in Turkey (Kelley)

Washington, November 3, 1942—4 p.m.

566. Your 1084, October 29, 11 a.m. The Department approves your action in drawing Robert College taxation question to Foreign Minister’s attention. It would be particularly regretted if Turkish Government should change its policy towards the College now, when Turkish officers are attending the school and when United States War Department has manifested its desire to assist Turkey by assigning four qualified United States Army Officers as instructors there, at a time when their release from United States Army represented notable sacrifice.62

Hull

62 In telegram No. 585, March 27, 1943, 6 p.m., Ambassador Steinhardt reported: “As a result of personal intervention of Prime Minister the very substantial minimum profits tax assessed against Robert College has been set aside.” (367.1164R54/180)

Index Index1

Abdullah, Emir of Transjordan, 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 662]

Abyssinia. See Ethiopia.

Acheson, Barclay, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Acheson, Dean, 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 281n [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 292n [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 339], 299–300 [Pgs. 299–300 include portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 682–683 [Pgs. 682–683 include portions of Doc. 795, Doc. 796, and Doc. 797], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 687–688 [Pgs. 687–688 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, and Doc. 802], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808]

Afghanistan, 44–62 [Pgs. 44–62 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65] Accidental flight of an American military plane over Afghan territory, U.S. expression of regret regarding, 59–62 [Pgs. 59–62 include portions of Doc. 58, Doc. 59, Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, Doc. 64, and Doc. 65]

Establishment of U.S. Legation at Kabul, 44–52 [Pgs. 44–52 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]

U.S. efforts to effect closer relations with Afghanistan, 52–59 [Pgs. 52–59 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59] Assistance in connection with trade and other matters, question of, 53–54 [Pgs. 53–54 include portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, Doc. 52, Doc. 53, and Doc. 54], 56–59 [Pgs. 56–59 include portions of Doc. 54, Doc. 55, Doc. 56, Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

Observations based on military and political situation, 52–53 [Pgs. 52–53 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, and Doc. 52], 54–56 [Pgs. 54–56 include portions of Doc. 52, Doc. 53, and Doc. 54]

Ahmadi, Marshal, 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230]

Air bases and air transit rights, American. See Ethiopia: Air transport rights; Liberia: American air bases; Muscat and Oman; and Saudi Arabia: Air transit rights.

Air services in the Near and Middle East, U.S.-British discussions regarding, 18–23 [Pgs. 18–23 include portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16]

Aktarzendi, Maj., 296–297 [Pgs. 296–297 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339]

Aktay, Ali Haydar, 832–833 [Pgs. 832–833 include portions of Doc. 949, Doc. 950, and Doc. 951], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951]

Alexander, Gen. Sir Harold R. L., 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 745]

Ali Mohammed Khan, 47–48 [Pgs. 47–48 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, and Doc. 52], 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 65]

Allen, George V., 660–661 [Pgs. 660–661 include portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 661–662 [Pgs. 661–662 include portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779], 703–704 [Pgs. 703–704 include portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, and Doc. 820], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 824 and Doc. 825]

Alling, Paul H., 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 49–50 [Pgs. 49–50 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 76–78 [Pgs. 76–78 include portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 102n [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 123–124 [Pgs. 123–124 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 197–198 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 210], 198–199 [Pgs. 198–199 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 269–270 [Pgs. 269–270 include portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 273–274 [Pgs. 273–274 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 280–281 [Pgs. 280–281 include portions of Doc. 318, Doc. 319, and Doc. 320], 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 293–294 [Pgs. 293–294 include portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, and Doc. 334], 294n [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, and Doc. 396], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 421], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 457], 415–416 [Pgs. 415–416 include portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 582], 538n [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 649], 541–542 [Pgs. 541–542 include portions of Doc. 650, Doc. 651, and Doc. 652], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 780 and Doc. 781], 706–707 [Pgs. 706–707 include portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823]

Amanullah Khan, 55–56 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 54]

American Export Lines, 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

American treaty rights, reservation of. See Iran: Anglo-Soviet-Iranian treaty: U.S. reservation, etc.; Morocco: Tangier Zone; and Syria and Lebanon: U.S. limited recognition: Consideration of.

Andrews, Gen. Frank M., 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909]

Anglo-Iranian Oil Co., 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 156]

Arfa, Gen. Ebrahim, 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 235], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Arnold, Gen. Henry H., 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 893, Doc. 894, and Doc. 895], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 897 and Doc. 898], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, and Doc. 903], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Atherton, Ray, 810n [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926]

Atlantic Charter, cited, 28 [Pg. 28 is part of Doc. 20], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 105n [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 126], 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 273], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 313], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 314], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 649], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 649], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 649], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 659], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 751], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 751], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 935]

Auchincloss, John W., 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 577]

Auchinleck, Gen. Sir Claude J. E., 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Axis activities and propaganda. See Axis victories, etc.; Egypt: Axis military advance; Iran: Arrest of certain suspected persons and Fifth column activities; Liberia: Expulsion of Germans and Submarine activities; Syria and Lebanon: British-Free French differences: Fifth column activities; Turkey: Germany, relations with.

Axis victories and propaganda, U.S. consideration of steps to combat impact on political stability of the Near East, 24–36 [Pgs. 24–36 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26] Appointment of a Diplomatic Agent to Syria and Lebanon, consideration of, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 20], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 22]

Germano-Italian Joint Declaration of July 3 respecting Egypt, suggested rebuttal, 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Hoskins mission to the Near East, proposed: Discussions concerning activities and functions of proposed mission, and British attitude, 26–29 [Pgs. 26–29 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21], 33–36 [Pgs. 33–36 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]; dispatch of Lt. Col. Hoskins to Cairo, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Issuance of a policy declaration on U.S. attitude toward the Near East, suggestions and discussions with the British, 25–26 [Pgs. 25–26 include portions of Doc. 17, Doc. 18, Doc. 19, and Doc. 20], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 20], 29–33 [Pgs. 29–33 include portions of Doc. 20, Doc. 21, Doc. 22, and Doc. 23]

Azam, Kalid, 673–674 [Pgs. 673–674 include portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 789]

Baelen, M., 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 633–634 [Pgs. 633–634 include portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747]

Bahrein Islands, 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697]

Bahrein Petroleum Co., 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690]

Bale, Capt., 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699]

Balfour Declaration (1917), commemoration of 25th anniversary of, 548–550 [Pgs. 548–550 include portions of Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and Doc. 661], 550–551 [Pgs. 550–551 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 662]

Barazi, Husni el, 673–674 [Pgs. 673–674 include portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

Barclay, Edwin, 355–396 [Pgs. 355–396 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, and Doc. 481] passim, 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 371–412 [Pgs. 371–412 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509] passim, 418–432 [Pgs. 418–432 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544] passim, 436–437 [Pgs. 436–437 include portions of Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc. 552], 438 [Pg. 438 includes portions of Doc. 553, Doc. 554, and Doc. 555]

Barclay, R. E., 661–662 [Pgs. 661–662 include portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779]

Baudet, Philip, 660–661 [Pgs. 660–661 include portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783]

Beard, Capt. William N., 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433]

Ben-Gurion, David, 551 [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662]

Bennett, J. C. Sterndale, 777n [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 874], 777–778 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 874], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 875], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 877 and Doc. 878], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 879], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881], 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 785–786 [Pgs. 785–786 include portions of Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883], 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 882 and Doc. 883]

Bergson, Peter H., 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657]

Berher, Sevki, 805n [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916], 805–806 [Pgs. 805–806 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, and Doc. 917]

Berle, Adolf A., Jr., 19–21 [Pgs. 19–21 include portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, and Doc. 15], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 101n [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137], 118–119 [Pgs. 118–119 include portions of Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 210], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 304–306 [Pgs. 304–306 include portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 354 [Pg. 354 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516], 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657], 545–546 [Pgs. 545–546 include portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, and Doc. 658], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 672]

Betts, Col. Thomas, 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Bewley, Thomas Kenneth, 304–305 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 346], 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823]

Bissell, Col., 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 421]

Board of Economic Warfare (BEW), 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599], 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 827], 712–713 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 827], 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 829], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 832], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 840 and Doc. 841], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 879, Doc. 880, and Doc. 881]

Bohlen, Charles E., 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926]

Boisson, Pierre, 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538]

Bolte, Gen. Charles L., 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 20 and Doc. 21]

Boone, Lt. Col., 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Boulos, Philippe, 658 [Pg. 658 includes portions of Doc. 772 and Doc. 773], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784]

Brereton, Gen. Lewis H., 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99]

British Broadcasting Company (BBC), 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505]

British Overseas Airways Corp. (BOAC), 413–419 [Pgs. 413–419 include portions of Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]

British strategic responsibility in Middle East area, 9n [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 20], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 675], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 675], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 723], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735]

Brown, Capt., 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909]

Bullard, Sir Reader W., 122n [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 159], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 160], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 171], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 177], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 180], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 171–206 [Pgs. 171–206 include portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220] passim, 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 232], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 232], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 249], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 252], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 302], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 306n [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 301–302 [Pgs. 301–302 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344], 303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 345], 325n [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394], 337–338 [Pgs. 337–338 include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395]

Bullitt, William C, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 138], 227 [Pg. 227 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 739]

Burns, Gen. James H., 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

Butler, Gen., 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Butler, Harold, 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655]

Cadogan, Sir Alexander, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620]

Cakmak, Marshal, 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 835 and Doc. 836]

California Arabian Standard Oil Co. (Casoc). See Saudi Arabia: Oil fields.

Campbell, Sir Ronald I., 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 727 and Doc. 728]

Canada, wheat shipments to Iran, question of, 121–122 [Pgs. 121–122 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]

Carvajal, Col., 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 603], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 604], 491–492 [Pgs. 491–492 include portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 607], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608]

Casey, Richard G., 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 26], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 174], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 197], 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215], 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 232], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 714], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 722], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 725], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 622–623 [Pgs. 622–623 include portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 737, Doc. 738, and Doc. 739], 631–632 [Pgs. 631–632 include portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 789], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 789]

Castillo, Cristóbal del, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 629], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643]

Catroux, Gen. Georges. See Syria and Lebanon: British–Free French differences.

Chapman-Andrews, Maj., 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116]

Chatel, Yves, 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 556]

Chipman, Norris B., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Chrome. See under Turkey.

Churchill, Winston S.: Areas of strategic responsibility, U.S. and British, 9n [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Exchange of messages with de Gaulle, 614–615 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 727], 624–626 [Pgs. 624–626 include portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737]; with Roosevelt, 311–312 [Pgs. 311–312 include portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, and Doc. 354], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

Palestine, attitude toward Arab-Zionist problems, 550–551 [Pgs. 550–551 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

Syria and Lebanon, 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 614–615 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 727], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 727 and Doc. 728], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732], 623–626 [Pgs. 623–626 include portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, and Doc. 737]

Clodius, Carl, 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 829], 718n [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 829], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 833], 726 [Pg. 726 includes portions of Doc. 833 and Doc. 834], 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 745n [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 746–783 [Pgs. 746–783 include portions of Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, and Doc. 879] passim

Collet, Gen., 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 766], 673–674 [Pgs. 673–674 include portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 789]

Combined Chiefs of Staff (U.S.-British), 33–34 [Pgs. 33–34 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 26], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 26]

Cornwallis, Sir Kinahan, 343n [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 350n [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415]

Craw, Col., 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, and Doc. 903]

Crittenden, Maj., 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Dardanelles. See Straits under Turkey.

Darlan, Adm. Jean Francois, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 739], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 751], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783]

Davallou, H. Hadjeb-, 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Davies, Fred, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693]

Davis, Elmer, 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 664]

de Gaulle, Gen. Charles. See Syria and Lebanon: British-Free French differences: Independence, etc., Madagascar situation, Understanding, etc., and Visit by de Gaulle.

Dejean, Maurice, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]

Dekanosov, V. G., 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943], 827–828 [Pgs. 827–828 include portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, and Doc. 944]

Desta Demptu, The Ras, 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130]

Dill, Field Marshal Sir John, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658]

Donovan, Col. William J., 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 739]

Douglas Aircraft Corp., 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 410]

Dunn, James Clement, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 649]

Durnan, James J., 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Eddy, Lt. Col. William A., 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565], 452–454 [Pgs. 452–454 include portions of Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 571], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642]

Eden, Anthony, 18–19 [Pgs. 18–19 include portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15], 30–31 [Pgs. 30–31 include portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 197], 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 249], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708], 592–593 [Pgs. 592–593 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 722], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732], 623–624 [Pgs. 623–624 include portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 745], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 785], 688–689 [Pgs. 688–689 include portions of Doc. 801, Doc. 802, and Doc. 803], 813n [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 935]

Egypt, 63–99 [Pgs. 63–99 include portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113] American military personnel, problems arising from presence in Egypt, 87–95 [Pgs. 87–95 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, Doc. 99, Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, Doc. 103, Doc. 104, Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108] Criminal jurisdiction, negotiations concerning, 89–91 [Pgs. 89–91 include portions of Doc. 100, Doc. 101, Doc. 102, and Doc. 103], 93–95 [Pgs. 93–95 include portions of Doc. 105, Doc. 106, Doc. 107, and Doc. 108]

Post-war demobilization, U.S. assurances to Egyptian Government, 87–88 [Pgs. 87–88 include portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99], 91–92 [Pgs. 91–92 include portions of Doc. 102, Doc. 103, and Doc. 104]

Axis military advance into Egypt, U.S. concern regarding effect of, 71–87 [Pgs. 71–87 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99] Military situation, discussions and reports concerning, 71–79 [Pgs. 71–79 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, Doc. 79, Doc. 80, Doc. 81, Doc. 82, Doc. 83, Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 79–81 [Pgs. 79–81 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 85–87 [Pgs. 85–87 include portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, Doc. 96, Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99]; U.S. Ambassador’s appraisal and recommendations, 71–73 [Pgs. 71–73 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79], 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 82], 78–79 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

Plans for evacuation of American personnel in event of emergency, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 81–83 [Pgs. 81–83 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 84–85 [Pgs. 84–85 include portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]; British plans, 83–84 [Pgs. 83–84 include portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93]

British activities concerning Egyptian political crisis, U.S. unwillingness to interfere with, 63–71 [Pgs. 63–71 include portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78]

Cotton trade, Egyptian representations regarding effect of U.S. Peruvian reciprocal trade agreement on, and U.S. reply, 95–97 [Pgs. 95–97 include portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, Doc. 109, and Doc. 110]

Germano-Italian Joint Declaration of July 3 respecting Egypt, 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Pan American air services in, 21–23 [Pgs. 21–23 include portions of Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16]

Political situation. See British activities, etc., supra.

Representations by Egyptian Minister regarding an article in Time Magazine alleged to be derogatory to King Farouk, 97–99 [Pgs. 97–99 include portions of Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113]

Severance of relations with Vichy Government, 63–64 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

Eisenhower, Gen. Dwight D., 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664]

El Alamein, 78n [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 85–86 [Pgs. 85–86 include portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96]

Engert, Cornelius Van H., 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 50–51 [Pgs. 50–51 include portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, and Doc. 49], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 718], 602n [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 718], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772]

Erol, Orhan H., 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 824 and Doc. 825]

Ertegün, Mehmet Münir, 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 49–50 [Pgs. 49–50 include portions of Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 682n [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 686–687 [Pgs. 686–687 include portions of Doc. 799, Doc. 800, and Doc. 801], 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 802 and Doc. 803], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 808 and Doc. 809], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 815], 703–708 [Pgs. 703–708 include portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, and Doc. 825] passim, 791n [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 893], 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 896 and Doc. 897]

Esteva, Adm. Jean Pierre, 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 556]

Ethiopia, 100–119 [Pgs. 100–119 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137] Adherence to United Nations Declaration of Jan. 1, 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 126], 114–115 [Pgs. 114–115 include portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132]

Air transport rights in Ethiopia, 116–119 [Pgs. 116–119 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137]

Anglo-Ethiopian treaty of Jan. 31: Cited, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 114], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 126], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]; U.S. request for clarification of certain exclusive features of, 116–119 [Pgs. 116–119 include portions of Doc. 132, Doc. 133, Doc. 134, Doc. 135, Doc. 136, and Doc. 137]

British position with relation to (see also Anglo-Ethiopian treaty, supra), 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 106–108 [Pgs. 106–108 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 126]

Conditions in Ethiopia, reports concerning, 106–108 [Pgs. 106–108 include portions of Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 108–111 [Pgs. 108–111 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126]

Diplomatic representation by United States at Addis Ababa, consideration of resumption of, 100–112 [Pgs. 100–112 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, Doc. 117, Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, Doc. 122, Doc. 123, Doc. 124, Doc. 125, Doc. 126, and Doc. 127]; establishment of U.S. Consulate at Asmara, Eritrea, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 123]

Greece, consular representation of, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 126]

Haile Selassie I, Emperor of Ethiopia: Adherence of Ethiopia to United Nations Declaration, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 126], 114–115 [Pgs. 114–115 include portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132]; desire for reestablishment of diplomatic relations with United States, 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 108–109 [Pgs. 108–109 include portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 111–112 [Pgs. 111–112 include portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]; exchange of messages with President Roosevelt, 112–116 [Pgs. 112–116 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

Treaty of friendship with United States (1914), cited, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 126]

Export-Import Bank, 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Fagan, Melvin M., 463–464 [Pgs. 463–464 include portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578]

Farouk I, King of Egypt, 63–70 [Pgs. 63–70 include portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, Doc. 73, Doc. 74, Doc. 75, and Doc. 76] passim, 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Feis, Herbert, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Fellers, Col. Bonner F., 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 82], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

Finletter, Thomas K., 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 577], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 873]

Firestone, Harvey S., Jr., 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 421]

Firestone Tire and Rubber Co., 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 421], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 424], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, and Doc. 471], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 474], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 437 [Pg. 437 includes portions of Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc. 552]

Fitzgerald, Gen. S. W., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 27], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 476], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 647], 537 [Pg. 537 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 676 and Doc. 677]

Foroughi, Mohammed Ali, 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 302], 325n [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Fowler, William A., 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318]

Fox, Col. Leon A., 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433]

France: Free French. See Syria and Lebanon: British-Free French differences.

Vichy Government: Severance of relations by Egypt with, 63–64 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]; by Liberia, 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

U.S. relations with, 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762]

Franco, Gen. Francisco, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 558 and Doc. 559], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 565 and Doc. 566], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568], 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620], 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 513n [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625]

Frangie, Hamid, 588n [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 641n [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 641–642 [Pgs. 641–642 include portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 764 and Doc. 765], 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 771 and Doc. 772]

Gailani, Rashid Ali al-, 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 715 and Doc. 716]

Gascoigne, A., 444 [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 558], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 565 and Doc. 566], 494n [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 494–511 [Pgs. 494–511 include portions of Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623] passim, 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640]

General Motors, 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 410]

George, W. Perry, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 577]

George VI, King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 180]

Gerber, William, 661n [Pg. 661 includes portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777]

Germano-Italian Joint Declaration of July 3 regarding Egypt and Near East, 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20]

Germany. See Axis activities; Axis victories; Liberia: Declaration of war and Expulsion of Germans; and under Turkey.

Giffard, Gen. Sir George James, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 27]

Giraud, Gen. Henri, 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624]

Greece, consular representation in Ethiopia, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 126]

Greely, Gen. John, 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, and Doc. 254], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, and Doc. 264], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Greenland, U.S.-Danish agreement of Apr. 9, 1941, for defense of, cited, 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

Gromyko, A. A., 810 [Pg. 810 includes portions of Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926]

Hackworth, Green H., 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 649]

Haile Selassie I, Emperor of Ethiopia. See under Ethiopia.

Hakken, Rev. Bernard, 353–354 [Pgs. 353–354 include portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

Halifax, Lord, 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 210], 213n [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 213–214 [Pgs. 213–214 include portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 249], 294n [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 327–328 [Pgs. 327–328 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 399], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 429n [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581], 544n [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657], 545–546 [Pgs. 545–546 include portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, and Doc. 658], 546–547 [Pgs. 546–547 include portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 551 [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 590n [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 644n [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762], 678n [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801], 687–688 [Pgs. 687–688 include portions of Doc. 800, Doc. 801, and Doc. 802], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 691–692 [Pgs. 691–692 include portions of Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 701–702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, and Doc. 818]

Halverson, Col. Harry A., 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, and Doc. 903]

Hamilton, James G., 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674]

Hamilton, John, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720]

Handy, Gen. Thomas T., 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]

Harriman, W. Averell, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 312–314 [Pgs. 312–314 include portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 679–680 [Pgs. 679–680 include portions of Doc. 793 and Doc. 794], 688 [Pg. 688 includes portions of Doc. 801 and Doc. 802], 688–689 [Pgs. 688–689 include portions of Doc. 801, Doc. 802, and Doc. 803]

Hassan Bey, Mahmoud, 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91], 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

Hassani, Tajeddine, 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 670n [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 672–673 [Pgs. 672–673 include portions of Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 789]

Hawkins, Harry C, 276–277 [Pgs. 276–277 include portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319]

Hayter, W. G., 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 210], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 210], 254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 269–270 [Pgs. 269–270 include portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 294n [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 304–305 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 346], 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 308n [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Helleu, Jean, 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 749 and Doc. 750]

Helm, A. K., 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]

Herrick, Myron T., 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 763 and Doc. 764], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 764]

Hibbard, Frederick P., 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 27], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 457], 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 457]

Himmler, Heinrich, 825–826 [Pgs. 825–826 include portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940]

Hoare, Sir Samuel, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 565 and Doc. 566], 464–465 [Pgs. 464–465 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, and Doc. 579], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580], 509n [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620], 509–510 [Pgs. 509–510 include portions of Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624]

Holmes, Gen. Sir William G., 608–610 [Pgs. 608–610 include portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 725], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 727], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780]

Hopkins, Harry, 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 793], 682–683 [Pgs. 682–683 include portions of Doc. 795, Doc. 796, and Doc. 797]

Hoskins, Lt. Col. Harold B., 26–29 [Pgs. 26–29 include portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21], 33–36 [Pgs. 33–36 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 649]

Howe, R. G., 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 126]

Hull, Cordell, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 33n [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 387–388 [Pgs. 387–388 include portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 448–449 [Pgs. 448–449 include portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563], 469–470 [Pgs. 469–470 include portions of Doc. 582, Doc. 583, and Doc. 584], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 659], 655n [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791]

Hull, Gen., 523–524 [Pgs. 523–524 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639]

Huston, Cloyce K., 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664]

Ibn Al-Mu’ammar, Ibrahim, 560–561 [Pgs. 560–561 include portions of Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669]

Ibn Saud, Abdul Aziz, King of Saudi Arabia: Air transit rights for American planes, question of, 567–575 [Pgs. 567–575 include portions of Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, and Doc. 685] passim; attitude toward Zionism, and political position in Arab world, 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 553–556 [Pgs. 553–556 include portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 758]; exchange of messages with President Roosevelt regarding agricultural mission to Saudi Arabia, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 670], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675]; protection of oil fields, question of, 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 700]

Imperial Airways, 20–21 [Pgs. 20–21 include portions of Doc. 14 and Doc. 15]

India, consideration of wheat shipments to Iran, 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 195–196 [Pgs. 195–196 include portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 198–199 [Pgs. 198–199 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 200–201 [Pgs. 200–201 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215]

Inönü, Ismet, 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 795 and Doc. 796], 683–684 [Pgs. 683–684 include portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 793n [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 893], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933], 823n [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 936], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 952]

Iran, 120–342 [Pgs. 120–342 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, Doc. 391, Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399] American advisers for Iranian Government, U.S. assistance in securing, 222–263 [Pgs. 222–263 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, Doc. 270, Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, Doc. 296, Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299] British interest in, and Anglo-American cooperation regarding, 224–227 [Pgs. 224–227 include portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, and Doc. 244], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 230–232 [Pgs. 230–232 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 233–235 [Pgs. 233–235 include portions of Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, and Doc. 254], 235–237 [Pgs. 235–237 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 246–247 [Pgs. 246–247 include portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287]

Iranian request for, and discussions concerning the dispatch of American experts with regard to— Agriculture, 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Education, 228–229 [Pgs. 228–229 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Finance, 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 200], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 194–195 [Pgs. 194–195 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 210], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 215], 205–206 [Pgs. 205–206 include portions of Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220], 224–227 [Pgs. 224–227 include portions of Doc. 240, Doc. 241, Doc. 242, Doc. 243, and Doc. 244], 229–230 [Pgs. 229–230 include portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, and Doc. 249], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 256–258 [Pgs. 256–258 include portions of Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, and Doc. 291], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Food and supplies, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 141–142 [Pgs. 141–142 include portions of Doc. 157, Doc. 158, and Doc. 159], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 159], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 165], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 174], 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 158–159 [Pgs. 158–159 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 243–244 [Pgs. 243–244 include portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291]

Health, 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 262–263 [Pgs. 262–263 include portions of Doc. 297, Doc. 298, and Doc. 299]

Military matters, 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 235–236 [Pgs. 235–236 include portions of Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258], 239–241 [Pgs. 239–241 include portions of Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, and Doc. 266], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 246–248 [Pgs. 246–248 include portions of Doc. 273, Doc. 274, and Doc. 275], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 252–253 [Pgs. 252–253 include portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 254–255 [Pgs. 254–255 include portions of Doc. 285, Doc. 286, and Doc. 287], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 259–261 [Pgs. 259–261 include portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Police and gendarmerie, 222–224 [Pgs. 222–224 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241], 232–233 [Pgs. 232–233 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 242–243 [Pgs. 242–243 include portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 399]

Political and economic situation, relation to, 155–157 [Pgs. 155–157 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 158–159 [Pgs. 158–159 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 232], 223–224 [Pgs. 223–224 include portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 241], 227–228 [Pgs. 227–228 include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245], 230–232 [Pgs. 230–232 include portions of Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 246–248 [Pgs. 246–248 include portions of Doc. 273, Doc. 274, and Doc. 275], 249–251 [Pgs. 249–251 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

U.S. and Iranian legislation affecting, 260–261 [Pgs. 260–261 include portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

U.S. policy as to relationship of advisers to U.S. Legation and to Iranian Government, 248–249 [Pgs. 248–249 include portions of Doc. 274, Doc. 275, and Doc. 276]

Anglo-Soviet-Iranian treaty of alliance, signed Jan. 29, 263–275 [Pgs. 263–275 include portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, Doc. 300, Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314] Cited, 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 273], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

Iranian desire for U.S. public declaration concerning integrity of Iran, and U.S. unwillingness to make, 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 264–265 [Pgs. 264–265 include portions of Doc. 300, Doc. 301, and Doc. 302], 273–275 [Pgs. 273–275 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

Progress of treaty negotiations, 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 265–267 [Pgs. 265–267 include portions of Doc. 301, Doc. 302, Doc. 303, and Doc. 304], 269–270 [Pgs. 269–270 include portions of Doc. 307, Doc. 308, and Doc. 309]

Signing of treaty, and exchange of messages between the Shah of Iran and President Roosevelt, 268–269 [Pgs. 268–269 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, and Doc. 308]

U.S. reservation of American rights, and assurances from the three Governments, 267–268 [Pgs. 267–268 include portions of Doc. 302, Doc. 303, Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 270–272 [Pgs. 270–272 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312]

Arrest of certain suspected persons, British demands for, and Iranian request for U.S. support regarding (see also Fifth column activities, infra), 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 232], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 324–325 [Pgs. 324–325 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 336–342 [Pgs. 336–342 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, Doc. 394, Doc. 395, Doc. 396, Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Azerbaijan. See Kurdish disorders, etc., infra.

British policy in Iran. See U.S. representations, infra; also individual subjects, supra and infra.

Currency question. See Food shortages: Agreement: Financial situation, infra.

Economic aid. See Food shortages, Lend-Lease aid, and Trade agreement with United States, infra.

Exchange rates, U.S. efforts to facilitate settlement of dispute between Iran and United Kingdom, 300–311 [Pgs. 300–311 include portions of Doc. 340, Doc. 341, Doc. 342, Doc. 343, Doc. 344, Doc. 345, Doc. 346, Doc. 347, Doc. 348, Doc. 349, Doc. 350, Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391]; financial agreement between United Kingdom and Iran, signed May 26, 311n [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353]

Fifth column activities, 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 196], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 188–189 [Pgs. 188–189 include portions of Doc. 201, Doc. 202, and Doc. 203], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 215], 204–205 [Pgs. 204–205 include portions of Doc. 216, Doc. 217, and Doc. 218], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 247 [Pg. 247 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377]

Food shortages (see also Supply problems, infra), U.S. concern regarding, 120–222 [Pgs. 120–222 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240] Agreement between United States, United Kingdom, and Iran regarding wheat supplies, signed Dec. 4, negotiation of, 155–206 [Pgs. 155–206 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220] Anglo-American assurances concerning food, discussions and reports concerning, 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 157–158 [Pgs. 157–158 include portions of Doc. 174, Doc. 175, and Doc. 176], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 176], 160–161 [Pgs. 160–161 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 163 [Pg. 163 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 167–168 [Pgs. 167–168 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 168–171 [Pgs. 168–171 include portions of Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187], 172–188 [Pgs. 172–188 include portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, Doc. 194, Doc. 195, Doc. 196, Doc. 197, Doc. 198, Doc. 199, Doc. 200, Doc. 201, and Doc. 202], 191–206 [Pgs. 191–206 include portions of Doc. 203, Doc. 204, Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220]; British draft proposals, Iranian counterdraft, and other proposed changes, 161–162 [Pgs. 161–162 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 163–165 [Pgs. 163–165 include portions of Doc. 179, Doc. 180, and Doc. 181], 171–172 [Pgs. 171–172 include portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 178 [Pg. 178 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

Anglo-Iranian financial agreement of May 26, relation to, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 192], 178–179 [Pgs. 178–179 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 186–187 [Pgs. 186–187 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 204]

Financial situation and currency difficulties, 156–157 [Pgs. 156–157 include portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 177], 166 [Pg. 166 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 177–178 [Pgs. 177–178 include portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193], 178–179 [Pgs. 178–179 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 197], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 197–200 [Pgs. 197–200 include portions of Doc. 210, Doc. 211, and Doc. 212], 201–202 [Pgs. 201–202 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 215], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]; currency commission, discussions concerning formation of, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 177], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 186–187 [Pgs. 186–187 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 191–192 [Pgs. 191–192 include portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 194–195 [Pgs. 194–195 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 210], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 202–203 [Pgs. 202–203 include portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215]

Formation of an Anglo-American-Soviet-Iranian food board, consideration of, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 159], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 184], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Signing of agreement Dec. 4, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220]

Soviet attitude, and request for purchase of food, 160–161 [Pgs. 160–161 include portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 165–166 [Pgs. 165–166 include portions of Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182], 170 [Pg. 170 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 173–174 [Pgs. 173–174 include portions of Doc. 187, Doc. 188, and Doc. 189], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 197], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 197], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 210], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 215], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]; desire to participate in wheat declaration and in Transport Committee, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 197], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220]

American participation in decisions regarding supply and distribution of food, 120–126 [Pgs. 120–126 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145]

Appeals by Iran for direct American aid, and complaints regarding British economic policy, 120–121 [Pgs. 120–121 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140], 123–124 [Pgs. 123–124 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 126–128 [Pgs. 126–128 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 135–137 [Pgs. 135–137 include portions of Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, and Doc. 155], 140–141 [Pgs. 140–141 include portions of Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158]

Financial situation, relation to. See under Agreement, etc., supra.

Food riots, 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 207–209 [Pgs. 207–209 include portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, and Doc. 225], 209–210 [Pgs. 209–210 include portions of Doc. 224, Doc. 225, and Doc. 226], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 235]

Political situation, relation to, 151 [Pg. 151 includes portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 155–157 [Pgs. 155–157 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, and Doc. 175], 158–159 [Pgs. 158–159 include portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 166–167 [Pgs. 166–167 include portions of Doc. 181, Doc. 182, and Doc. 183], 180–181 [Pgs. 180–181 include portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 215], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 206–208 [Pgs. 206–208 include portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 210–212 [Pgs. 210–212 include portions of Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 212–213 [Pgs. 212–213 include portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231], 219–220 [Pgs. 219–220 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 220–222 [Pgs. 220–222 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

Shipments of wheat from Canada, question of, 121–122 [Pgs. 121–122 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141]; from India, consideration of, 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 195–196 [Pgs. 195–196 include portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 198–199 [Pgs. 198–199 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 200–201 [Pgs. 200–201 include portions of Doc. 211, Doc. 212, and Doc. 213], 202 [Pg. 202 includes portions of Doc. 213, Doc. 214, and Doc. 215]

Soviet position. See under Agreement, etc., supra.

Wheat. See Agreement, etc., supra, and under Supply problems: Allocation and distribution, infra.

Japanese Legation in Tehran, expulsion of, 325–335 [Pgs. 325–335 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, Doc. 386, Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391] British representations for expulsion, and desire for U.S. parallel action, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 327–328 [Pgs. 327–328 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

U.S. insistence on, and Iranian attitude, 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 325–327 [Pgs. 325–327 include portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, Doc. 377, Doc. 378, and Doc. 379], 328–332 [Pgs. 328–332 include portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386]; Iranian acquiescence, and U.S. assurance of benefits to Iran, 333–335 [Pgs. 333–335 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391]

Kurdish disorders in Soviet-occupied province of Azerbaijan, 318–325 [Pgs. 318–325 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374] Iranian concern, and representations regarding Soviet refusal to permit Iranian troops to enter area, 318–321 [Pgs. 318–321 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365]; Soviet response, and subsequent improvement in situation, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367], 323–325 [Pgs. 323–325 include portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374]

Reports concerning disorders, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 240], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

U.S. concern regarding, 321–322 [Pgs. 321–322 include portions of Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367]

Lend-Lease aid, 289–300 [Pgs. 289–300 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341] Eligibility of Iran for aid, and public announcement of, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 153], 289–295 [Pgs. 289–295 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, Doc. 333, Doc. 334, Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391]

Procedure for furnishing supplies, discussions concerning, 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 137–138 [Pgs. 137–138 include portions of Doc. 154, Doc. 155, and Doc. 156], 295–298 [Pgs. 295–298 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339]; Iranian desire to deal directly with United States in Lend-Lease matters, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 339]

Terms of payment, question of, 299–300 [Pgs. 299–300 include portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Political and economic situation. See under American advisers, supra; also Financial situation and Political situation under Food shortages, supra.

Soviet policy. See Anglo-Soviet-Iranian treaty of alliance, Kurdish disorders, and under Food shortages: Agreement, etc., supra; also Supply route to Soviet Union and Trans-Iranian Railroad, infra.

Supply problems (see also Food shortages, supra): Allocation and distribution of— Tires and trucks, and spare parts, discussions concerning, 128–142 [Pgs. 128–142 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, and Doc. 159], 144–145 [Pgs. 144–145 include portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 147–151 [Pgs. 147–151 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 171]

Wheat, 121–123 [Pgs. 121–123 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, Doc. 141, and Doc. 142], 142–143 [Pgs. 142–143 include portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 145–146 [Pgs. 145–146 include portions of Doc. 160, Doc. 161, and Doc. 162], 147 [Pg. 147 includes portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 151–155 [Pgs. 151–155 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 190–191 [Pgs. 190–191 include portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222]

Central Supply Committee in Tehran (CSC), organization and functions of, 124–125 [Pgs. 124–125 include portions of Doc. 142, Doc. 143, and Doc. 144], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 145], 130–141 [Pgs. 130–141 include portions of Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, Doc. 151, Doc. 152, Doc. 153, Doc. 154, Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, and Doc. 158] passim, 147–148 [Pgs. 147–148 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, and Doc. 165], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]—153 [Pg. 153 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 171]

Middle East Supply Center, U.S. participation in, 124–126 [Pgs. 124–126 include portions of Doc. 142, Doc. 143, Doc. 144, and Doc. 145], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 145], 129 [Pg. 129 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 138–139 [Pgs. 138–139 include portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 402]

Transport Board (Anglo-American-Iranian), organization of, 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 171], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174], 170–171 [Pgs. 170–171 include portions of Doc. 185, Doc. 186, and Doc. 187]

United Kingdom Commercial Corporation (UKCC), activities in Iran and difficulties with Iranian Government, 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 138], 124–125 [Pgs. 124–125 include portions of Doc. 142, Doc. 143, and Doc. 144], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 145], 128–134 [Pgs. 128–134 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151] passim, 138–151 [Pgs. 138–151 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168] passim, 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 227 [Pg. 227 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Supply route to Soviet Union, protection of, 5–6 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 5], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 84], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 174], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 176], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 203], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 210], 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 232], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 240], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 241], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 252], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 254 and Doc. 255], 304–305 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 346], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 354]

Trade agreement with United States: Negotiations for, 276–289 [Pgs. 276–289 include portions of Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]; signature of agreement and supplementary exchange of notes, Apr. 8, 1943, 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

Trans-Iranian Railroad, American operation of southern section of, 311–318 [Pgs. 311–318 include portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361] Understanding between United States and United Kingdom regarding: Exchange of views, and decision for American operation, 311–314 [Pgs. 311–314 include portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355]; notification to Iranian Government, and Iranian consent subject to British and Soviet approval, 314–315 [Pgs. 314–315 include portions of Doc. 354, Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 316–318 [Pgs. 316–318 include portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361]

U.S. armed forces in Iran in connection with operation, question of jurisdiction over, 315–316 [Pgs. 315–316 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359]

Tripartite treaty of alliance. See Anglo-Soviet-Iranian treaty of alliance, supra.

U.S. armed forces in Iran, 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 315–316 [Pgs. 315–316 include portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, Doc. 357, Doc. 358, and Doc. 359]

U.S. representations regarding British policy in Iran, and circumstances leading to (see also Political situation under Food shortages, supra), 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 187–191 [Pgs. 187–191 include portions of Doc. 200, Doc. 201, Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 193–194 [Pgs. 193–194 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 209], 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 206–222 [Pgs. 206–222 include portions of Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240]

Iraq, 343–354 [Pgs. 343–354 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418] Customs and transit dues, U.S. insistence on exemption of American war materials sent to or through Iraq, 346–353 [Pgs. 346–353 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, Doc. 409, Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, Doc. 413, Doc. 414, Doc. 415, Doc. 416, and Doc. 417]

Lend-Lease aid, arrangements for, 343–346 [Pgs. 343–346 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]

Residence tax, U.S. unwillingness to request exemption for Americans, 353–354 [Pgs. 353–354 include portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

Views of Iraqi Consul General at Beirut regarding British-Free French differences in Syria and Lebanon, 601–602 [Pgs. 601–602 include portions of Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718], 604–605 [Pgs. 604–605 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720]

Isthmian Steamship Lines, 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407]

Italy, Joint Declaration with Germany, July 3, regarding Egypt and Near East, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 17]

Jackson, Charles D., 775–776 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 873], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 879], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885]

Jackson, R. G. A., 3n [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 3–4 [Pgs. 3–4 include portions of Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 736–737 [Pgs. 736–737 include portions of Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, and Doc. 847]

Jacobs, Joseph Earle, 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 7], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 12]

Jadwin, Col., 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 893, Doc. 894, and Doc. 895], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900]

Jahanbani, Gen. Amanollah, 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367], 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 368, Doc. 369, and Doc. 370]

Japan. See Iran: Japanese Legation in Tehran.

Jawdat, Ali, 541n [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 541–542 [Pgs. 541–542 include portions of Doc. 650, Doc. 651, and Doc. 652], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653]

Jernegan, John D., 126–128 [Pgs. 126–128 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 189–191 [Pgs. 189–191 include portions of Doc. 202, Doc. 203, and Doc. 204], 197–199 [Pgs. 197–199 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211], 232–233 [Pgs. 232–233 include portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, and Doc. 252], 294n [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 296–297 [Pgs. 296–297 include portions of Doc. 337, Doc. 338, and Doc. 339], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 340], 306–307 [Pgs. 306–307 include portions of Doc. 346, Doc. 347, and Doc. 348], 317–318 [Pgs. 317–318 include portions of Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361], 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 463–464 [Pgs. 463–464 include portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578]

Jester, Perry N., 38–43 [Pgs. 38–43 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32]

Jews. See Palestine, Zionist and Arab agitation, etc.

Johnson, Col., 415–416 [Pgs. 415–416 include portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515]

Johnson, Col. Charles R., Jr., 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 632, Doc. 633, and Doc. 634], 522–523 [Pgs. 522–523 include portions of Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638]

Johnson, Col. J. P., 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 354]

Johnson, Col. Louis, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 647]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (U.S.), 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 20], 33–34 [Pgs. 33–34 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 35–36 [Pgs. 35–36 include portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 26]

Jones, Capt., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 7]

Jones, George Lewis, Jr., 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 7], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 12]

Jordana, Count, 509 [Pg. 509 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643]

Kaufman, Prank A., 690–691 [Pgs. 690–691 include portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, and Doc. 806]

Kazemi, S. Bagherr, 250 [Pg. 250 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, and Doc. 279], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Kelley, Robert F., 727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 835], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 835 and Doc. 836], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940]

Kemp, Col. Phillip, 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452]

Keynes, John Maynard, 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

Khouri, Faiz. See Khowry, Fayes el.

Khouri, Faris. See Khowry, Faris.

Khoury, Beshara el, 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 702 and Doc. 703]

Khowry, Faris, 673–674 [Pgs. 673–674 include portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 789]

Khowry, Fayes el, 656–657 [Pgs. 656–657 include portions of Doc. 770, Doc. 771, and Doc. 772], 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 670n [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 670–671 [Pgs. 670–671 include portions of Doc. 785, Doc. 786, and Doc. 787], 671–672 [Pgs. 671–672 include portions of Doc. 786, Doc. 787, and Doc. 788], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789], 673–674 [Pgs. 673–674 include portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789], 674–675 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 789]

King, Adm. Ernest J., 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353]

King-Crane Commission (1919), 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 789]

Kirchhoff, Col., 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486]

Kirk, Alexander C, 71–73 [Pgs. 71–73 include portions of Doc. 77, Doc. 78, and Doc. 79], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 82], 76n [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 78–79 [Pgs. 78–79 include portions of Doc. 84, Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666]

Knatehbull-Hugessen, Sir Hughe M., 692n [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 692–693 [Pgs. 692–693 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, and Doc. 809], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 808 and Doc. 809], 694 [Pg. 694 includes portions of Doc. 809, Doc. 810, and Doc. 811], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 817 and Doc. 818], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821], 705–706 [Pgs. 705–706 include portions of Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822], 727n [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 835], 727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 835], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 840 and Doc. 841], 732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856], 746–787 [Pgs. 746–787 include portions of Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884] passim, 809n [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 923 and Doc. 924], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926], 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 930 and Doc. 931], 822n [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 935]

Kroll, H. A., 695–696 [Pgs. 695–696 include portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813]

Kuniholm, Bertel E., 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Kurdish disorders in Azerbaijan. See under Iran.

Kuwatly, Shukri, 645–646 [Pgs. 645–646 include portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762]

Lampson, Sir Miles, 63n [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 66], 63–64 [Pgs. 63–64 include portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70], 65–66 [Pgs. 65–66 include portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 75], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 80–81 [Pgs. 80–81 include portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 91, Doc. 92, and Doc. 93], 85 [Pg. 85 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95], 88n [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 99], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 99], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Laval, Pierre, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 739]

League of Nations, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 727], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 736], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 736], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759]; Mandate Act of July 24, 1922, interpretation of, 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 753, Doc. 754, and Doc. 755], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 785], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Leahy, Adm. William D., 33–34 [Pgs. 33–34 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 739]

Lehman, Herbert H., 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Lenahan, William, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580 include portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699]

Lend-Lease Act (1941), cited, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 153], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 339], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 493], 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495], 405–406 [Pgs. 405–406 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 406–407 [Pgs. 406–407 include portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792]

Lend-Lease aid (see also Middle East Supply Center): Iran. See under

Iran. Iraq, arrangements for, 343–346 [Pgs. 343–346 include portions of Doc. 400, Doc. 401, Doc. 402, Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405]

Liberia. See under Liberia.

Turkey. See under Turkey.

United Kingdom, agreement signed Feb. 23, cited, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Leslie, Kenneth, 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657]

Levant States. See Syria and Lebanon.

Lewis, Sir Wilmot, 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 935]

Liberia, 355–438 [Pgs. 355–438 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, and Doc. 555] American air bases in Liberia. See British activities: Desire for use of, infra; and Defense agreement, infra.

British activities: Currency in Liberia, question of replacement by American currency, 430–438 [Pgs. 430–438 include portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, and Doc. 555]

Desire for use of American air bases in Liberia: Attitude of State Department and of Liberian Government, 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452], 407–415 [Pgs. 407–415 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, and Doc. 514]; position of War Department, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 510, Doc. 511, and Doc. 512], 415–416 [Pgs. 415–416 include portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515], 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]; recommendations of Harry A. McBride, 416–418 [Pgs. 416–418 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

Position regarding expulsion of German Consul from Liberia, 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 427–428 [Pgs. 427–428 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536], 429–430 [Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540]

Publicity regarding American military activities in Liberia, 399–400 [Pgs. 399–400 include portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486], 400–401 [Pgs. 400–401 include portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Currency, negotiations regarding replacement of British currency in Liberia by American currency, 430–438 [Pgs. 430–438 include portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, Doc. 540, Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, Doc. 544, Doc. 545, Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, and Doc. 555]

Declaration of war against Germany, question of, 356–357 [Pgs. 356–357 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

Defense agreement with United States, signed Mar. 31, 355–403 [Pgs. 355–403 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492] Appointment of Harry A. McBride as Special Representative of President Roosevelt to negotiate agreement, 355–357 [Pgs. 355–357 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422]; reappointment to discuss fulfillment of agreement, 387–390 [Pgs. 387–390 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 391–392 [Pgs. 391–392 include portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476]

Discussions concerning— Airports and defense areas, U.S. military use of, and American troops for defense of Liberian territory, 355–371 [Pgs. 355–371 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, and Doc. 444], 377–379 [Pgs. 377–379 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 386–387 [Pgs. 386–387 include portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, and Doc. 472], 390–391 [Pgs. 390–391 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 401–402 [Pgs. 401–402 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

Censorship, 368–369 [Pgs. 368–369 include portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 396–397 [Pgs. 396–397 include portions of Doc. 480, Doc. 481, and Doc. 482], 397–398 [Pgs. 397–398 include portions of Doc. 481, Doc. 482, and Doc. 483], 399–401 [Pgs. 399–401 include portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532]

Credits for road construction and other defense measures, 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 359–360 [Pgs. 359–360 include portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425, and Doc. 426], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 429], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 367–368 [Pgs. 367–368 include portions of Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 452], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 474], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Health conditions, 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 360 [Pg. 360 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 438, Doc. 439, and Doc. 440], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Road construction. See Credits, supra.

Draft text and amendments, 361–364 [Pgs. 361–364 include portions of Doc. 427, Doc. 428, and Doc. 429], 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 372–373 [Pgs. 372–373 include portions of Doc. 445, Doc. 446, and Doc. 447], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

Implementation of agreement and related matters, 377–382 [Pgs. 377–382 include portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, Doc. 456, Doc. 457, Doc. 458, Doc. 459, Doc. 460, Doc. 461, Doc. 462, Doc. 463, and Doc. 464], 386–398 [Pgs. 386–398 include portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, and Doc. 483]

Messages to Liberian President Barclay in conection with, 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 374–375 [Pgs. 374–375 include portions of Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452], 375–376 [Pgs. 375–376 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452], 383–384 [Pgs. 383–384 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 389–390 [Pgs. 389–390 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

Negotiations, 355–375 [Pgs. 355–375 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, Doc. 421, Doc. 422, Doc. 423, Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, Doc. 442, Doc. 443, Doc. 444, Doc. 445, Doc. 446, Doc. 447, Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452]

Press announcement, Dec. 3, Liberian statement in connection with, and Roosevelt message to President Barclay, 402–403 [Pgs. 402–403 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

Signature Mar. 31, and submission to Liberian Legislature for ratification, 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 381 [Pg. 381 is part of Doc. 462], 382–385 [Pgs. 382–385 include portions of Doc. 462, Doc. 463, Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469]; exchange of notes Oct. 6, clarifying article II of agreement, discussions leading to, 385–386 [Pgs. 385–386 include portions of Doc. 468, Doc. 469, Doc. 470, and Doc. 471], 387–390 [Pgs. 387–390 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 474], 393–394 [Pgs. 393–394 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, and Doc. 478], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

Export-Import Bank loan, discussed, 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Expulsion of Germans from Liberia: British position concerning, 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 427–428 [Pgs. 427–428 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536], 429–430 [Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540]; discussions concerning, 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc. 466], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 472], 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 472], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 474], 392–393 [Pgs. 392–393 include portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476]; U.S. insistence on, 419–430 [Pgs. 419–430 include portions of Doc. 516, Doc. 517, Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540]

Invasion of North Africa by American Forces, Liberian reaction to, 401–402 [Pgs. 401–402 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

Lend-Lease aid: Consideration of, 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 457], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 474]; preparatory discussions and public announcement of Liberia’s eligibility for, 404–407 [Pgs. 404–407 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498]

Roberts Field and Fisherman Lake (see also Defense agreement, supra): Arrangements for American use for defense purposes, 355–356 [Pgs. 355–356 include portions of Doc. 419, Doc. 420, and Doc. 421], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456], 386–387 [Pgs. 386–387 include portions of Doc. 469, Doc. 470, Doc. 471, and Doc. 472]; British desire to use American air bases at, 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452], 407–419 [Pgs. 407–419 include portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, Doc. 503, Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, Doc. 510, Doc. 511, Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]

Roosevelt’s exchange of messages with Liberian President, 383–384 [Pgs. 383–384 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 389–390 [Pgs. 389–390 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 405–406 [Pgs. 405–406 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

Severance of relations with Axis Powers, 356–357 [Pgs. 356–357 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]; with Vichy France, 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492]

Submarine activities off Liberian coast, 370 [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 457], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460]

U.S. defense aid. See Defense agreement and Lend-Lease aid, supra.

War aims, question of joint U.S.-Liberian declaration regarding, 394–395 [Pgs. 394–395 include portions of Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, and Doc. 479], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483]

Livesey, Frederick, 301–302 [Pgs. 301–302 include portions of Doc. 342, Doc. 343, and Doc. 344], 307–308 [Pgs. 307–308 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Lockard, Lt. Cmdr., 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695]

Long, Breckinridge, 79–80 [Pgs. 79–80 include portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, Doc. 87, and Doc. 88], 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 89, Doc. 90, and Doc. 91]

Lozevsky, S. A., 807 [Pg. 807 includes portions of Doc. 918, Doc. 919, and Doc. 920]

Luthringer, George F., 307–308 [Pgs. 307–308 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 308n [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 309–310 [Pgs. 309–310 include portions of Doc. 349, Doc. 350, and Doc. 351]

Lyttelton, Sir Oliver, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 5], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 75], 69–70 [Pgs. 69–70 include portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 727], 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 727], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 736], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

MacArthur, Gen. Douglas, 72 [Pg. 72 is part of Doc. 78]

MacMichael, Sir Harold, 551n [Pg. 551 includes portions of Doc. 661 and Doc. 662], 551–553 [Pgs. 551–553 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

MacMurray, John Van A., 811–816 [Pgs. 811–816 include portions of Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933]

Madagascar, British views regarding Free French civil administration of, 632–633 [Pgs. 632–633 include portions of Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 745], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 749 and Doc. 750], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779]

Maglione, Cardinal Luigi, 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Magnes, Judah, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 663]

Maher Pasha, Aly, 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 66], 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70]

Maisky, Ivan, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 197], 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Makins, Roger, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 27], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

Mardam, Jamil, 644–645 [Pgs. 644–645 include portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758]

Marshall, Gen. George C, 408–409 [Pgs. 408–409 include portions of Doc. 498, Doc. 499, Doc. 500, Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503]

Maxwell, Gen. Russell L., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 7], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 12], 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 75], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 84], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 94n [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 354], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 676 and Doc. 677], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 899 and Doc. 900], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, and Doc. 903]

McBride, Col. Harry A., 37–38 [Pgs. 37–38 include portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 421], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 357–358 [Pgs. 357–358 include portions of Doc. 421, Doc. 422, and Doc. 423], 358n [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 359–370 [Pgs. 359–370 include portions of Doc. 424, Doc. 425, Doc. 426, Doc. 427, Doc. 428, Doc. 429, Doc. 430, Doc. 431, Doc. 432, Doc. 433, Doc. 434, Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, Doc. 438, Doc. 439, Doc. 440, Doc. 441, and Doc. 442] passim, 370n [Pg. 370 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 374–375 [Pgs. 374–375 include portions of Doc. 448, Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452], 375 [Pg. 375 includes portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452], 375–376 [Pgs. 375–376 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, Doc. 451, and Doc. 452], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 457], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 387–405 [Pgs. 387–405 include portions of Doc. 471, Doc. 472, Doc. 473, Doc. 474, Doc. 475, Doc. 476, Doc. 477, Doc. 478, Doc. 479, Doc. 480, Doc. 481, Doc. 482, Doc. 483, Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, Doc. 492, Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495] passim, 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510], 415–416 [Pgs. 415–416 include portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515], 416–418 [Pgs. 416–418 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517], 426 [Pg. 426 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536], 430 [Pg. 430 includes portions of Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 431–432 [Pgs. 431–432 include portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544], 432 [Pg. 432 includes portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544], 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 546 and Doc. 547]

McDaniel, Charles B., 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 397n [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

McNarney, Gen. Joseph T., 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Menemencioğlu, Numan, 680n [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 793 and Doc. 794]. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 695–697 [Pgs. 695–697 include portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, and Doc. 814], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 815], 700–701 [Pgs. 700–701 include portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 820 and Doc. 821], 724n [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833], 724–726 [Pgs. 724–726 include portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834], 739n [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 848, Doc. 849, and Doc. 850], 739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 848, Doc. 849, and Doc. 850], 755n [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 862], 756–786 [Pgs. 756–786 include portions of Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, and Doc. 883] passim, 795n [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 896 and Doc. 897], 795 [Pg. 795 includes portions of Doc. 896 and Doc. 897], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 905], 805n [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 915 and Doc. 916], 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 923 and Doc. 924], 809–810 [Pgs. 809–810 include portions of Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, and Doc. 926], 823n [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 936], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940], 828–829 [Pgs. 828–829 include portions of Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, and Doc. 946], 829–830 [Pgs. 829–830 include portions of Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 952], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 952], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 953]

Merchant, Livingston T., 58–59 [Pgs. 58–59 include portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 873]

Merriam, Gordon P., 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664], 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580 include portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693]

Middle East Supply Center (MESC), U.S. participation in (see also under Iran: Supply problems, and under Turkey: Wheat), 1–17 [Pgs. 1–17 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12] British invitation, and discussions concerning participation, 1–4 [Pgs. 1–4 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5], 9–10 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 11–12 [Pgs. 11–12 include portions of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7] Civilian supply requirements, information concerning methods of handling and concerning functions of Center, 4–12 [Pgs. 4–12 include portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 14–15 [Pgs. 14–15 include portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

U.S. decision to participate in Center and Council, and arrangements for formal representation, 12–13 [Pgs. 12–13 include portions of Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 15–17 [Pgs. 15–17 include portions of Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Millar, F. R. Hoyer, 429–430 [Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652]

Millspaugh, Arthur C., 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 177], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 200], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 194–195 [Pgs. 194–195 include portions of Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 210], 200 [Pg. 200 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 215], 205–206 [Pgs. 205–206 include portions of Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, and Doc. 220], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 238n [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 243 [Pg. 243 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 244 [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 288], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

Minor, Harold B., 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 156], 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 160], 150 [Pg. 150 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174]

Mohammed Hashim Khan, 52–53 [Pgs. 52–53 include portions of Doc. 49, Doc. 50, Doc. 51, and Doc. 52]

Mohammed Reza Shah Pahlavi, Shahanshah of Iran, 157 [Pg. 157 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 180], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 209], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 215], 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 232], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 235], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 268 [Pg. 268 includes portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, and Doc. 306], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 318–319 [Pgs. 318–319 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, and Doc. 362], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Mohammed Zahir Shah, 51n [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, and Doc. 49], 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, and Doc. 49], 51–52 [Pgs. 51–52 include portions of Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 50, Doc. 51, and Doc. 52], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 54]

Molotov, V. M., 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367], 814 [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 929 and Doc. 930], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 935], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 935], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 935]

Monroe, Paul, 228–229 [Pgs. 228–229 include portions of Doc. 244, Doc. 245, Doc. 246, and Doc. 247], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 260 and Doc. 261]

Moose, James S., Jr., 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 675]

Morocco, 439–530 [Pgs. 439–530 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646] American economic aid to Spanish Zone of Morocco and Tangier, negotiations between American Chargé at Tangier and Spanish High Commissioner, 439–486 [Pgs. 439–486 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603] Economic accord along lines of arrangement with French North Africa (see also Petroleum accord and Political situation, infra): British attitude, 450–452 [Pgs. 450–452 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 577], 464–469 [Pgs. 464–469 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, and Doc. 583], 470–471 [Pgs. 470–471 include portions of Doc. 583, Doc. 584, and Doc. 585]

Consideration of, and discussions concerning, 441–446 [Pgs. 441–446 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, and Doc. 559], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 559 and Doc. 560], 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 453–454 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 568], 455–464 [Pgs. 455–464 include portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, and Doc. 578], 469–470 [Pgs. 469–470 include portions of Doc. 582, Doc. 583, and Doc. 584], 471–474 [Pgs. 471–474 include portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, and Doc. 587], 475–481 [Pgs. 475–481 include portions of Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, and Doc. 597], 483–484 [Pgs. 483–484 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, and Doc. 600]; basis for agreement, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 583 and Doc. 584], 471–473 [Pgs. 471–473 include portions of Doc. 584, Doc. 585, and Doc. 586]

Issuance of export licenses and navicerts prior to conclusion of economic accord, question of, 445–446 [Pgs. 445–446 include portions of Doc. 558 and Doc. 559], 483 [Pg. 483 includes portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 485–486 [Pgs. 485–486 include portions of Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

Spanish position that commercial negotiations must be carried out in Madrid, 484–486 [Pgs. 484–486 include portions of Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603]

Petroleum accord for Spanish North Africa and Tangier, 474–475 [Pgs. 474–475 include portions of Doc. 586, Doc. 587, and Doc. 588], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 592], 483–484 [Pgs. 483–484 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, and Doc. 600]

Political situation in North Africa, reports concerning, and consideration of a political démarche, 439–441 [Pgs. 439–441 include portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557], 446–450 [Pgs. 446–450 include portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, and Doc. 565], 451–453 [Pgs. 451–453 include portions of Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568], 455–456 [Pgs. 455–456 include portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 465–466 [Pgs. 465–466 include portions of Doc. 578, Doc. 579, and Doc. 580], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583], 481–483 [Pgs. 481–483 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599]

Invasion of French North Africa by American Forces, U.S. policies and actions regarding Spanish Morocco in connection with, 505–530 [Pgs. 505–530 include portions of Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646] Assurances with regard to territorial integrity of Spanish Morocco, U.S. and British policy regarding, 482–483 [Pgs. 482–483 include portions of Doc. 597, Doc. 598, and Doc. 599], 505–510 [Pgs. 505–510 include portions of Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, and Doc. 622]; delivery of messages to authorities in Spanish Morocco and Madrid, 510–512 [Pgs. 510–512 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, and Doc. 624], 513–514 [Pgs. 513–514 include portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646]

Flights of American planes over Spanish territory in North Africa, protest by Spanish High Commissioner, and U.S. reply, 522 [Pg. 522 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638]

Internment of American aviators after forced landings in Spanish Morocco: Discussions concerning welfare and release of crews, and safeguarding of the planes, 512–513 [Pgs. 512–513 include portions of Doc. 623, Doc. 624, and Doc. 625], 515–517 [Pgs. 515–517 include portions of Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629], 517–521 [Pgs. 517–521 include portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 521–522 [Pgs. 521–522 include portions of Doc. 634, Doc. 635, and Doc. 636]; exchange of American and British aviators against interned Axis personnel, question of, 517–518 [Pgs. 517–518 include portions of Doc. 629 and Doc. 630], 518–519 [Pgs. 518–519 include portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Propaganda activities among natives, U.S. assurances regarding, 514–515 [Pgs. 514–515 include portions of Doc. 625 and Doc. 626], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 629], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635]

Relations of American troops with native population, 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646]

Spain’s political attitude, 526–527 [Pgs. 526–527 include portions of Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

U.S. troop movements in connection with military occupation, 522–523 [Pgs. 522–523 include portions of Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638], 523–524 [Pgs. 523–524 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639]

Visit of General Patton with Spanish High Commissioner Orgaz, 524–526 [Pgs. 524–526 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642], 528–530 [Pgs. 528–530 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

Reservation of American treaty rights. See Tangier Zone, infra.

Spanish Zone. See American economic aid and Invasion of French North Africa by American Forces, supra.

Tangier Zone (see also American economic aid, supra): Controversy over attempts by Spanish Customs officials to open packages addressed to foreign diplomatic and consular representatives in Tangier, 494–505 [Pgs. 494–505 include portions of Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, and Doc. 616] Representations by British Consul General, 494–496 [Pgs. 494–496 include portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 610], 500 [Pg. 500 includes portions of Doc. 610 and Doc. 611]; by U.S. Chargé, based on treaty provisions, and replies from Spanish officials, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 608], 496–502 [Pgs. 496–502 include portions of Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612]

U.S. and British acceptance of Spanish suggestion for settlement, with U.S. reservation of treaty rights, 502–504 [Pgs. 502–504 include portions of Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, and Doc. 614]

Provisioning of Tangier Zone from French Morocco, question of continuation of, 441–443 [Pgs. 441–443 include portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557]

Taxes and price controls in Tangier Zone without prejudice to American treaty rights, informal cooperation between the American Diplomatic Agency and Spanish authorities, 486–494 [Pgs. 486–494 include portions of Doc. 601, Doc. 602, Doc. 603, Doc. 604, Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, and Doc. 608]

Morrill, Capt. Paul M., 106n [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 123], 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Mugica, Gen., 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576], 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 622 and Doc. 623], 511–512 [Pgs. 511–512 include portions of Doc. 622, Doc. 623, and Doc. 624]

Murdoch, Mr., 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 484], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486], 401 [Pg. 401 includes portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

Murphy, Robert D., 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 571], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640]

Murray, Wallace, 24–25 [Pgs. 24–25 include portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 44–45 [Pgs. 44–45 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 68–71 [Pgs. 68–71 include portions of Doc. 74, Doc. 75, Doc. 76, Doc. 77, and Doc. 78], 97–98 [Pgs. 97–98 include portions of Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 100–101 [Pgs. 100–101 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 101–102 [Pgs. 101–102 include portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 102n [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 127–128 [Pgs. 127–128 include portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 189–190 [Pgs. 189–190 include portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 190–191 [Pgs. 190–191 include portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 193–194 [Pgs. 193–194 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, and Doc. 207], 197–198 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 210], 222–224 [Pgs. 222–224 include portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241], 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 242–243 [Pgs. 242–243 include portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269], 248–249 [Pgs. 248–249 include portions of Doc. 274, Doc. 275, and Doc. 276], 269 [Pg. 269 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 313], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 314], 281n [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 292–293 [Pgs. 292–293 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 304–306 [Pgs. 304–306 include portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 307 [Pg. 307 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 330 [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, and Doc. 389], 341–342 [Pgs. 341–342 include portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 342n [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 399], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 421], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476], 429–430 [Pgs. 429–430 include portions of Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 649], 553–556 [Pgs. 553–556 include portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 664], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 800 and Doc. 801]

Muscat and Oman, negotiations concerning use by United States of air bases, 531–537 [Pgs. 531–537 include portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648]

Nabors, Capt, 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495]

Naccache, Alfred, 586–605 [Pgs. 586–605 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720] passim, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 730], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 779], 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 667–668 [Pgs. 667–668 include portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787]

Nahas Pasha, Mustapha, 65–66 [Pgs. 65–66 include portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, and Doc. 72], 66–67 [Pgs. 66–67 include portions of Doc. 70, Doc. 71, Doc. 72, and Doc. 73], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 75], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 80n [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 80–81 [Pgs. 80–81 include portions of Doc. 87, Doc. 88, and Doc. 89]

Narcotic Drugs Import and Export Act (1909), cited, 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 325]

Nasr, T., 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

Nesbitt, Capt. Frederick, 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Neuman, Emmanuel, 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653]

Nielsen, Orsen N., 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 210], 198–199 [Pgs. 198–199 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Nixon, Sir Frank, 146–147 [Pgs. 146–147 include portions of Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164], 148–149 [Pgs. 148–149 include portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

Noguès, Gen. Albert, 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 556], 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 556 and Doc. 557], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 557], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 557], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 559 and Doc. 560], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 568], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580]

North Africa. See Morocco.

Nowrouz Khan, 46n [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 47–48 [Pgs. 47–48 include portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42]

Nuri as-Said, 343n [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 350n [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412], 350–351 [Pgs. 350–351 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, and Doc. 413], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 541n [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653]

Office of War Information (OWI), 27–28 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 20], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655], 557–558 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664], 638–641 [Pgs. 638–641 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788]

Ohliger, F. W., 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690]

Oil. See Morocco: American economic aid: Petroleum accord; and under Saudi Arabia.

Orbay, Gen. Kazim, 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 797], 684n [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 797], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 870]

Orbay, Rauf, 681–682 [Pgs. 681–682 include portions of Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796]

Orgaz, Gen. Luis, 440–486 [Pgs. 440–486 include portions of Doc. 556, Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, Doc. 569, Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, Doc. 573, Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, Doc. 577, Doc. 578, Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, Doc. 582, Doc. 583, Doc. 584, Doc. 585, Doc. 586, Doc. 587, Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, Doc. 597, Doc. 598, Doc. 599, Doc. 600, Doc. 601, Doc. 602, and Doc. 603] passim, 487n [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 603], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 603], 497n [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 506–530 [Pgs. 506–530 include portions of Doc. 616, Doc. 617, Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, Doc. 624, Doc. 625, Doc. 626, Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, Doc. 631, Doc. 632, Doc. 633, Doc. 634, Doc. 635, Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646] passim

Pahlavi. See Mohammed Reza Shah Pahlavi.

Palestine, Zionist and Arab agitation regarding British policy in Middle East, and future status of Palestine, 538–558 [Pgs. 538–558 include portions of Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664] Analyses and background, 551–558 [Pgs. 551–558 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, and Doc. 664]

Arab States: Attitude toward United States, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 663], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664]; future independence of, alleged U.S. assurances, 541–542 [Pgs. 541–542 include portions of Doc. 650, Doc. 651, and Doc. 652], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653]; Ibn Saud, attitude toward Zionism, and political position in Arab world, 553–556 [Pgs. 553–556 include portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

Balfour Declaration (1917), commemoration of 25th anniversary of, 548–550 [Pgs. 548–550 include portions of Doc. 659, Doc. 660, and Doc. 661], 550–551 [Pgs. 550–551 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 662]

Jewish army, question of creation of, 539–540 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 649], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655], 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657]; British position, 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655], 545–547 [Pgs. 545–547 include portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, and Doc. 658]

U.S. attitude toward (see also Jewish army, supra): Declaration of policy, consideration of, 538–540 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 649], 543–544 [Pgs. 543–544 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655]; exchange of views between Jewish leaders and Department of State officials, 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 542–543 [Pgs. 542–543 include portions of Doc. 651, Doc. 652, and Doc. 653], 544–545 [Pgs. 544–545 include portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657], 550–551 [Pgs. 550–551 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662]

Zionism: Arab attitude toward, 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 662], 553–556 [Pgs. 553–556 include portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 664]; “Biltmore resolutions”, British views regarding political consequences of, 551–553 [Pgs. 551–553 include portions of Doc. 661, Doc. 662, and Doc. 663]

Pan American Airways, operations in Near East and Africa, 18–23 [Pgs. 18–23 include portions of Doc. 13, Doc. 14, Doc. 15, and Doc. 16], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 347–348 [Pgs. 347–348 include portions of Doc. 405, Doc. 406, Doc. 407, Doc. 408, and Doc. 409], 349–350 [Pgs. 349–350 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412], 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 356–357 [Pgs. 356–357 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 424], 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 431, Doc. 432, and Doc. 433], 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 452], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 457], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 474], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 647], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 647], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 647], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 676]

Papen, Franz von, 696 [Pg. 696 is part of Doc. 813], 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 867], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 867], 823–833 [Pgs. 823–833 include portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, and Doc. 951]

Parker, W. Leonard, 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 315], 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 557–558 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664]

Patton, Gen. George S., 523n [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, and Doc. 638]; visit to Spanish Morocco, 524–526 [Pgs. 524–526 include portions of Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, Doc. 641, and Doc. 642], 528–530 [Pgs. 528–530 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

Peterson, Sir Maurice, 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 256, Doc. 257, and Doc. 258]

Piburn, Lt. Col. Edwin, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Poincaré, Raymond, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 763 and Doc. 764], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 764]

Potemkin, V. P., 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 935], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 948]

Preston, Capt., 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Pyron, Gen., 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693]

Qadri, Tahsin, 601n [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718], 601–602 [Pgs. 601–602 include portions of Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718], 604–605 [Pgs. 604–605 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720]

Qavam, Ahmad, 151–166 [Pgs. 151–166 include portions of Doc. 166, Doc. 167, Doc. 168, Doc. 169, Doc. 170, Doc. 171, Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, and Doc. 182] passim, 176 [Pg. 176 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 179 [Pg. 179 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 180 [Pg. 180 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 196], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 200], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 193–221 [Pgs. 193–221 include portions of Doc. 205, Doc. 206, Doc. 207, Doc. 208, Doc. 209, Doc. 210, Doc. 211, Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, Doc. 219, Doc. 220, Doc. 221, Doc. 222, Doc. 223, Doc. 224, Doc. 225, Doc. 226, Doc. 227, Doc. 228, Doc. 229, Doc. 230, Doc. 231, Doc. 232, Doc. 233, Doc. 234, Doc. 235, Doc. 236, Doc. 237, and Doc. 238] passim, 244n [Pg. 244 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 245–261 [Pgs. 245–261 include portions of Doc. 271, Doc. 272, Doc. 273, Doc. 274, Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, Doc. 293, Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296] passim, 325n [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 336n [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 336–337 [Pgs. 336–337 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394], 337 [Pg. 337 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399]

Recognition. See Syria and Lebanon: U.S. limited recognition.

Reese, Ellis, 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 583 and Doc. 584]

Renchard, George W., 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Ribbentrop, Joachim von, 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935]

Riddleberger, James W., 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 577], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578]

Ridley, Gen. Clarence S., 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 339]

Rios Capape, Gen., 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, and Doc. 629]

Roberts Field and Fisherman Lake. See under Liberia.

Rommel, Gen. Erwin, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70], 78n [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 97, Doc. 98, and Doc. 99], 450n [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 564 and Doc. 565]

Roosevelt, Franklin D.: Afghanistan, appointment of Minister to, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Areas of strategic responsibility, U.S. and British, 9n [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5]

Egypt, 98–99 [Pgs. 98–99 include portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113]

Ethiopia, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 112–116 [Pgs. 112–116 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

Exchange of messages with Churchill, 311–312 [Pgs. 311–312 include portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, Doc. 353, and Doc. 354], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]; Haile Selassie I, 112–116 [Pgs. 112–116 include portions of Doc. 126, Doc. 127, Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]; Ibn Saud, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 670], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675]; the Shahanshah of Iran, 268–269 [Pgs. 268–269 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, and Doc. 308]; the President of Liberia, 383–384 [Pgs. 383–384 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 389–390 [Pgs. 389–390 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 405–406 [Pgs. 405–406 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496]

Iran, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 153], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 240], 224 [Pg. 224 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 268–269 [Pgs. 268–269 include portions of Doc. 304, Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, and Doc. 308], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 339]

Iraq, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]

Liberia, 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 383–384 [Pgs. 383–384 include portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472], 388–390 [Pgs. 388–390 include portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 493], 405–406 [Pgs. 405–406 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, and Doc. 496], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498]

Palestine, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 649], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 649], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 543–544 [Pgs. 543–544 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655], 550 [Pg. 550 includes portions of Doc. 660 and Doc. 661], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 663], 555n [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 663], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 664]

Political stability of Near East, interest in measures to secure, 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 26]

Saudi Arabia, 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 670], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 675]

Spanish Morocco and Tangier, 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 582 and Doc. 583], 470n [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 583 and Doc. 584], 513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 513n [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 624 and Doc. 625], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 634 and Doc. 635], 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646]

Syria and Lebanon, 664 [Pg. 664 includes portions of Doc. 779 and Doc. 780], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 787 and Doc. 788], 673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 788 and Doc. 789]

Turkey, 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813]

Routh, Augustus C., 409n [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503], 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505], 410–411 [Pgs. 410–411 include portions of Doc. 504, Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507]

Said, Nuri as-, 343n [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 350n [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, and Doc. 412], 350–351 [Pgs. 350–351 include portions of Doc. 410, Doc. 411, Doc. 412, and Doc. 413], 352 [Pg. 352 includes portions of Doc. 413, Doc. 414, and Doc. 415], 541n [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653]

Saleh, Allah Yar, 120–121 [Pgs. 120–121 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, and Doc. 140], 121–122 [Pgs. 121–122 include portions of Doc. 138, Doc. 139, Doc. 140, and Doc. 141], 123–124 [Pgs. 123–124 include portions of Doc. 141, Doc. 142, and Doc. 143], 126–128 [Pgs. 126–128 include portions of Doc. 144, Doc. 145, and Doc. 146], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 159], 152 [Pg. 152 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 171], 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 288], 276–277 [Pgs. 276–277 include portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 278–279 [Pgs. 278–279 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, and Doc. 318], 270–280 [Pgs. 270–280 include portions of Doc. 308, Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, Doc. 312, Doc. 313, Doc. 314, Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 281 [Pg. 281 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 324]

Samy Pasha, Salim, 63n [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 66], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 66], 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 66, Doc. 67, and Doc. 68]

Saraçoğlu, Sükrü, 680n [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 793 and Doc. 794], 680–681 [Pgs. 680–681 include portions of Doc. 793, Doc. 794, and Doc. 795], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797], 702 [Pg. 702 includes portions of Doc. 817 and Doc. 818], 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819], 727n [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 835], 727–742 [Pgs. 727–742 include portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856] passim, 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 857 and Doc. 858], 746–748 [Pgs. 746–748 include portions of Doc. 857, Doc. 858, and Doc. 859], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 861], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 754–755 [Pgs. 754–755 include portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 866], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 866 and Doc. 867], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 867 and Doc. 868], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 870 and Doc. 871], 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 791n [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 893], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 897 and Doc. 898], 798–799 [Pgs. 798–799 include portions of Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, and Doc. 904], 801n [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908], 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 906, Doc. 907, and Doc. 908], 814n [Pg. 814 includes portions of Doc. 929 and Doc. 930], 816–822 [Pgs. 816–822 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, and Doc. 935], 823n [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 936], 830–831 [Pgs. 830–831 include portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 952], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 952], 835n [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 953]

Saudi Arabia, 559–585 [Pgs. 559–585 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, Doc. 683, Doc. 684, Doc. 685, Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700] Air transit rights for American planes, U.S. negotiations for, and British cooperation, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 567–574 [Pgs. 567–574 include portions of Doc. 674, Doc. 675, Doc. 676, Doc. 677, Doc. 678, Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683]; Ibn Saud’s assent for American and British flights over certain routes, 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685]

American Agricultural Mission to Saudi Arabia, 561–567 [Pgs. 561–567 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, Doc. 670, Doc. 671, Doc. 672, Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675]; exchange of messages between President Roosevelt and King Ibn Saud, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 670], 566–567 [Pgs. 566–567 include portions of Doc. 673, Doc. 674, and Doc. 675]

American Legation at Jidda, establishment of, 550–561 [Pgs. 550–561 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, Doc. 662, Doc. 663, Doc. 664, Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669]

British assistance to Saudi Arabia, estimated value of, 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681]

British military responsibility in, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 675], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 675], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698]

California Arabian Standard Oil Co. See Oil fields, etc., infra.

Dhahran oil installations. See Oil fields, etc., infra.

Ibn Saud, King of Saudi Arabia. See Ibn Saud, Abdul Aziz.

Oil fields and installations in Saudi Arabia, plans by oil company and U.S. and British Government officials for protection of, 576–585 [Pgs. 576–585 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, Doc. 691, Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, Doc. 699, and Doc. 700] Denial and defense operations, preparations for undertaking as a military operation, 577 [Pg. 577 includes portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 580–581 [Pgs. 580–581 include portions of Doc. 692, Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 582–584 [Pgs. 582–584 include portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, Doc. 698, and Doc. 699]

Evacuation of Americans, question of, 577–578 [Pgs. 577–578 include portions of Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, Doc. 690, and Doc. 691], 579–580 [Pgs. 579–580 include portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693], 581–582 [Pgs. 581–582 include portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697]

Protection measures, discussions concerning, 576–577 [Pgs. 576–577 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690]; question of possible anti-aircraft installations, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 686 and Doc. 687], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 700]

Saydam, Refik, 727n [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 835], 791n [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 889, Doc. 890, and Doc. 891], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 905], 823n [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 936], 834n [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 952]

Schayesteh, Mohammed, 137n [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 156 and Doc. 157], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 222 [Pg. 222 includes portions of Doc. 238, Doc. 239, and Doc. 240], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 240], 229–244 [Pgs. 229–244 include portions of Doc. 245, Doc. 246, Doc. 247, Doc. 248, Doc. 249, Doc. 250, Doc. 251, Doc. 252, Doc. 253, Doc. 254, Doc. 255, Doc. 256, Doc. 257, Doc. 258, Doc. 259, Doc. 260, Doc. 261, Doc. 262, Doc. 263, Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270], passim, 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 282, Doc. 283, and Doc. 284], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 288], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 273–274 [Pgs. 273–274 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 274–275 [Pgs. 274–275 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 324], 290n [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 292–293 [Pgs. 292–293 include portions of Doc. 330, Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 295–296 [Pgs. 295–296 include portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 316n [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 316–317 [Pgs. 316–317 include portions of Doc. 358, Doc. 359, and Doc. 360], 317–318 [Pgs. 317–318 include portions of Doc. 359, Doc. 360, and Doc. 361], 330n [Pg. 330 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 330–332 [Pgs. 330–332 include portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 333–334 [Pgs. 333–334 include portions of Doc. 387, Doc. 388, and Doc. 389], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391], 338n [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 338–339 [Pgs. 338–339 include portions of Doc. 394, Doc. 395, and Doc. 396], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

Schwarzkopf, Col. H. Norman, 233 [Pg. 233 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 238 [Pg. 238 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 252 [Pg. 252 includes portions of Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 260 [Pg. 260 includes portions of Doc. 293, Doc. 294, and Doc. 295], 261 [Pg. 261 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 339]

Serrano Suñer, Ramón, 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 560, Doc. 561, and Doc. 562], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 565 and Doc. 566], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580]

Sevki Alhan, Mehmet Ali, 706n [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 821 and Doc. 822], 706–707 [Pgs. 706–707 include portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 852 and Doc. 853]

Shaw, G. Howland, 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666]

Sheridan, J. P., 155–170 [Pgs. 155–170 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, Doc. 174, Doc. 175, Doc. 176, Doc. 177, Doc. 178, Doc. 179, Doc. 180, Doc. 181, Doc. 182, Doc. 183, Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186] passim, 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 207, Doc. 208, and Doc. 209], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 209], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 243–244 [Pgs. 243–244 include portions of Doc. 268, Doc. 269, and Doc. 270], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282]

Shingler, Col. Don G., 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 176]

Simpson, Clarence L., 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 377 [Pg. 377 includes portions of Doc. 453, Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456], 380–381 [Pgs. 380–381 include portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc. 466], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468], 392–393 [Pgs. 392–393 include portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 402 [Pg. 402 includes portions of Doc. 489 and Doc. 490], 402–403 [Pgs. 402–403 include portions of Doc. 489, Doc. 490, Doc. 491, and Doc. 492], 410n [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505], 420–421 [Pgs. 420–421 include portions of Doc. 518, Doc. 519, Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523], 421 [Pg. 421 includes portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525], 422–423 [Pgs. 422–423 include portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, and Doc. 527], 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 525, Doc. 526, and Doc. 527], 424 [Pg. 424 includes portions of Doc. 527, Doc. 528, and Doc. 529], 425 [Pg. 425 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536]

Sirry Pasha, Hussein, 63n [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 66], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 66], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 780 and Doc. 781], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70]

Smith, E. Talbot, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122]

Smith, Capt. Lyman, 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 910, Doc. 911, and Doc. 912]

Socony Vacuum Oil Co., 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476]

Soheily, Ali, 131n [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 149], 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 138 [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 220, Doc. 221, and Doc. 222], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 235], 221 [Pg. 221 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 249], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 249, Doc. 250, and Doc. 251], 238–239 [Pgs. 238–239 include portions of Doc. 259, Doc. 260, and Doc. 261], 241–242 [Pgs. 241–242 include portions of Doc. 264, Doc. 265, Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 257n [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 257 [Pg. 257 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290], 263n [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 264 [Pg. 264 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309], 290n [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 290–291 [Pgs. 290–291 include portions of Doc. 327, Doc. 328, and Doc. 329], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 335, Doc. 336, and Doc. 337], 315n [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 355, Doc. 356, and Doc. 357], 318n [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 319–320 [Pgs. 319–320 include portions of Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, and Doc. 364], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367], 324n [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 372, Doc. 373, and Doc. 374], 326n [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 330–332 [Pgs. 330–332 include portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 333 [Pg. 333 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391]

Somers, Andrew L., 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657]

Somervell, Gen. Brehon, 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

Soriano, Rafael, 487n [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 603], 487–489 [Pgs. 487–489 include portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 603 and Doc. 604], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 604], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607], 495n [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 608], 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 608], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 610], 498–499 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 610], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 611], 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 612, Doc. 613, and Doc. 614], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 614], 518–519 [Pgs. 518–519 include portions of Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631]

Soviet Union. See the following under Iran: Anglo-Soviet-Iranian treaty of alliance; Food shortages: Agreement, etc.: Soviet attitude; Kurdish disorders; Supply route to Soviet Union; and Trans-Iranian Railroad. See also Turkey: Soviet-Turkish relations.

Spain. See Morocco.

Spalding, Gen. Sidney P., 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 354], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 578 [Pg. 578 includes portions of Doc. 690 and Doc. 691], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 693, Doc. 694, and Doc. 695], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 582–583 [Pgs. 582–583 include portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, Doc. 697, and Doc. 698]

Spears, Gen. Sir Edward. See Syria and Lebanon: British-Free French differences: Discord, etc.

Stalin, I. V., 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353], 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 819–820 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 935]

Standard Vacuum Oil Co., 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28]

Standley, Adm. William H., 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 329 [Pg. 329 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

Steinhardt, Laurence A., 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 701–702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, and Doc. 818], 709 [Pg. 709 includes portions of Doc. 825 and Doc. 826], 802 [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 802n [Pg. 802 includes portions of Doc. 908 and Doc. 909], 808 [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 808n [Pg. 808 includes portions of Doc. 920, Doc. 921, and Doc. 922], 811n [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 926 and Doc. 927], 832n [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950]

Stettinius, Edward R., Jr., 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 340], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792], 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 793], 682–683 [Pgs. 682–683 include portions of Doc. 795, Doc. 796, and Doc. 797]

Stimson, Henry L., 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 410], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 421], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 373 [Pg. 373 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 452 [Pg. 452 includes portions of Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568]

Stonehewer Bird, F. H. W., 570–571 [Pgs. 570–571 include portions of Doc. 676 and Doc. 677], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681], 573–574 [Pgs. 573–574 include portions of Doc. 679, Doc. 680, Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 692 and Doc. 693], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 695, Doc. 696, and Doc. 697], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 584 [Pg. 584 includes portions of Doc. 698 and Doc. 699], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 700]

Strelsin, Alfred A., 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657], 546 [Pg. 546 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 546–547 [Pgs. 546–547 include portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658]

Suleiman, Abdullah, 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 570n [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 676], 570–571 [Pgs. 570–571 include portions of Doc. 676 and Doc. 677], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 677 and Doc. 678], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 679, Doc. 680, and Doc. 681]—574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685]

Swinton, Lord, 37 [Pg. 37 is part of Doc. 27], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

Syria and Lebanon, 586–676 [Pgs. 586–676 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789] American institutions in Syria and Lebanon, decrees regarding tax exemption, 659 [Pg. 659 includes portions of Doc. 774 and Doc. 775], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779]

British-Free French differences, 586–641 [Pgs. 586–641 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, Doc. 703, Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, Doc. 730, Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, Doc. 734, Doc. 735, Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, Doc. 744, Doc. 745, Doc. 746, Doc. 747, Doc. 748, Doc. 749, Doc. 750, Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753] Civil administration and local politics, Catroux’s position and British views, 586–587 [Pgs. 586–587 include portions of Doc. 701 and Doc. 702], 589–590 [Pgs. 589–590 include portions of Doc. 703, Doc. 704, and Doc. 705], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708], 592–593 [Pgs. 592–593 include portions of Doc. 707, Doc. 708, and Doc. 709], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 714], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 730], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784]

De Gaulle’s position and activities. See Independence, etc.: British versus Free French interpretation, infra.

Discord between General Spears and General Catroux: British policy and U.S. attempts for settlement, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 701], 587–588 [Pgs. 587–588 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, and Doc. 703], 590–601 [Pgs. 590–601 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, Doc. 708, Doc. 709, Doc. 710, Doc. 711, Doc. 712, Doc. 713, Doc. 714, Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718], 602–606 [Pgs. 602–606 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, and Doc. 722], 608–610 [Pgs. 608–610 include portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]; complaints by Lebanese President against General Spears, and request for U.S. help, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 701], 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 702, Doc. 703, and Doc. 704], 602–603 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 718], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720]; views of Iraqi Consul General, 601–602 [Pgs. 601–602 include portions of Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718], 604–605 [Pgs. 604–605 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720]

Elections, question of, 586–588 [Pgs. 586–588 include portions of Doc. 701, Doc. 702, and Doc. 703], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], 591–592 [Pgs. 591–592 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708], 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 714], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 715], 606–607 [Pgs. 606–607 include portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 723], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 729], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735], 622–623 [Pgs. 622–623 include portions of Doc. 734, Doc. 735, and Doc. 736], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 749 and Doc. 750], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 751], 640–641 [Pgs. 640–641 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 783 and Doc. 784], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 784], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 789], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 789]

Fifth column activities, danger of, 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 715 and Doc. 716], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718], 604–605 [Pgs. 604–605 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 723], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 727 and Doc. 728]

Food shortages, 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 718], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 723]; establishment of Wheat Office, 596–597 [Pgs. 596–597 include portions of Doc. 712, Doc. 713, and Doc. 714], 598–599 [Pgs. 598–599 include portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 718]

Independence of Syria and Lebanon and related matters: British versus Free French interpretation of situation, and Churchill-de Gaulle exchange, 613–616 [Pgs. 613–616 include portions of Doc. 727 and Doc. 728], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 731], 621–622 [Pgs. 621–622 include portions of Doc. 733, Doc. 734, and Doc. 735], 623–626 [Pgs. 623–626 include portions of Doc. 735, Doc. 736, and Doc. 737], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741], 631–632 [Pgs. 631–632 include portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, Doc. 743, and Doc. 744], 633–634 [Pgs. 633–634 include portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745]; U.S. efforts for settlement, and attitude of de Gaulle, 610–612 [Pgs. 610–612 include portions of Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, and Doc. 726], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 727 and Doc. 728], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 730], 619–621 [Pgs. 619–621 include portions of Doc. 731, Doc. 732, Doc. 733, and Doc. 734], 626–630 [Pgs. 626–630 include portions of Doc. 736, Doc. 737, Doc. 738, Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741], 630–631 [Pgs. 630–631 include portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 743 and Doc. 744], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745]

Discussions regarding implementation of promises of independence, 588–589 [Pgs. 588–589 include portions of Doc. 702, Doc. 703, and Doc. 704], 591–592 [Pgs. 591–592 include portions of Doc. 705, Doc. 706, Doc. 707, and Doc. 708], 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715], 601–612 [Pgs. 601–612 include portions of Doc. 716, Doc. 717, Doc. 718, Doc. 719, Doc. 720, Doc. 721, Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, and Doc. 726]

U.S. recognition of independence, question of, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 715 and Doc. 716], 607–618 [Pgs. 607–618 include portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, Doc. 725, Doc. 726, Doc. 727, Doc. 728, Doc. 729, and Doc. 730], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 729]

Lyttelton-de Gaulle agreement of July 19, cited, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 727], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 735 and Doc. 736], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 736], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743]

Madagascar situation, relation to, 632–633 [Pgs. 632–633 include portions of Doc. 743, Doc. 744, and Doc. 745], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 745], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749], 637 [Pg. 637 includes portions of Doc. 749 and Doc. 750], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779]

Mandate Act of 1922, interpretation of, 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 753, Doc. 754, and Doc. 755], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 785], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 785 and Doc. 786]

Military and political situation, relation to, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 701], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], 600–601 [Pgs. 600–601 include portions of Doc. 715, Doc. 716, Doc. 717, and Doc. 718], 604–605 [Pgs. 604–605 include portions of Doc. 718, Doc. 719, and Doc. 720], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 721 and Doc. 722], 608–610 [Pgs. 608–610 include portions of Doc. 722, Doc. 723, Doc. 724, and Doc. 725]

Understanding reached between Free French National Committee at London and British Foreign Office, 636–637 [Pgs. 636–637 include portions of Doc. 748, Doc. 749, and Doc. 750]; conversation between U.S. Diplomatic Agent at Beirut and General Catroux in connection with, 638–641 [Pgs. 638–641 include portions of Doc. 751, Doc. 752, and Doc. 753]

Visit by de Gaulle to clarify situation: Conversations with U.S. Consul at Beirut. See Independence, etc., supra.

Determination to force showdown, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 727], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 731], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 731 and Doc. 732], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 739]

Request for transfer of military direction of Allied Forces in Syria and Lebanon to French command, 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 745], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 748 and Doc. 749]

Food situation (see also under British–Free French differences, supra), 645 [Pg. 645 is part of Doc. 758]

Military security, British responsibility for, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 703 and Doc. 704], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 723], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 734 and Doc. 735]

Nationalist activities in Syria, 644–646 [Pgs. 644–646 include portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, and Doc. 759], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762]

Recognition of independent Governments by United States. See U.S. limited recognition, infra.

Reservation of American treaty rights. See U.S. limited recognition: Consideration of, infra.

U.S. limited recognition by appointment of a Diplomatic Agent, 641–676 [Pgs. 641–676 include portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, Doc. 754, Doc. 755, Doc. 756, Doc. 757, Doc. 758, Doc. 759, Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, Doc. 769, Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, Doc. 775, Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789] Background and summary of status of Syrian and Lebanese Governments, 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 753, Doc. 754, and Doc. 755], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 758 and Doc. 759]

British inquiries concerning U.S. recognition, 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762]

Consideration of: Proposals by Lebanese and Syrian Governments, 641–642 [Pgs. 641–642 include portions of Doc. 752, Doc. 753, and Doc. 754], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755]; U.S. views and reservation of American treaty rights, 598 [Pg. 598 includes portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 715 and Doc. 716], 607–608 [Pgs. 607–608 include portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 729], 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 647–655 [Pgs. 647–655 include portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, Doc. 762, Doc. 763, Doc. 764, Doc. 765, Doc. 766, Doc. 767, Doc. 768, and Doc. 769], 656–659 [Pgs. 656–659 include portions of Doc. 770, Doc. 771, Doc. 772, Doc. 773, Doc. 774, and Doc. 775]

Nomination of George Wadsworth as American Diplomatic Agent and Consul General at Beirut and Damascus: Inquiries by members of Free French Delegation and British Embassy at Washington in connection with, 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 660–662 [Pgs. 660–662 include portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, and Doc. 779], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783]

Instructions to Wadsworth, résumé of, 664–665 [Pgs. 664–665 include portions of Doc. 779, Doc. 780, and Doc. 781]

Presentation of credentials, and résumés of conversations with Heads of Government and high officials, 666–676 [Pgs. 666–676 include portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, Doc. 785, Doc. 786, Doc. 787, Doc. 788, and Doc. 789]; conversations with General Catroux, 666–667 [Pgs. 666–667 include portions of Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, and Doc. 784], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 785]

U.S.-Vichy relations, considerations in connection with, 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762]

Wheat Office, establishment of, 596–597 [Pgs. 596–597 include portions of Doc. 712, Doc. 713, and Doc. 714], 598–599 [Pgs. 598–599 include portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 718]

Tahri Saman, Bedri, 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814]

Tariff Act of 1930, cited, 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 325]

Taylor, Col. Victor V., 679 [Pg. 679 is part of Doc. 793]

Tesfaye Tegagn, Ato, 103–104 [Pgs. 103–104 include portions of Doc. 118, Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 112n [Pg. 112 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

Thayer, Charles W., 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 35 and Doc. 36], 46 [Pg. 46 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 46–47 [Pgs. 46–47 include portions of Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 38, Doc. 39, and Doc. 40], 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 40, Doc. 41, and Doc. 42], 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 50n [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, and Doc. 47], 59 [Pg. 59 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

Thorold, G. F., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 210], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 210], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Time Magazine, Egyptian representations regarding article alleged to be derogatory to King Farouk, 97–99 [Pgs. 97–99 include portions of Doc. 109, Doc. 110, Doc. 111, Doc. 112, and Doc. 113]

Timmerman, L. Stephen, 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 235], 219–220 [Pgs. 219–220 include portions of Doc. 235, Doc. 236, and Doc. 237], 251–252 [Pgs. 251–252 include portions of Doc. 277, Doc. 278, Doc. 279, Doc. 280, Doc. 281, and Doc. 282]

Tixier, Adrien, 642–643 [Pgs. 642–643 include portions of Doc. 753, Doc. 754, and Doc. 755], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 660–661 [Pgs. 660–661 include portions of Doc. 776 and Doc. 777], 662–664 [Pgs. 662–664 include portions of Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, and Doc. 780], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 780 and Doc. 781], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 785]

Tobruk, 78n [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

Trade Agreements Act (1934, extended 1940), cited, 278 [Pg. 278 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 323], 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 325]

Trade agreements between United States and— Iran: Negotiations for, 276–289 [Pgs. 276–289 include portions of Doc. 315, Doc. 316, Doc. 317, Doc. 318, Doc. 319, Doc. 320, Doc. 321, Doc. 322, Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]; signature Apr. 8, 1943, 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

Peru (May 7), cited, 95 [Pg. 95 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 325]

Turkey (1939), cited, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 325]

Transcontinental Western Airlines, 38–39 [Pgs. 38–39 include portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Treaties, conventions, etc.: Agreement of Constantinople (1913), 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 764]

Franco-Lebanese and Franco-Syrian treaties of 1936, cited, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 725], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 751]

German-Soviet treaty of non-aggression (1939), cited, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 927 and Doc. 928], 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 928 and Doc. 929]

International Opium Convention (1925), cited, 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 325]

Montreux Convention regarding the Straits (1936), 805–811 [Pgs. 805–811 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, and Doc. 927], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 948]

Spanish-Moroccan treaty of 1861, cited, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 608], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 610], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612]

Treaty of Jidda, (1927), cited, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 663]

Turkey. See under Turkey.

United Kingdom. See under United Kingdom.

U.S.–Denmark, agreement for defense of Greenland (1941), cited, 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

U.S.–Ethiopia (1914), treaty of friendship, cited, 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 126]

U.S.–France, convention regarding U.S. rights in Syria and Lebanon (1924), cited, 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 736 and Doc. 737], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 751], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753], 643 [Pg. 643 includes portions of Doc. 754 and Doc. 755]

U.S.–Liberia. See Liberia: Defense agreement.

U.S.–Muscat, treaty of amity and commerce (1833), cited, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 647]

Trippe, Juan, 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 421], 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 424], 387 [Pg. 387 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472]

Turkey, 677–835 [Pgs. 677–835 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, Doc. 834, Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, Doc. 853, Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, Doc. 885, Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, Doc. 914, Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, Doc. 935, Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, Doc. 951, Doc. 952, and Doc. 953] American bombers, landing on neutral Turkish territory, 789–804 [Pgs. 789–804 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914] Information concerning incident, and U.S. expression of regret, 789–793 [Pgs. 789–793 include portions of Doc. 886, Doc. 887, Doc. 888, Doc. 889, Doc. 890, Doc. 891, Doc. 892, and Doc. 893]

Negotiations regarding disposition of planes and crews interned in Turkey, 793–802 [Pgs. 793–802 include portions of Doc. 893, Doc. 894, Doc. 895, Doc. 896, Doc. 897, Doc. 898, Doc. 899, Doc. 900, Doc. 901, Doc. 902, Doc. 903, Doc. 904, Doc. 905, Doc. 906, Doc. 907, Doc. 908, and Doc. 909]; escape of one plane and crew, and subsequent developments, 802–804 [Pgs. 802–804 include portions of Doc. 908, Doc. 909, Doc. 910, Doc. 911, Doc. 912, Doc. 913, and Doc. 914]

American colleges in Turkey, U.S. representations concerning taxation of, 834–835 [Pgs. 834–835 include portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953]

American frozen funds in Turkey, 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 815 and Doc. 816]

Axis vessels, passage through Dardanelles, U.S., British, and Soviet representations based on Montreux Convention regarding the Straits, 805–811 [Pgs. 805–811 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, and Doc. 927]

British-Turkish relations (see also Axis vessels, supra; Chrome, Lend-Lease, and Pre-emptive buying, infra), 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 935], 820–822 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935]

Chrome, efforts by U.S. and British Governments to acquire from Turkey and to prevent sale by Turkey to Germany, 742–788 [Pgs. 742–788 include portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, Doc. 859, Doc. 860, Doc. 861, Doc. 862, Doc. 863, Doc. 864, Doc. 865, Doc. 866, Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, Doc. 870, Doc. 871, Doc. 872, Doc. 873, Doc. 874, Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, and Doc. 885] Anglo-Turkish chrome agreement, negotiations for renewal of: British proposals and Turkish position, 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856], 745–748 [Pgs. 745–748 include portions of Doc. 856, Doc. 857, Doc. 858, and Doc. 859], 753–757 [Pgs. 753–757 include portions of Doc. 861, Doc. 862, and Doc. 863], 762–763 [Pgs. 762–763 include portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866], 765–767 [Pgs. 765–767 include portions of Doc. 866, Doc. 867, and Doc. 868], 770–772 [Pgs. 770–772 include portions of Doc. 869, Doc. 870, and Doc. 871], 773–774 [Pgs. 773–774 include portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 777–780 [Pgs. 777–780 include portions of Doc. 874, Doc. 875, and Doc. 876], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 877 and Doc. 878]; question of treatment of Great Britain pari passu with Germany, 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 861], 755 [Pg. 755 is part of Doc. 862], 760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 864], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 864], 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 864 and Doc. 865], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 866], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 867 and Doc. 868], 769 [Pg. 769 is part of Doc. 869], 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 875], 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 875 and Doc. 876]

Citation to agreement (1940) and contract (1941), 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, and Doc. 856]

German efforts to obtain Turkish chrome, relation to. See German-Turkish commercial agreement, infra.

Price considerations, 748–750 [Pgs. 748–750 include portions of Doc. 858, Doc. 859, and Doc. 860], 769–770 [Pgs. 769–770 include portions of Doc. 869 and Doc. 870], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 870 and Doc. 871], 773 [Pg. 773 includes portions of Doc. 871 and Doc. 872], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 875], 780–781 [Pgs. 780–781 include portions of Doc. 875, Doc. 876, and Doc. 877], 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 881 and Doc. 882], 786–787 [Pgs. 786–787 include portions of Doc. 882, Doc. 883, and Doc. 884], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885]

Understandings reached, and questions of interpretation and implementation, 781–788 [Pgs. 781–788 include portions of Doc. 876, Doc. 877, Doc. 878, Doc. 879, Doc. 880, Doc. 881, Doc. 882, Doc. 883, Doc. 884, and Doc. 885]

U.S. collaboration with the British and representations to Turkish Government on all aspects of chrome situation, 742–745 [Pgs. 742–745 include portions of Doc. 854, Doc. 855, Doc. 856, and Doc. 857], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 860], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 860], 758–762 [Pgs. 758–762 include portions of Doc. 863, Doc. 864, and Doc. 865], 763–765 [Pgs. 763–765 include portions of Doc. 865, Doc. 866, and Doc. 867], 767–770 [Pgs. 767–770 include portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, Doc. 869, and Doc. 870], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 870 and Doc. 871], 780–782 [Pgs. 780–782 include portions of Doc. 875, Doc. 876, Doc. 877, and Doc. 878], 783 [Pg. 783 is part of Doc. 879]; observations on British policy by Embassy officers in Ankara, 775–776 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 873], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 883 and Doc. 884], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 884 and Doc. 885]

Wheat situation in Turkey, relation to, 755–756 [Pgs. 755–756 include portions of Doc. 862 and Doc. 863]

German-Turkish commercial agreement (Clodius agreement, 1941): Cited, 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 829], 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857]

Position of Turkey on obligation to supply chrome to Germany in return for war materials, 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 856 and Doc. 857], 757–758 [Pgs. 757–758 include portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 759–760 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 864], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 864], 762–763 [Pgs. 762–763 include portions of Doc. 864, Doc. 865, and Doc. 866], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 866], 766–767 [Pgs. 766–767 include portions of Doc. 867 and Doc. 868], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869], 770 [Pg. 770 includes portions of Doc. 869 and Doc. 870], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 873], 781–782 [Pgs. 781–782 include portions of Doc. 876, Doc. 877, and Doc. 878]

U.S. and British efforts to minimize German benefits and to prevent expansion of agreement, 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 856], 750–752 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 860], 754 [Pg. 754 includes portions of Doc. 861 and Doc. 862], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 862 and Doc. 863], 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 863 and Doc. 864], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 864], 760–762 [Pgs. 760–762 include portions of Doc. 864 and Doc. 865], 767–768 [Pgs. 767–768 include portions of Doc. 867, Doc. 868, and Doc. 869]

German Ambassador von Papen, attempted assassination of, 823–833 [Pgs. 823–833 include portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, and Doc. 951] Reports concerning incident and implication of Soviet nationals, 823–825 [Pgs. 823–825 include portions of Doc. 936, Doc. 937, Doc. 938, Doc. 939, and Doc. 940]

Soviet misuse of information furnished by United States as to possible Nazi origin, 825–830 [Pgs. 825–830 include portions of Doc. 939, Doc. 940, Doc. 941, Doc. 942, Doc. 943, Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948]

Trial and conviction of Soviet nationals, and effect on Turkish-Soviet relations, 830–833 [Pgs. 830–833 include portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, Doc. 948, Doc. 949, Doc. 950, and Doc. 951]

Germany, relations with (see also Axis vessels, Chrome, and German Ambassador von Papen, supra): Propaganda agencies, activities in Turkey, 811–816 [Pgs. 811–816 include portions of Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933]

Purchase of certain Turkish products, 709–710 [Pgs. 709–710 include portions of Doc. 825, Doc. 826, and Doc. 827], 724–726 [Pgs. 724–726 include portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834]

Role in breakdown of Turkish negotiations for charter of Swedish vessels, 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 848, Doc. 849, and Doc. 850]

Supply of war materials to Turkey: Chrome deliveries by Turkey in exchange for. See Chrome: German-Turkish commercial agreement, supra.

General, 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 790 and Doc. 791], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 794 and Doc. 795], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 797], 695–697 [Pgs. 695–697 include portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, and Doc. 814]

Lend-Lease supplies for, negotiations regarding handling of, 677–708 [Pgs. 677–708 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, Doc. 796, Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, Doc. 814, Doc. 815, Doc. 816, Doc. 817, Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, and Doc. 825] British-U.S. discussions, and proposals for new procedures, 678–680 [Pgs. 678–680 include portions of Doc. 791, Doc. 792, Doc. 793, and Doc. 794], 682–683 [Pgs. 682–683 include portions of Doc. 795, Doc. 796, and Doc. 797], 684–690 [Pgs. 684–690 include portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, Doc. 800, Doc. 801, Doc. 802, Doc. 803, and Doc. 804], 691–692 [Pgs. 691–692 include portions of Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 692–695 [Pgs. 692–695 include portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, Doc. 808, Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 701–702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, and Doc. 818]; Turkish approval of new procedure, 695 [Pg. 695 includes portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814]

Concern of Turkey over delays and diversions, 680–682 [Pgs. 680–682 include portions of Doc. 793, Doc. 794, Doc. 795, and Doc. 796], 683–684 [Pgs. 683–684 include portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797], 700–701 [Pgs. 700–701 include portions of Doc. 815, Doc. 816, and Doc. 817], 702–703 [Pgs. 702–703 include portions of Doc. 817, Doc. 818, and Doc. 819]

Direct transfer of materials to Turkey or retransfer through the British, question of. See British-U.S. discussions, supra.

German offer of war material to Turkey, relation to Lend-Lease situation, 695–697 [Pgs. 695–697 include portions of Doc. 811, Doc. 812, Doc. 813, and Doc. 814]

Master Lend-Lease agreement, proposed, 690–691 [Pgs. 690–691 include portions of Doc. 803, Doc. 804, Doc. 805, and Doc. 806], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 698–700 [Pgs. 698–700 include portions of Doc. 815 and Doc. 816], 707–708 [Pgs. 707–708 include portions of Doc. 822, Doc. 823, Doc. 824, and Doc. 825]

Payment for supplies, misapprehensions concerning, and U.S. efforts to clarify, 703–706 [Pgs. 703–706 include portions of Doc. 818, Doc. 819, Doc. 820, Doc. 821, and Doc. 822]

Shipping problems, 679–680 [Pgs. 679–680 include portions of Doc. 793 and Doc. 794], 706–707 [Pgs. 706–707 include portions of Doc. 821, Doc. 822, and Doc. 823]

U.S.-British Coordinating Committee, 685–686 [Pgs. 685–686 include portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, Doc. 799, and Doc. 800], 689–690 [Pgs. 689–690 include portions of Doc. 802, Doc. 803, and Doc. 804], 694–695 [Pgs. 694–695 include portions of Doc. 809, Doc. 810, Doc. 811, Doc. 812, and Doc. 813], 697 [Pg. 697 includes portions of Doc. 813 and Doc. 814]

U.S. views as to possible Turkish resistance to Axis, 677–678 [Pgs. 677–678 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, and Doc. 792]

Wheat, arrangement of terms for additional supplies of, 737–738 [Pgs. 737–738 include portions of Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848], 738–739 [Pgs. 738–739 include portions of Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, and Doc. 850]

Montreux Convention regarding the Straits, 805–811 [Pgs. 805–811 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, and Doc. 927], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 948]

Pre-emptive buying of Turkish goods, U.S. development of unified program with the British, 708–726 [Pgs. 708–726 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834] Bases of payment for products, and question of utilization of British purchasing power in Turkey, 713 [Pg. 713 is part of Doc. 827], 720–721 [Pgs. 720–721 include portions of Doc. 830 and Doc. 831], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833]

Commodities under consideration, 710 [Pg. 710 includes portions of Doc. 826 and Doc. 827], 711–713 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 827], 714–717 [Pgs. 714–717 include portions of Doc. 827, Doc. 828, and Doc. 829], 718–719 [Pgs. 718–719 include portions of Doc. 829 and Doc. 830], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 831 and Doc. 832], 723–724 [Pgs. 723–724 include portions of Doc. 832 and Doc. 833]

Initial U.S. recommendations: Discussions leading to, 708–717 [Pgs. 708–717 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, and Doc. 829]; comments of London Preemption Committee, and British views, 717–721 [Pgs. 717–721 include portions of Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, and Doc. 831]

U.S. modification of original plan, 721–724 [Pgs. 721–724 include portions of Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, and Doc. 833]

Turkish sale of products to Germany, relation to program, 724–726 [Pgs. 724–726 include portions of Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834]

Soviet-Turkish relations (see also Axis vessels and German Ambassador von Papen, attempted assassination of, supra): Background of, résumé and explanation by Turkish Foreign Minister, 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 818 and Doc. 819], 818–822 [Pgs. 818–822 include portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935]

Improvement in, Soviet desire for and U.S. willingness to assist in efforts toward, 816–818 [Pgs. 816–818 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, Doc. 934, and Doc. 935]

Statement by American Ambassador MacMurray concerning, utilization by German propaganda agencies in Turkey, 811–816 [Pgs. 811–816 include portions of Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933]

Turkish concern over Soviet interest in the Dardanelles, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 819–820 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 935], 821–822 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 935]

Straits: Axis vessels, question of passage through, 805–811 [Pgs. 805–811 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, and Doc. 927]

Montreux Convention relative to (1936), 805–811 [Pgs. 805–811 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, and Doc. 927], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 948]

Turkish concern over Soviet interest in, 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 796 and Doc. 797], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 819–820 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 935], 821–822 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 935]

Taxation of American colleges in Turkey, U.S. representations regarding, 834–835 [Pgs. 834–835 include portions of Doc. 952 and Doc. 953]

Treaties and agreements: Anglo-French-Turkish treaty of mutual assistance (1939), 684n [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 797], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 819 and Doc. 820], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935]

Anglo-Turkish chrome agreement (1940) and contract of Dec. 23, 1941. See under Chrome, supra.

German-Turkish commercial agreement (Clodius agreement, 1941). See under Chrome, supra.

Montreux Convention regarding the Straits (1936), 805–811 [Pgs. 805–811 include portions of Doc. 915, Doc. 916, Doc. 917, Doc. 918, Doc. 919, Doc. 920, Doc. 921, Doc. 922, Doc. 923, Doc. 924, Doc. 925, Doc. 926, and Doc. 927], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 934 and Doc. 935], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 948]

Soviet-Turkish Declaration (1941), 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 935]

U.S. Ambassador MacMurray’s statement regarding Turkish-Soviet relations, clarification of, 811–816 [Pgs. 811–816 include portions of Doc. 926, Doc. 927, Doc. 928, Doc. 929, Doc. 930, Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933]

Wheat, Turkey’s requests for additional supplies, and U.S. favorable response, 727–741 [Pgs. 727–741 include portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, Doc. 838, Doc. 839, Doc. 840, Doc. 841, Doc. 842, Doc. 843, Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, and Doc. 853] Discussions of situation and U.S. readiness to meet Turkish requests, 727–730 [Pgs. 727–730 include portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, Doc. 837, and Doc. 838], 732–733 [Pgs. 732–733 include portions of Doc. 840, Doc. 841, and Doc. 842], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 842 and Doc. 843]

Middle East Supply Center, cooperation in advancing supplies, 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838], 731–732 [Pgs. 731–732 include portions of Doc. 839, Doc. 840, and Doc. 841], 733–734 [Pgs. 733–734 include portions of Doc. 841 and Doc. 842], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 842 and Doc. 843], 736–737 [Pgs. 736–737 include portions of Doc. 844, Doc. 845, Doc. 846, and Doc. 847]

Relation of wheat situation to chrome negotiations, 755–756 [Pgs. 755–756 include portions of Doc. 862 and Doc. 863]

Shipping problems, Turkish efforts to purchase or charter vessels for transport of wheat, 728–729 [Pgs. 728–729 include portions of Doc. 835, Doc. 836, and Doc. 837], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 839 and Doc. 840], 732 [Pg. 732 includes portions of Doc. 840 and Doc. 841], 734–735 [Pgs. 734–735 include portions of Doc. 842 and Doc. 843], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 845, Doc. 846, and Doc. 847], 738 [Pg. 738 includes portions of Doc. 847 and Doc. 848], 739–741 [Pgs. 739–741 include portions of Doc. 848, Doc. 849, Doc. 850, Doc. 851, Doc. 852, and Doc. 853], 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 862 and Doc. 863]

Terms of payment, question of, 737–738 [Pgs. 737–738 include portions of Doc. 845, Doc. 846, Doc. 847, and Doc. 848], 738–739 [Pgs. 738–739 include portions of Doc. 847, Doc. 848, Doc. 849, and Doc. 850]

Twitchell, Karl S., 561–562 [Pgs. 561–562 include portions of Doc. 667, Doc. 668, Doc. 669, and Doc. 670], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 670], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674], 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 674 and Doc. 675], 569 [Pg. 569 is part of Doc. 675]

United Kingdom (see also Air services in the Near and Middle East, Axis victories, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, Liberia, Middle East Supply Center, Morocco, Muscat and Oman, Palestine, Saudi Arabia, Syria and Lebanon, Turkey, and West Africa): British Chiefs of Staff, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 35n [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26]

Churchill. See Churchill, Winston S. Lend-Lease agreement with United States, Fed. 23, cited, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 340]

Middle East as area of British strategic responsibility, 9n [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 5], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 20], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 675], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 697 and Doc. 698], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 704 and Doc. 705], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 723]

Treaties and agreements with other countries: Egypt, treaty of friendship and alliance (1936), cited, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 68, Doc. 69, and Doc. 70], 79n [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 85, Doc. 86, and Doc. 87], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 99], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]; “Immunities Convention”, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 99]

Ethiopia, treaty of Jan. 31. See under Ethiopia.

France and Turkey, treaty of mutual assistance (1939), cited, 684n [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 797], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 819 and Doc. 820], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935]

Iran, financial agreement, May 26, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 192], 178–179 [Pgs. 178–179 include portions of Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199], 186–187 [Pgs. 186–187 include portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 187 [Pg. 187 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 188 [Pg. 188 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 204], 311n [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 351, Doc. 352, and Doc. 353]

Iran and Soviet Union, treaty of alliance, Jan. 29. See Iran: Anglo-Soviet-Iranian treaty.

Iran and United States, agreement regarding wheat supplies, Dec. 4. See Iran: Food shortages: Agreement, etc.

Iraq, treaty of alliance (1930), cited, 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]

Lend-Lease agreement with United States, Feb. 23, cited, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 340]

Morocco, general treaty of 1856, cited, 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 608], 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 610], 501–502 [Pgs. 501–502 include portions of Doc. 611 and Doc. 612]

Soviet Union, treaty of alliance, May 26, cited, 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 935]

Treaty of Jidda (1927), cited, 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 663]

Turkey, chrome agreement. See Turkey: Chrome: Anglo-Turkish chrome agreement, Turkey and France, treaty of mutual assistance (1939), cited, 684n [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 797], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 819 and Doc. 820], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 935]

United Kingdom Commercial Corporation (UKCC), 120 [Pg. 120 is part of Doc. 138], 124–125 [Pgs. 124–125 include portions of Doc. 142, Doc. 143, and Doc. 144], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 145], 128–134 [Pgs. 128–134 include portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, Doc. 147, Doc. 148, Doc. 149, Doc. 150, and Doc. 151] passim, 138–151 [Pgs. 138–151 include portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, Doc. 157, Doc. 158, Doc. 159, Doc. 160, Doc. 161, Doc. 162, Doc. 163, Doc. 164, Doc. 165, Doc. 166, Doc. 167, and Doc. 168] passim, 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 227 [Pg. 227 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 708–726 [Pgs. 708–726 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834] passim

United Nations Declaration of Jan. 1: Adherence of Ethiopia, 104–105 [Pgs. 104–105 include portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, Doc. 121, and Doc. 122], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122], 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 124, Doc. 125, and Doc. 126], 111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 126], 114–115 [Pgs. 114–115 include portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, Doc. 130, Doc. 131, and Doc. 132]; cited, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 111n [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 126], 114n [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130], 638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 751], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 752 and Doc. 753]

United States Commercial Company, 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 577 and Doc. 578], 471 [Pg. 471 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 708–726 [Pgs. 708–726 include portions of Doc. 824, Doc. 825, Doc. 826, Doc. 827, Doc. 828, Doc. 829, Doc. 830, Doc. 831, Doc. 832, Doc. 833, and Doc. 834] passim

Upston, Col. John E., 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 472, Doc. 473, and Doc. 474], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 476]

Uriarte, Gen. Jenaro, 444 [Pg. 444 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 559 and Doc. 560], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 568], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576], 466 [Pg. 466 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 603], 491–505 [Pgs. 491–505 include portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, Doc. 607, Doc. 608, Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, Doc. 613, Doc. 614, Doc. 615, and Doc. 616] passim, 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643]

U.S. diplomatic and consular representation: Appointment of a Diplomatic Agent to Syria and Lebanon. See Syria and Lebanon: U.S. limited recognition.

Establishment of Consulate at Asmara, Eritrea, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 119, Doc. 120, and Doc. 121], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 123]

Establishment of Legation at Kabul, Afghanistan, 44–52 [Pgs. 44–52 include portions of Doc. 33, Doc. 34, Doc. 35, Doc. 36, Doc. 37, Doc. 38, Doc. 39, Doc. 40, Doc. 41, Doc. 42, Doc. 43, Doc. 44, Doc. 45, Doc. 46, Doc. 47, Doc. 48, Doc. 49, and Doc. 50]; at Jidda, Saudi Arabia, 559–561 [Pgs. 559–561 include portions of Doc. 665, Doc. 666, Doc. 667, Doc. 668, and Doc. 669]

U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 20], 33–34 [Pgs. 33–34 include portions of Doc. 22, Doc. 23, and Doc. 24], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 35–36 [Pgs. 35–36 include portions of Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 26]

U.S. Maritime Commission, 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 346–347 [Pgs. 346–347 include portions of Doc. 404, Doc. 405, Doc. 406, and Doc. 407]

U.S. War Department, 409 [Pg. 409 includes portions of Doc. 501, Doc. 502, and Doc. 503], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, and Doc. 507], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509], 414 [Pg. 414 includes portions of Doc. 510, Doc. 511, and Doc. 512], 415–416 [Pgs. 415–416 include portions of Doc. 512, Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515], 418–419 [Pgs. 418–419 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]

Vey Haraki, Hikmat, 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 718]

Villard, Henry S., 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 31 and Doc. 32], 356–357 [Pgs. 356–357 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422], 368 [Pg. 368 includes portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, Doc. 437, and Doc. 438], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 569, Doc. 570, and Doc. 571], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 577], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 582], 523–524 [Pgs. 523–524 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, and Doc. 639], 665–666 [Pgs. 665–666 include portions of Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, and Doc. 783]

Vinogradov, S. A., 816n [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933], 816–817 [Pgs. 816–817 include portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, Doc. 933, and Doc. 934], 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 933 and Doc. 934], 825n [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 939 and Doc. 940], 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 943 and Doc. 944], 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 830–831 [Pgs. 830–831 include portions of Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 950 and Doc. 951]

Vyshinsky, A. Y., 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 365, Doc. 366, and Doc. 367], 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 935], 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 941, Doc. 942, and Doc. 943], 828 [Pg. 828 includes portions of Doc. 943 and Doc. 944], 829–830 [Pgs. 829–830 include portions of Doc. 944, Doc. 945, Doc. 946, Doc. 947, and Doc. 948], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 949 and Doc. 950]

Wadsworth, George, 631 [Pg. 631 includes portions of Doc. 741, Doc. 742, and Doc. 743], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 660–669 [Pgs. 660–669 include portions of Doc. 776, Doc. 777, Doc. 778, Doc. 779, Doc. 780, Doc. 781, Doc. 782, Doc. 783, Doc. 784, and Doc. 785]

Wagner, Robert F., 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 660]

Waldheim, Gottfried von, 421–430 [Pgs. 421–430 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, Doc. 523, Doc. 524, Doc. 525, Doc. 526, Doc. 527, Doc. 528, Doc. 529, Doc. 530, Doc. 531, Doc. 532, Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, Doc. 537, Doc. 538, Doc. 539, and Doc. 540] passim

Walker, Norman, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 340]

Walker, Walter F., 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476], 404n [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 493], 404–407 [Pgs. 404–407 include portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, Doc. 495, Doc. 496, Doc. 497, and Doc. 498]

Walton, Lester A., 358n [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

War Shipping Administration, 392 [Pg. 392 includes portions of Doc. 474, Doc. 475, and Doc. 476], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 821 and Doc. 822], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 837 and Doc. 838]

Wathen, Albert L., 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 671 and Doc. 672], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 673 and Doc. 674]

Wavell, Gen. Sir Archibald P., 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 13]

Wedemeyer, Gen. Albert C., 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 203], 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Weightman, H., 532–533 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 647], 535–537 [Pgs. 535–537 include portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648]

Weizmann, Ghaim, 550–551 [Pgs. 550–551 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 554–555 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 663]

Welles, Sumner, 19 [Pg. 19 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 34–35 [Pgs. 34–35 include portions of Doc. 23, Doc. 24, Doc. 25, and Doc. 26], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 70n [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 71n [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 76n [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 83 and Doc. 84], 98n [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 114, Doc. 115, and Doc. 116], 102n [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 114n [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 128, Doc. 129, and Doc. 130], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 137 [Pg. 137 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 194n [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 210], 213–214 [Pgs. 213–214 include portions of Doc. 230, Doc. 231, and Doc. 232], 242n [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 255 [Pg. 255 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 258–259 [Pgs. 258–259 include portions of Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 274–275 [Pgs. 274–275 include portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 292n [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 331, Doc. 332, and Doc. 333], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 327–328 [Pgs. 327–328 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, Doc. 380, and Doc. 381], 330–332 [Pgs. 330–332 include portions of Doc. 384, Doc. 385, and Doc. 386], 334n [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 457], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 537 and Doc. 538], 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 653, Doc. 654, and Doc. 655], 545 [Pg. 545 includes portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657], 550–551 [Pgs. 550–551 include portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 664], 559 [Pg. 559 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 562–563 [Pgs. 562–563 include portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670], 590–591 [Pgs. 590–591 include portions of Doc. 704, Doc. 705, Doc. 706, and Doc. 707], 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 707 and Doc. 708], 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 708 and Doc. 709], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 725 and Doc. 726], 616 [Pg. 616 includes portions of Doc. 727 and Doc. 728], 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 756, Doc. 757, and Doc. 758], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 760, Doc. 761, and Doc. 762], 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 768 and Doc. 769], 677–678 [Pgs. 677–678 include portions of Doc. 790, Doc. 791, and Doc. 792], 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 791 and Doc. 792], 685 [Pg. 685 includes portions of Doc. 797, Doc. 798, and Doc. 799], 686–687 [Pgs. 686–687 include portions of Doc. 799, Doc. 800, and Doc. 801], 691–692 [Pgs. 691–692 include portions of Doc. 804, Doc. 805, Doc. 806, Doc. 807, and Doc. 808], 701–702 [Pgs. 701–702 include portions of Doc. 816, Doc. 817, and Doc. 818], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 852 and Doc. 853]

West, Paul, 557–558 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 664]

West Africa, consideration by Department of State of appointment of an American representative as counterpart of British Minister Resident, with headquarters at Accra, 37–43 [Pgs. 37–43 include portions of Doc. 27, Doc. 28, Doc. 29, Doc. 30, Doc. 31, and Doc. 32]

Weygand, Gen. Maxime, 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 556], 456n [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 571]

Wheat: Iran. See under Iran: Food shortages.

Syria and Lebanon, establishment of Wheat Office, 596–597 [Pgs. 596–597 include portions of Doc. 712, Doc. 713, and Doc. 714], 598–599 [Pgs. 598–599 include portions of Doc. 714 and Doc. 715], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 718]

Turkey. See under Turkey.

Wheeler, Gen. R. A., 77 [Pg. 77 is part of Doc. 84], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 240], 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 669 and Doc. 670]

White, C. Thayer, 276–277 [Pgs. 276–277 include portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 278–279 [Pgs. 278–279 include portions of Doc. 316, Doc. 317, and Doc. 318], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 279–280 [Pgs. 279–280 include portions of Doc. 317, Doc. 318, and Doc. 319], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 822 and Doc. 823]

White, Harry Dexter, 305–306 [Pgs. 305–306 include portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 307–308 [Pgs. 307–308 include portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 308n [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 348 and Doc. 349], 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Willkie, Wendell, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 28], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 290 and Doc. 291], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 397, Doc. 398, and Doc. 399], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 662], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 739, Doc. 740, and Doc. 741], 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 744 and Doc. 745], 634 [Pg. 634 is part of Doc. 745], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 786 and Doc. 787]

Wilson, Gen. Sir Henry Maitland, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 715], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 718 and Doc. 719], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 719 and Doc. 720], 608n [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723], 608 [Pg. 608 includes portions of Doc. 722 and Doc. 723], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 723], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 746 and Doc. 747]

Wilson, Orme, 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 458, Doc. 459, and Doc. 460], 576–577 [Pgs. 576–577 include portions of Doc. 686, Doc. 687, Doc. 688, Doc. 689, and Doc. 690]

Winant, Frederick, 4–12 [Pgs. 4–12 include portions of Doc. 4, Doc. 5, Doc. 6, and Doc. 7], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 12], 126n [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 126 [Pg. 126 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 145], 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 145 and Doc. 146], 138n [Pg. 138 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 167–168 [Pgs. 167–168 include portions of Doc. 182, Doc. 183, and Doc. 184], 175–176 [Pgs. 175–176 include portions of Doc. 189, Doc. 190, and Doc. 191], 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 345–346 [Pgs. 345–346 include portions of Doc. 403, Doc. 404, and Doc. 405], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 844 and Doc. 845]

Wise, Rabbi Stephen S., 541 [Pg. 541 includes portions of Doc. 650 and Doc. 651]

Wood, Col. John E., 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 460, Doc. 461, and Doc. 462], 383 [Pg. 383 includes portions of Doc. 464, Doc. 465, and Doc. 466], 411–412 [Pgs. 411–412 include portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509], 412–413 [Pgs. 412–413 include portions of Doc. 507, Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510], 416 [Pg. 416 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515]

Wylie, Sir Francis, 58n [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 60–61 [Pgs. 60–61 include portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, Doc. 62, Doc. 63, and Doc. 64]

Wyndham White, Eric, 450–451 [Pgs. 450–451 include portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566], 464–465 [Pgs. 464–465 include portions of Doc. 577, Doc. 578, and Doc. 579], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 582]

Yalcin, Huseyin Cahid, 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 883 and Doc. 884], 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 931, Doc. 932, and Doc. 933]

Yassin, Yusuf, 560 [Pg. 560 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 681, Doc. 682, and Doc. 683], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 684 and Doc. 685], 585 [Pg. 585 is part of Doc. 700]

Yencken, Arthur Ferdinand, 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 466–467 [Pgs. 466–467 include portions of Doc. 579, Doc. 580, and Doc. 581], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 580 and Doc. 581], 470 [Pg. 470 includes portions of Doc. 583 and Doc. 584]

Zahidi, Gen., 208 [Pg. 208 includes portions of Doc. 222, Doc. 223, and Doc. 224], 212 [Pg. 212 includes portions of Doc. 228, Doc. 229, and Doc. 230], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 232], 218 [Pg. 218 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Zionism. See Palestine.

1  In indexing persons the intention has been to include all references to persons of significance for an understanding of the record, with the following exceptions: (1) The name of the Secretary of State or the Acting Secretary of State appearing as the signer of outgoing instructions unless there is a clear indication of the Secretary’s or Acting Secretary’s personal interest; (2) the name of an American officer in charge of a mission appearing as the signer of reports to the Department of State, except for personal items; (3) the names of persons to whom documents are addressed.

Persons are not identified by office in the index, but usually where a person is first mentioned in any section a footnote identification is given unless that person is identified in the text.
