Foreign Relations of the United States, 1958–1960, Lebanon and Jordan, Volume XI (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1992)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1958-60v11).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Lebanon and Jordan (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1958–1960, Volume XI)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1958–1960

Volume XI

Lebanon and Jordan

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 29, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Lebanon and Jordan (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1958–1960, Volume XI)Contents

Preface

List of Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

Lebanon and JordanI. Background to the Crisis in Lebanon, January 1-June 9, 1958: Eisenhower Doctrine and the Nature of the U.S. Commitment to Lebanon; U.S. Economic Aid to Lebanon; The Outbreak of Civil War; Preliminary U.S.–U.K. Planning for Military Intervention in Lebanon; Efforts to Contain the Crisis (Documents 1-65)

II. The Decision to Introduce U.S. Forces Into Lebanon, June 10–July 17, 1958: Establishment of the U.N. Observation Group; Chamoun’s Rejection of Nasser’s Formula for Settlement; Lebanon’s Request for Military Intervention; The U.S.–U.K. Decision to Intervene; Introduction of U.S. Forces (Documents 66-154)

III. Background to the Crisis in Jordan and the Introduction of British Forces, January 1–July 17, 1958: U.S. Economic and Military Aid to Jordan; U.S. Support for the Establishment of the Arab Union; The Crisis in Iraq and the Jordanian Request for U.S. Military Support; U.S. Support of the Introduction of British Forces Into Jordan (Documents 155-189)

IV. Diplomatic Efforts to Resolve the Crisis in Jordan, July 18–August 21, 1958: Jordanian Request for U.S. Troops; The Murphy Mission; U.S. Response to a Soviet Proposal for a Heads of Government Meeting; The Lebanese Presidential Election; Jordanian Request for Additional Military Aid and a Mutual Defense Treaty; Negotiations with the United Arab Republic; Emergency Session of the U.N. General Assembly (Documents 190-287)

V. Reestablishment of Political Stability in Lebanon and Jordan and the Withdrawal of U.S. and U.K. Forces, August 22–October 31, 1958: The “Arab Resolution”; Hammarskjöld’s Trip to the Middle East; U.S.–U.K. Coordination on Planning for Withdrawal; Negotiations with Lebanon Concerning U.S. Withdrawal; Negotiations Concerning Jordanian Security; Establishment of the Chehab Government; Withdrawal of U.S. Forces From Lebanon; Withdrawal of U.K. Forces From Jordan (Documents 288-362)

VI. U.S. Relations with Lebanon and Jordan, November 1958–December 1960: The Question of the Level of U.S. Aid to Lebanon; U.S. Relations with the Karame and Salaam Governments in Lebanon; U.S. Military Survey Mission in Jordan; Negotiations Concerning U.S. Military and Economic Aid to Jordan; King Hussein’s Visit to the United States; U.S. Relations with the Rifai, Majali, and Talhouni Governments in Jordan (Documents 363-415)

Index

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series presents the official documentary historical record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government. The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is responsible for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The editing of the series in the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, is guided by principles of historical objectivity and accuracy. Documents are not altered or deletions made without indicating where changes have been made. Every effort is made to identify lacunae in the record and to explain why they have occurred. Certain omissions may be necessary to protect national security or to condense the record and avoid needless repetition. The published record, however, omits no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision, and nothing has been excluded for the purpose of concealing or glossing over a defect in policy.

At the time of the compilation of this volume in 1987, the Department was guided in the preparation of the Foreign Relations series by official regulations first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. A new statutory charter for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series was established by Title IV of Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by the President on October 28, 1991. That new charter requires that the Foreign Relations series “shall be a thorough, accurate, and reliable documentary record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity.” The new charter also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published “not more than 30 years after the events recorded.”

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations of the United States Series

This volume is part of a comprehensive subseries of volumes that will document the most important issues in the foreign policy of President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s administration. The subseries covers the years 1958 through 1960. Other volumes in the 1958–1960 triennium that cover the Middle East region are Volume XII, Near and Middle East, and Volume XIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute; United Arab Republic; North Africa.

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The law requires that the published record contained in the Foreign Relations series must reflect all major foreign policy decisions and activities and include relevant documentation from all government agencies and entities involved in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support. The historical records of the Presidents and their national security advisers together with the still larger body of documentation in the Department of State are the principal sources for the Foreign Relations series. The National Archives and Records Administration, including the Presidential libraries that it administers, is the main repository and coordinating authority for historical government records and a major source for the documents and information included in the series. Specific sources used in preparing this volume and its microfiche supplement are described in detail in the List of Sources, pages XIII–XVIII.

Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1958–1960, Volume XI

This volume and its microfiche supplement were planned and compiled as an integrated publication. Taken together, the two parts of the publication provide extensive documentation on U.S. relations with Lebanon and Jordan during the final 3 years of the Eisenhower administration. Given the bulk of extant records, however, this publication includes only a selection of the most important documents dealing with U.S. policy toward Lebanon and Jordan.

As such, the editor, Louis J. Smith, has chosen to focus the printed volume on the 1958 crisis that led to the introduction of U.S. forces into Lebanon and British forces into Jordan and to include the remaining documents for the period, which largely date from 1959 and 1960, in the microfiche supplement. In this manner, the 1958 crises, which defined the shape of U.S. relations with these two countries until the end of the Eisenhower administration, are treated primarily in the printed volume and are given editorial priority. Annotations in the printed volume identify by means of cross references particularly relevant documents contained in the microfiche supplement. In preparing the integrated publication, the editor has emphasized the diplomatic, political, and military aspects of U.S. foreign policy rather than the economic, cultural, and informational relations between the United States and the countries of Lebanon and Jordan.

Several important topics have been used as the focal points for the selection of documents included in this publication. A primary objective of the publication has been to document the discussions, recommendations, decisions, and the flow of information that constituted the policymaking process in Washington during the crises that occurred in Lebanon and Jordan. In particular, the decisions that led to the introduction of U.S. military forces in Lebanon in July and U.S. support for the British landings in Jordan shortly thereafter are traced from the background considerations that took place during the 6 months preceding the crises to the aftermath assessments following the withdrawal of the troops in October and November.

Records on the management of the crises are particularly rich among the historical papers maintained by the Eisenhower Library. The centralized and decentralized files of the Department of State also include a large collection of presidential and National Security Council documents, a portion of which were selected for inclusion in this publication. Senior-level military decisions on the planning and implementation of military operations in Lebanon and the eastern Mediterrean theater were found and selected from the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff deposited at the National Archives.

Cable traffic between Washington and Beirut and Amman provides the most important source of documentation on the extensive negotiations that were conducted with the governments of Lebanon and Jordan over military support for the two countries. Most of the negotiations with the government of Lebanese President Camille Chamoun and the Jordanian government of King Hussein were conducted, on instructions from Washington, by Ambassador Robert McClintock in Beirut and Chargé Thomas Wright in Amman. Under Secretary of State Robert Murphy assisted those efforts during a special mission to the Middle East. Documents concerning these negotiations were selected from the central files of the Department of State.

The U.S. military operation in Lebanon, which the Lebanese Government requested, began on July 15 and continued until October. British troops began arriving at Amman airport on July 17 and remained in Jordan until the beginning of November. The editor has selected documents relating to the military activities from a wide range of files located in the Eisenhower Library and the Department of State. Department of Defense files, and particularly Joint Chiefs of Staff records, were important in documenting military decisions, coordination with British forces, and troop and fleet movements. The editor did not, however, seek to provide detailed documentation of U.S. and allied military operations in the Middle East.

Another important goal of this publication has been to present selected documents recording the close coordination of U.S. policy with the British government of Prime Minister Harold Macmillan. This coordination involved a steady stream of communication between Washington and London, visits such as Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd’s to Washington in July, and telephone calls and letters exchanged directly between President Eisenhower and Prime Minister Macmillan. Memoranda, letters, and telegrams documenting this coordination were selected from the central files of the Department of State, from key files at the Eisenhower Library, such as the Eisenhower Diaries, the International Series in the Whitman File, White House Telephone Conversations, and the Macmillan–Lloyd Correspondence in the Dulles Papers.

Following the end of the crises and the withdrawal of U.S. and British forces in the autumn of 1958, U.S. policymakers continued to be concerned about the political and economic viability of Lebanon and Jordan. Jordan was believed to be particularly vulnerable, thus requiring high-level consideration. In general, however, officials in the Department of State and the Embassies in Beirut and Amman took over the watch. The President did become involved on occasion, as when King Hussein visited Washington in 1959 and 1960, but in the normal course of events the relations between the United States and Lebanon and Jordan were defined and maintained through the cables that passed between Washington and Beirut and Amman. The editor has selected for publication a portion of the available cables from the central files and lot files of the Department of State.

For this volume, the editor has not attempted to document particular U.S. intelligence operations or any significant contribution that U.S. intelligence made to the formulation of foreign policy. Intelligence records, including documents originated by the Central Intelligence Agency that are to be found among the collections of the Eisenhower Library, were consulted. That research was accomplished with the full cooperation and assistance of the CIA. It did not, however, result in the inclusion in this volume of any key intelligence analyses that contributed to the major political and diplomatic actions.

Completion of the declassification of this printed volume and its microfiche supplement, and the final steps of their preparation for publication, coincided with the development of procedures since early 1991 by the Central Intelligence Agency in cooperation with the Department of State that have expanded access by Department historians to high-level intelligence documents from among those records still in the custody of the Central Intelligence Agency. The Department of State chose not to postpone the publication of this volume to ascertain how such access might affect the scope of available documentation and the changes that might be made in the contents of this particular volume. The Department of State, however, is making good use of these new procedures, which have been arranged by the CIA’s History Staff, for the compilation of future volumes in the Foreign Relations series.

The declassification review process for this print volume and its microfiche supplement resulted in the withholding from publication of 4.2 percent of the documents originally selected for the print volume and 8.9 percent of the documents originally selected for the microfiche supplement. Deletions from documents dealing with developments in Lebanon were minimal, and related largely to minor references to intelligence matters. The editor is confident that the documents dealing with Lebanon, as presented in the print volume and the microfiche supplement, provide a comprehensive and accurate record of U.S. relations with that country during the 1958–1960 period. Most of the deletions from the proposed text of the print volume and the microfiche supplement were made in documents dealing with developments in Jordan. The still-classified documents omitted from the publication relate to matters of continuing sensitivity in U.S.-Jordanian relations. Consequently, the account of U.S. relations with Jordan printed here is incomplete and does not accurately reflect the full range of U.S.-Jordanian concerns. In the judgment of the editor, however, the documentation concerning Jordan originally intended for publication but denied declassification does not distort the record.

The editor wishes to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the National Archives and Records Agency’s Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, in particular David Haight.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Incoming telegrams from U.S. missions are placed according to time of receipt in the Department of State or other receiving agency, rather than the time of transmission; memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted. During periods of crisis and intense activity, especially immediately before, during, and after troop landings in Lebanon on July 15 and those in Jordan on July 17, the editor has not always been able to arrange some documents precisely in their chronological order. In these cases he has used his best judgment.

Editorial treatment of the documents published in Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Obvious typographical errors are corrected, but other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an addition in roman type. Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate text that deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or that remains classified after declassification review (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. The amount of material omitted because it was unrelated, however, is not accounted for. All ellipses and brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The first footnote to each document indicates the document’s source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. The source footnote also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates if the President or his major policy advisers read the document. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in this volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information devived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts have been used when necessary to supplement or explicate the official record.

Declassification Review

Declassification review of the documents selected for publication was conducted by the Division of Historical Documents Review, Bureau of Diplomatic Security, Department of State. The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information and applicable laws.

Under Executive Order 12356, information that concerns one or more of the following categories, and whose disclosure reasonably could be expected to cause damage to the national security, requires classification: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; or

9) a confidential source.

The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information as is consistent with current requirements of national security and law. Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and appropriate foreign governments regarding specific documents of those governments.

Acknowledgements

Dr. Louis J. Smith compiled and edited the volume in 1987 under the supervision of Editor in Chief John P. Glennon. General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie supervised the final steps in the editorial and publication process. Gabrielle Mallon of the Office of the Historian prepared the lists of names and abbreviations. Althea W. Robinson and Rita M. Baker performed the technical editing. Barbara A. Bacon of the Publishing Services Division (Natalie H. Lee, Chief) oversaw production of the volume. Do Mi Stauber prepared the index to both the print volume and its microfiche supplement.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

February 1992

List of Sources List of Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State 1. Indexed Central Files. The main source of documentation for this volume and for the companion microfiche publication was the Department of State’s indexed central files. Documents in classes 200 (protection of interests), 400 (trade relations), 500 (cultural relations), 600 (international relations), 700 (internal political and national defense affairs), 800 (internal economic and social affairs), and 900 (communication, transportation, science) were searched for decimal combinations involving the principal countries of Lebanon and Jordan (country nos. 83A and 85), as well as related Middle Eastern country files such as Syria (no. 83), Israel (no. 84a), the United Arab Republic (no. 86b), and Iraq (no. 87). Files under the general Middle East number 80 also produced significant documentation.

Other files and related subfiles searched for relevant materials include 033 (official visits); 110.11 through 110.15 (Department of State senior officials files); 123 (Department of State personnel files); and various files in class 300 (international organizations and conferences).

Documentation on the major and some of the minor themes covered in this volume are located in the following files: 1958 Crisis in Lebanon 110.13–MU: Deputy Under Secretary Murphy’s trip to the Middle East

110.15–RO: Assistant Secretary Rountree’s visit to the Middle East

320 and subfiles: U.N. General Assembly role in the crisis, including a visit by Secretary-General Hammarskjöld to the Middle East

330: U.N. Security Council role in the crisis

396.1: Western responses to the Soviet proposal for a summit meeting in the U.N. Security Council

611.80 and 780.00: Regional implications of the crisis

684A.86 and 684A.86B: Arab-Israeli implications of the crisis

783A.00: The primary file for political developments, civil disorders, and the military intervention in Lebanon

783A. 11: Exchanges with Lebaneses President Chamoun

783A.5–MSP: U.S. military assistance to Lebanon

783A.5411: Movement of U.S. forces into and within Lebanon

1958 Crisis in Jordan 033.4111: Visit by Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Washington

110.13–MU: Deputy Under Secretary Murphy’s trip to the Middle East

611.86C: U.S. support for the Arab Union

685.87: Ties between Jordan and Iraq

780.00, 785.00, and 110.13–MU: Dealings with UAR President Nasser over a possible compromise solution on Jordan

785.00: The primary file for political developments, civil disorders, and the military intervention in Jordan

785.11: Exchanges with King Hussein

785.13: Contacts with cabinet-level offricials, particularly Foreign Minister Rifai

785.5–MSP: U.S. military assistance to Jordan

785.5411: Troop movements into and within Jordan (The question of overflights of Israeli territory during the crisis in Jordan was searched in file 784A.5411 but is primarily documented in the Arab-Israeli compilation in Volume XIII)

786.00: The response of other Arab states to the crises in Jordan and Iraq

787.00: The coup in Iraq on July 14

Aftermath of the Crises in Lebanon and Jordan 411.83A41: U.S.-Lebanese trade relations

411.8541: U.S.-Jordanian trade relations

611.80: U.S. concerns with regional implications of developments in Lebanon and Jordan

783A.00: Primary file for political developments in Lebanon

785.00: Primary file for political developments in Jordan

883A.00 and 883A. 10: U.S. economic aid and budgetary support for Lebanon

885.10: U.S. budgetary support for Jordan

885.2553: Petroleum supplies for Jordan

2. Lot Files. Documents from the central files have been supplemented by materials from decentralized office files, the lot files of the Department of State. A list of the major lot files used or consulted follows: Conference Files: Lots 63 D 123 and 64 D 560 See entry under Washington National Records Center.

INR Files: Lot 59 D 600 Files retained by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research containing records of the Lebanese crisis in chronological order from May 8 to August 1958, including State, military, and CIA messages.

INR–NIE Files Files retained by the Bureau of Intelligence and Research containing copies of National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates, including NIEs and SNIEs for the 1958–1960 period.

NEA Files: Lot 61 D 20 Miscellaneous subject files pertaining to Iraq and Jordan for the years 1957–1959, maintained by the Iraq-Jordan desk of the Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs as of August 20, 1958).

NEA Files: Lot 61 D 43 Geographic files for Middle Eastern countries, including correspondence and memoranda, for the period January–December 1959, maintained by the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs.

NEA Files: Lot 62 D 25 Miscellaneous subject files pertaining to Iraq for the years 1958–1960 and miscellaneous subject files pertaining to Jordan for the years 1959–1960, maintained by the Iraq–Jordan desk of the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs.

NEA Files: Lot 63 D 52 Miscellaneous subject files pertaining to Lebanon, Israel, and the Middle East for the years 1958–1961, maintained by the Lebanon-Israel desk of the Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs.

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 64 D 174 Correspondence between President Eisenhower and heads of foreign governments for the years 1953–1960, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204 Correspondence between the President and heads of foreign governments for the years 1953–1964, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199 Chronological collections of the Secretary of State’s memoranda of conversation and the Under Secretary of State’s memoranda of conversation for the years 1953–1960, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75 Chronological collections of the minutes of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meetings during the years 1952–1960, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351 Serial master file of National Security Council documents and correspondence, and related Department of State memoranda for the years 1947–1961, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95 Administrative and miscellaneous National Security Council documentation, including NSC Records of Action, for the years 1947–1963, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

State–JCS Meetings: Lot 61 D 417 Top Secret records of meetings between representatives of the Department of State and the Joint Chiefs of Staff for the years 1951–1959 and selected problem files on the Middle East for the years 1954–1956, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, D.C. Record Group 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland Record Group 59, Records of the Department of State Conference Files: FRC 83–0067 Lot 63 D 123: Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States, as well as major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State for the years 1955–1958, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

Conference Files: FRC 83–0068 Lot 64 D 560: Collection of documentation on official visits by heads of government and foreign ministers to the United States, as well as major international conferences attended by the Secretary of State for the year 1959, as maintained by the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State.

Record Group 84, Records of the Foreign Service Posts of the United States Beirut Embassy Files: FRC 61 F 99 Classified records of the Embassy in Beirut, 1958–1960.

Beirut Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159 Top secret files of the Embassy in Beirut, 1955–1963.

Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense OASD/ISA Files: FRC 62 A 1698 Lebanon and Jordan country files of the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs.

Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas Dulles Papers Records of John Foster Dulles, 1952–1959, including General Memoranda of Conversation, Meetings with the President, General Telephone Conversations, and White House Telephone Conversations.

Harlow Papers Papers of Bryce N. Harlow, Administrative Assistant, September 1953–September 1958, Deputy Assistant to the President for Congressional Affairs, September 1958–January 1961.

Herter Papers Papers of Christian A. Herter, 1957–1961. Principally important for Herter’s Telephone Conversations as Secretary of State, 1959–1961.

Jackson Papers Papers of C. D. Jackson, Special Assistant to the President.

President’s Daily Appointments From White House Office Files, Records of the Office of the Special Assistant for Executive Appointments, 1952–1961.

Staff Secretary Records Records of the Office of the White House Staff Secretary, 1952–1961, including records of Paul T. Carroll, Andrew J. Goodpaster, L. Arthur Minnich, Jr., and Christopher H. Russell.

White House Central Files Documents collected for this volume are from the Confidential File within this collection.

White House Office Files Several White House Office collections, including files of the Office of the Staff Secretary, and Project “Clean Up”.

Whitman File Papers of Dwight D. Eisenhower as President of the United States, 1953–1961, as maintained by his personal secretary, Ann Whitman. The Whitman file includes the following elements: Name series, Dulles–Herter series, Eisenhower Diaries, Ann Whitman (ACW) Diaries, National Security Council Records, Miscellaneous Records, Cabinet Papers, Legislative Meetings, International Meetings, Administrative Series, and International File.

Published Sources

Documentary Collections Cordier, Andrew W. and Wilder Foote (eds.). Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations. Vol. IV: Dag Hammarskjold, 1958–1960. New York: Columbia University Press, 1974.

U.S. Department of State. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, 1959, and 1960. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1962–1964.

———. Department of State Bulletin, Vols. XXXVIII–XLIII. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1958–1961.

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, 1959, and 1960–61. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1959–1961.

Memoirs

Note: The following memoirs were consulted. The Department of State takes no responsibility for their accuracy nor endorses their interpretation of events.

Chamoun, Camille. Crise au Moyen-Orient. Paris: Gallimard, 1963.

Eisenhower, Dwight D. The White House Years. Waging Peace, 1956–1961. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1965.

Eveland, Wilbur Crane. Ropes of Sand: America’s Failure in the Middle East. New York: W.W. Norton, 1980.

Hussein, King of Jordan. Uneasy Lies the Head: An Autobiography. London: Heinemann, 1962.

Lodge, Henry Cabot. As It Was, An Inside View of Politics and Power in the 50’s and 60’s. New York: W.W. Norton, 1976.

Macmillan, Harold S. Riding the Storm, 1956–1959. New York: Harper and Row, 1971.

Murphy, Robert. Diplomat Among Warriors. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1964.

List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations

CG, Commanding General

CGS, Chief, General Staff

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CID, Criminal Investigation Division

CINCAMBRITFOR, Commander in Chief, American and British Forces

CINCLANT, Commander in Chief, Atlantic

CINCLANTFLT, Commander in Chief, Atlantic Fleet

CINCNELM, Commander in Chief, U.S. Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean

CINCPAC, Commander in Chief, Pacific

CINCPACFLT, Commander in Chief, Pacific Fleet

CINCSPECOMME, Commander in Chief, U.S. Specified Command, Middle East

CINCUSAFE, Commander in Chief, United States Air Force, Europe

CNO, Chief of Naval Operations

COMLANFOR, Commander, Joint American Land Forces

COMSIXTHFLT, Commander, Sixth Fleet

COMTAC, Commander, Tactical Air Command

CONUS, Continental United States

COS, Chief of Staff

CT, country team

DD, destroyers

Delga, series indicator for telegrams from the U.S. Delegations at the United Nations General Assembly; also used to refer to the U.S. Delegation at the United Nations General Assembly

Deptel, Department telegram

DLF, Develoment Loan Fund

DOD, Department of Defense

DRN, Division of Research and Analysis for Near East, South Asia, and Africa of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Dulte, series indicator for telegrams from Secretary of State Dulles

E, Bureau of Economic Affairs, Department of State

EDT, Eastern Daylight Time

Embdesp, Embassy despatch

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation

FRC, Federal Records Center

FY, fiscal year

FYI, for your information

G, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

G–2, Army (or Marine) general staff section dealing with intelligence at the divisional level or higher

G–3, Army general staff section dealing with operations and training at the divisional level or higher

GA, General Assembly

GATT, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GNP, gross national product

GOE, Government of Egypt

GOI, Government of Iraq; Government of Israel

GOL, Government of Lebanon

GOT, Government of Turkey

H, Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Relations

HIM, His Imperial Majesty

HKJ, Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

HMG, Her (His) Majesty’s Government

IBRD, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

ICA, International Cooperation Administration

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

IO, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IO/UNP, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State

IPC, Iraq Petroleum Company

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JD, Jordanian dinars

JFY, Jordanian fiscal year

L/UNA, Office of the Assistant Legal Adviser for United Nations Affairs, Department of State

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MATS, Military Air Transport Service

ME, Middle East

METO, Middle East Treaty Organization

MFA, Ministry of Foreign Affairs

MSP, Mutual Security Program

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NE, Near East

NEA, Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, Department of State; after August 20, 1958, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Niact, night action; telegram indicator requiring immediate action

NIE, National Intelligence Estimate

Noforn, distribution indicator limiting distribution to U.S. citizens

NR, Office of Near Eastern and South Asian Regional Affairs, Department of State

NSA, National Security Agency

OASD/ISA, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

OSP, off-shore procurement program

P.L., Public Law

PM, Prime Minister

POL, petroleum, oil, and lubricants

PPS, Partie Populaire Syrien (Syrian National Party)

PSP, Progressive Socialist Party (Lebanon)

RAF, Royal Air Force

SA, Saudi Arabia

SAC, Strategic Air Command

SACEUR, Strategic Air Command, Europe

SAG, Saudi Arabian Government

SC, United Nations Security Council

SCA, Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs, Department of State

SEATO, Southeast Asia Treaty Organization

Secto, series indicator for telegrams from the Secretary of State (or his delegation) at international conferences

SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate

SSNP, Syrian Social Nationalist Party (PPS)

SYG, Secretary-General of the United Nations

Tedul, series indicator for telegrams to Secretary of State Dulles

TO, Table of Organization

TO and E, Table of Organization and Equipment

Tosec, series indicator for telegrams to the Secretary of State (or his delegation) at international conferences

TS, Top Secret

UAR, United Arab Republic

UK, United Kingdom

UKDel, United Kingdom Delegation

UN, United Nations

UNEF, United Nations Emergency Force

UNGA, United Nations General Assembly

UNOGIL, United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon

UNRWA, United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East

UNSC, United Nations Security Council

UNSYG, United Nations Secretary-General

UNTSO, United Nations Truce Supervisory Organization

USA, United States Army

USARMA, United States Army Attaché

USC, United States Code

USCINCEUR, United States Commander in Chief, Europe

USDel, United States Delegation

USFY, United States fiscal year USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIS, United States Information Service

USNMR, United States National Military Representative to Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers, Europe

USOM, United States Operation Mission

USRO, United States Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and European Regional Organizations

USS, United States Ship

USSR, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

USUN, United States Mission at the United Nations

WH, White House

W/MSC, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Mutual Security Coordination

List of Persons List of Persons

Note: The identification of the persons in this list is generally limited to circumstances and positions under reference in these documents. All titles and positions are American unless there is an indication to the contrary.

Abdullah, Colonel Radi, Adviser to King Hussein of Jordan until he was arrested in July 1958

Adams, Major General Paul D., USA, appointed Commander in Chief, American Land Forces, Lebanon, on July 23, 1958; assumed command on July 26

Adams, Sherman, Assistant to the President

Allen, George V., Director of the United States Information Agency

Anderson, Robert B., Secretary of the Treasury

Azkoul, Karim, Lebanese Permanent Representative to the United Nations

Barbour, Walworth, Minister-Counselor of the Embassy in the United Kingdom and liaison with the U.K. command in London

Barco, James W., Deputy Representative in the United Nations Security Council

Bell, John O., Regional Director for Near East and South Asia, International Cooperation Administration

Ben Gurion, David, Israeli Prime Minister

Berding, Andrew H., Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs

Bergus, Donald C., Officer in Charge of Israel-Jordan Affairs, Office of Near Eastern Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs, Department of State

Bernau, Phyllis D., Secretary of State Dulles’ Personal Assistant

Berry, J. Lampton, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs after August 20, 1958), until October 1958

Boustani, Emile, Deputy in the Lebanese Parliament

Brown, Vice Admiral Charles R., USN, Commander of the U.S. Sixth Fleet

Bull, Major General Odd, Norwegian Army, member of the United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon

Bunche, Ralph J., Under Secretary of the United Nations for Special Political Affairs

Burke, Admiral Arleigh A., USN, Chief of Naval Operations

Cabell, Lieutenant General Charles P., USAF, Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency

Caccia, Sir Harold, British Ambassador to the United States

Cargo, William I., Deputy Director of the Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs, Department of State, until August 1958; thereafter Director

Chamoun, Camille, President of Lebanon

Chehab, General Fuad, Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces of Lebanon until September 1958; thereafter President of Lebanon

Cumming, Hugh S., Jr., Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Cutler, Robert, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Daoud, Saman, Jordanian Minister of Finance and National Economy

Dayal, Rajeshwar, Indian member of the United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon

De Gaulle, Charles, President of France from December 21, 1958

Dickson, Air Chief Marshal Sir William F., RAF, Chief of the British Defense Staff until July 1959

Dillon, C. Douglas, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs until June 1958; Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs, July 1958–June 1959; thereafter Under Secretary of State

Dimechkié, Nadim, Lebanese Ambassador to the United States from February 1958

Dixon, Sir Pierson, British Representative at the United Nations until October 1960

Dulles, Allen, Director of Central Intelligence

Dulles, John Foster, Secretary of State until April 1959

Eban, Abba, Israeli Ambassador to the United States

Eddé, Pierre, Lebanese Minister of Finance until August 1958

Eddé, Raymond, Lebanese Minister of the Interior and Social Affairs until October 1959

Eisenhower, Dwight D., President of the United States

Elbrick, C. Burke, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs until November 1958

Faisal II, King of Iraq until his assassination on July 14, 1958

Fawzi, Mahmoud, Egyptian Foreign Minister until February 1958; thereafter Foreign Minister of the United Arab Republic

FitzGerald, Dennis A., Deputy Director for Operations of the International Cooperation Administration

Fulbright, J. William, Democratic Senator from Arkansas; member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Funseth, Robert L., Political Officer in the Embassy in Lebanon

Gallman, Waldemar J., Ambassador to Iraq until December 14, 1958

Gemayel, Maurice, Acting Lebanese Minister of Finance

Gemayel, Pierre, Lebanese Minister of Public Works, Education, Agriculture, and Health from October 15, 1958

Goodpaster, Brigadier General Andrew J., USA (Ret.), White House Staff Secretary

Gray, Gordon, Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization until July 1958; thereafter Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Gromyko, Andrei A., Soviet Foreign Minister

Haddad, Fuad, editorial writer with the Phalange newspaper Al Amal; kidnapped and murdered in September 1958

Hagerty, James C., Press Secretary to the President

Haikal, Dr. Yusaf, Jordanian Ambassador to the United States until August 1958, and again beginning in December 1959

Haikal, Muhammad Hussanein, editor of the Egyptian newspaper Al Ahram and confidant of Nasser

Hamilton, William L., Officer in Charge of Lebanon–Israel Affairs, Department of State, from August 1958

Hammarskjöld, Dag, Secretary-General of the United Nations

Hare, Raymond A., Ambassador to Egypt until February 1958; thereafter Ambassador to the United Arab Republic until December 1959; thereafter Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Harlow, Bryce N., Administrative Assistant to the President

Hart, Parker T., Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs

Hayter, Sir William, Deputy Under Secretary, British Foreign Office

Hélou, Charles, Lebanese Minister of National Economy and Information after September 23, 1958

Henderson, Loy, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Administration

Herter, Christian A., Under Secretary of State until April 21, 1959; thereafter Secretary of State

Higgs, L. Randolph, Deputy Chief of Mission in Lebanon

Holloway, Admiral James L., Jr., USN, Commander in Chief, U.S. Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (CINCNELM); and Commander in Chief, U.S. Specified Command, Middle East (CINCSPECOMME)

Hood, Viscount Samuel, Minister of the British Embassy in the United States

Humphrey, George M., Secretary of the Treasury until July 1957

Hussein I, King of Jordan

Irwin, John N., II, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Jackson, C.D., consultant to Secretary of State Dulles and special assistant to President Eisenhower

Johnston, Sir Charles, British Ambassador to Jordan

Jones, G. Lewis, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs after July 6, 1959

Juma, Midhat, Jordanian Under Secretary for Press, Broadcasting, and Tourism; Ambassador to the United States, September 1958–November 1959

Karamé, Rachid, Lebanese Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior and National Defense from September 23, 1958; after October 15, 1958, Prime Minister and Minister of Defense, Finance, Economic, and Information

Khouri, Victor A., Lebanese Ambassador to the United States, November 8, 1955–September 1958

Khrushchev, Nikita S., First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union; also Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers from March 1958

Kocher, Eric, Chargé d’Affaires in Jordan from August 1960

Kuznetsov, Vasily V., Deputy Soviet Foreign Minister

Lakeland, William C., Officer in Charge of Iraq–Jordan Affairs, Office of Near Eastern Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, from August 1958

Lloyd, Selwyn, British Foreign Secretary until June 1960; thereafter Chancellor of the Exchequer

Lodge, Henry Cabot, Representative at the United Nations until September 1960

Macmillan, Harold, British Prime Minister

Macomber, William B., Assistant Secretary of State for Congressional Affairs

Majali, Lieutenant General Habis, Chief of the General Staff of the Jordanian Army

al-Majali, Hazza, Court Minister in Jordan; Prime Minister after May 5, 1959

Malik, Charles, Lebanese Foreign Minister of Lebanon until September 1958

Mason, R. H., British Chargé d’Affaires in Jordan

McClintock, Robert A., Ambassador to Lebanon; appointed December 23, 1957, and presented his credentials January 15, 1958

McElroy, Neil H., Secretary of Defense until December 1959

Meir, Golda, Israeli Foreign Minister

Menshikov, Mikhail, Soviet Ambassador to the United States from February 1958

Middleton, Sir George, British Ambassador in Lebanon

Mills, Sheldon T., Ambassador to Jordan; appointed February16, 1959, and presented his credentials May 12, 1959

Mirza, Wasfi, Jordanian Minister of Interior from May 5, 1959; Minister of War/Defense from September 20, 1959

Murphy, Robert D., Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs until August 1959; Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, August–December 1959

Nasser Colonel Gamal Abdel, President of Egypt until February 1958; thereafter President of the United Arab Republic

Nasser, Musa, Jordanian Foreign Minister from September 20, 1959

Nixon, Richard M., Vice President of the United States

Plaza Lasso, Galo, former President of Ecuador; Chairman of the United Nations Observation Group in Lebanon (UNOGIL) from June 16, 1958

Qassim, General Abdul Karim, led coup that overthrew the Government of Iraq on July 14, 1958; thereafter Iraqi Prime Minister

Quarles, Donald A., Deputy Secretary of Defense until May 1959

Reinhardt, G. Frederick, Counselor of the Department of State

al-Rifai, Samir, Jordanian Prime Minister until his resignation on May 5, 1959

Rockwell, Stuart W., Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, until July 1959

Rountree, William M., Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs after August 20, 1958) until July 1959

Sabri, Ali, Minister of State for Presidential Affairs of the United Arab Republic

al-Said, Nuri, Iraqi Prime Minister, March 3–July 14, 1958

Salaam, Saeb, Lebanese Prime Minister after August 1960

Sandys, Duncan, British Minister of Defense

Sarraj, Abd-al-Hamid, Minister of Interior of the United Arab Republic (Syrian Region)

Saud ibn Abdul-Aziz, King of Saudi Arabia

Shara, Major General Sadiq, Deputy Commander of the Jordanian Army and Chief of the General Staff

Sisco, Joseph J., Officer in Charge of United Nations Political Affairs, Department of State, until August 1958; thereafter Deputy Director, Office of United Nations Political and Security Affairs, Bureau of International Organization Affairs

Smith, Gerard C., Assistant Secretary of State for Policy Planning

Smith, James H., Director of the International Cooperation Administration

Solh, Sami, Lebanese Prime Minister until September 23, 1958

Sprague, Mansfield D., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs until August 1958

Talhuni, Bahjat, Chief of the Jordanian Royal Cabinet; Prime Minister after August 29, 1960

Taylor, General Maxwell D., USA, Chief of Staff, U.S. Army

Twining, General Nathan F., USAF, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Wade, Brigadier General Sidney S., USMC, Commanding General, Marine landing force in Lebanon

Waggoner, Edward L., Officer in Charge of Lebanon–Syria Affairs, Department of State

Wilcox, Francis O., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs

Wright, Thomas K., Charge d’Affaires in Jordan

Yeager, Rear Admiral Howard A., USN, Amphibious Task Force Commander

Zein, Queen, mother of King Hussein of Jordan

Lebanon and JordanLebanon and Jordan

Contents

I. Background to the Crisis in Lebanon, January 1-June 9, 1958: Eisenhower Doctrine and the Nature of the U.S. Commitment to Lebanon; U.S. Economic Aid to Lebanon; The Outbreak of Civil War; Preliminary U.S.–U.K. Planning for Military Intervention in Lebanon; Efforts to Contain the CrisisI. Background to the Crisis in Lebanon, January 1-June 9, 1958: Eisenhower Doctrine and the Nature of the U.S. Commitment to Lebanon; U.S. Economic Aid to Lebanon; The Outbreak of Civil War; Preliminary U.S.–U.K. Planning for Military Intervention in Lebanon; Efforts to Contain the Crisis1

1 For previous documentation on U.S. relations with Lebanon and Jordan, see Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. XIII, pp. 170 ff. and 1 ff., respectively.

1. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, January 9, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.80/1–958. Secret. Also sent to Amman, Ankara, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, and Jidda.

2. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, January 16, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/1–1658. Secret.

3. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Lebanon-Syria Affairs (Waggoner) to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell)

Washington, January 17, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/1–1758. Top Secret.

4. Editorial Note

5. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, January 30, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/1–3058. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Damascus, Paris, London, Cairo, Amman, Baghdad, and Jidda.

6. Letter From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Irwin) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)

Washington, February 6, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/2–658. Top Secret.

7. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, February 21, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/2–2158. Top Secret.

8. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, February 27, 1958—4:17 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/2–2158. Top Secret. Drafted by Eagleton, Waggoner, and Rockwell and cleared by Rountree.

9. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, March 5, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/3–558. Top Secret.

10. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, March 18, 1958—7:53 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/3–658. Top Secret. Drafted by Waggoner and approved by Rountree.

11. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, March 20, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/3–2058. Top Secret.

12. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, April 3, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/4–358. Top Secret.

13. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, April 11, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/4–1158. Confidential.

14. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, April 18, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/4–1858. Top Secret. Repeated to London and Paris.

15. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, April 23, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/4–2358. Top Secret. Repeated to London.

16. Letter From Secretary of State Dulles to Foreign Minister Malik

Washington, April 29, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/4–2958. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Bergus, Rockwell, and Dulles and cleared by Rountree, Dillon, and Dulles. Transmitted to Beirut in telegram 4107, April 29, which is the source text.In telegram 4106 to Beirut, April 29, the Embassy was informed that the letter was being sent in view of the possibility that the Lebanese Government might repudiate its adherence to the Eisenhower Doctrine. At the same time that McClintock delivered the Secretary’s letter, he was instructed to inform Malik that his request for additional aid had received the highest level of consideration within the Department, but unfortunately funds to meet such a request were not available. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/4–2858; included in the microfiche supplement)

17. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, May 2, 1958

Washington, May 2, 1958

18. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut May 4, 1958—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–458. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London and Paris.

19. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State

Copenhagen, May 6, 1958—11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–658. Top Secret; Niact. Also sent to Beirut.

20. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut May 7, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–758. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, and Copenhagen.

21. Letter From the President to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 7, 1958.

source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–758. Secret; Priority. Transmitted to Copenhagen in Tedul 15, marked “For Secretary from Acting Secretary,” which is the source text. Drafted by President Eisenhower.

22. Editorial Note

23. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 11, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1158. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Paris, Rome, and London.

24. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut May 11, 1958—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Paris, Rome, and London.

25. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 11, 1958—11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1158. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Paris and London.

26. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 12, 1958—noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1258. Top Secret.

27. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 13, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1358. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, and Rome.

28. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut May 13, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1358. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London and Paris.

29. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Dulles in Washington and Foreign Secretary Lloyd in London, May 13, 1958, 12:50 p.m.

May 13, 1958, 12:50 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

30. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, May 13, 1958, 5:50 p.m.

White House, Washington, May 13, 1958, 5:50 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President. Top Secret; Personal and Private. Drafted on May 15 by Rountree.

31. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, May 13, 1958—9:23 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1358. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Dulles and cleared by Rountree. Repeated to London.

32. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 14, 1958—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1458. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Repeated to London.

33. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, May 14, 1958, 1:13 p.m.

Washington, May 14, 1958, 1:13 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

34. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the British Ambassador (Caccia), Washington, May 14, 1958, 6:48 p.m.

Washington, May 14, 1958, 6:48 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Phyllis D. Bernau. The source text indicates that Ambassador Caccia placed the call.

35. Telegram From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Commander in Chief, U.S. Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (Holloway), at London

Washington, May 14, 1958—5:28 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 1. Top Secret; Operational Immediate; Noforn. Repeated to USCINCEUR, CINCLANT, and USNMR.

36. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, May 15, 1958—7:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1558. Top Secret; Niact; [distribution indicator not declassified]. Drafted by Rockwell and approved by Dulles. Repeated to Beirut, Damascus, and London.

37. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 16, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London.

38. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut May 16, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London and Paris.

39. Memorandum for the Record of the State–Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, May 16, 1958, 11:30 a.m.

Washington, May 16, 1958, 11:30 a.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files. Top Secret. Prepared by Major General O. S. Picher, USAF, Director of The Joint Staff. A memorandum summarizing the first part of this discussion, prepared by Richard B. Finn of the Department of State, indicates that the discussion opened with a general briefing on developments in Lebanon by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs, Stuart W. Rockwell. (Department of State, State–JCS Meetings: Lot 61 D 417; included in the microfiche supplement)

40. Editorial Note

41. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, May 18, 1958, 4:30 p.m.

Washington, May 18, 1958, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1858. Top Secret. Drafted by Kohler.

42. Memorandum From Colonel D. J. Decker of the Joint Middle East Planning Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Chief of Naval Operations (Burke)

Washington, May 19, 1958.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 62 A 1698, 092 Lebanon TS Sensitive. Top Secret.

43. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, May 19, 1958—8:57 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1958. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree, Herter, and Dulles. Repeated to London and Paris.

44. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State

Cairo, May 20, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2058. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Beirut, Damascus, and London.

45. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the British Ambassador (Caccia), Washington, May 21, 1958

Washington, May 21, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2158. Top Secret. Drafted by Dulles. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at dinner.

46. Editorial Note

47. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 22, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2258. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London and Paris.

48. Editorial Note

49. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, May 23, 1958—8:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2358. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and in substance by Dulles. Repeated to London and Paris.

50. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 24, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2458. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London and Paris.

51. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, May 27, 1958—4:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2058. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and approved by Rountree. Repeated to Beirut, London, and Paris.

52. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 28, 1958—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2858. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to USUN, London, and Paris.

53. Editorial Note

54. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, May 30, 1958—11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–3058. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to USUN, London, and Paris.

55. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State

Cairo, May 31, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–3158. Top Secret. Repeated to Beirut, London, and Paris.

56. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 2, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–258. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, Ankara, Amman, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, Tel Aviv, and USUN.

57. Editorial Note

58. Telegram From the Embassy in Iraq to the Department of State

Baghdad, June 4, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London and Beirut.

59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, June 5, 1958—9:39 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–458. Top Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and Dulles. Repeated to London, Beirut, Paris, and USUN.

60. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, June 5, 1958.

Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Top Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.” All members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in the estimate on June 5, except for the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside of their jurisdiction.

61. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 6, 1958—noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–658. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

62. Editorial Note

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State

Cairo, June 7, 1958—10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–758. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Beirut, London, Paris, and USUN.

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, June 9, 1958—2:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central files, 783A.00/6–858. Top Secret; Niact; Noforn; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree. Also sent to Beirut and repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

65. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, June 9, 1958, 3 p.m.

Washington, June 9, 1958, 3 p.m.

1. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 1. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State2

Beirut, January 9, 1958—6 p.m.

2335. From Ambassador. I made courtesy call today on Malik and arranged presentation credentials President January 14.3

Foreign Minister launched into familiar pattern well known to Department of how long he had waited for concrete manifestation of a US policy toward Middle East. He said all he got was “the same stale old things”.

I inquired if he regarded US assurances to assist free countries of Middle East to maintain their independence as either stale or old. Malik admitted he had received such assurances very recently from Secretary and Under Secretary.

Minister then lamented incapacity of west to deal with danger of Communist subversion. He added Communists had perfected their techniques since 1948 and western world had done nothing about it.

I rejoined that on basis of my recent observation in East Asia I could not completely agree with his analysis. I said Philippines were a brilliant example of a new country younger than Lebanon in terms of independence which had met an intensely dangerous internal Communist uprising with complete success and had put down subversion in a highly effective manner. I did not see why similar techniques if accompanied by resolution would not work elsewhere. I pointed to statement in my proposed address to Chamoun quoting proverb “courage makes the heart great”.

Malik hastily averred present government was filled with resolution and bravery but did feel exceedingly anxious over threat from neighbors. Minister said, “We have reached conclusion there cannot exist on one side a pro-western Beirut and on other side a Soviet dominated Damascus”. He also said he had positive proof Egyptian and Syrian Governments were determined to overthrow present regime in Lebanon. When he lamented degree of Syrian subversion inside his country I asked why Lebanon could not try counter-subversion and he agreed that best defense is attack.

Minister affirmed that reliance on US assurances was “rock upon which he stood” and left plain inference our assurances had in some cases not been followed by positive action. We believe he has in mind such requests as those for armored cars for gendarmérie and other items in countering subversion upon which as yet no US action has been taken.4

At conclusion of interview, Malik said he wanted long talk with me to discuss general US position in Middle East. He asked if I could see him next Tuesday afternoon following presentation of letters to Chamoun.

It seems to me if these Pirandello characters are in search of a policy we should give them one. I would suggest for Department’s consideration that at next interview I tell Malik: (1) We reaffirm support for any free nation resolute in determination to defend its integrity and independence.

(2) If Syrian or Egyptian subversion can best be met by counter-subversion we shall be prepared to offer ways and means.

(3) So far as aid program for Lebanon is concerned, since by every index Lebanese economy is sound, aid must be based on political effect within overall framework of seeking maintain independence this republic.5

(4) As for broader US policy toward Middle East, which so engages Malik’s fretful attention, it is to resist Soviet encroachment; to work with our friends in area to change attitudes of regimes presently sympathetic to Soviet infiltration; and that

(5) The Lord helps those who help themselves.6

Higgs

2 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.80/1–958. Secret. Also sent to Amman, Ankara, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, and Jidda.

3 McClintock had just arrived in Beirut. He succeeded Ambassador Donald R. Heath, who left Lebanon on January 4.

4 In a January 8 memorandum to the Secretary of Defense, the Joint Chiefs of Staff took note of political unrest and subversion in Lebanon, which they felt was sponsored by “leftist, pro-Egyptian, radical nationalists in Lebanon, with probable outside Egyptian and Syrian support”. To help meet this threat, they recommended provision of military equipment, including armored cars, anti-aircraft guns, and a tank, to the Lebanese Army. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 62 A 1698, 091.3 Lebanon; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 Before he left Lebanon, Ambassador Heath observed, in telegram 2236 from Beirut, January 2, that the pro-Western government of Lebanon had, in effect, staked its political life on being able to obtain substantial additional aid from the United States. Heath urged that consideration be given to providing such aid, and noted that a refusal to discuss additional aid might bring about the downfall of the Chamoun government, and the emergence of a successor government which would likely not be pro-Western. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/1–258; included in the microfiche supplement)

6 In telegram 2810 to Beirut, January 13, the Department of State responded that it concurred in the line taken with Malik and considered it particularly opportune to emphasize to the Lebanese Government the necessity of taking resolute action to protect its security. The Department accepted McClintock’s outline for the next conversation, except for point 2, which McClintock was instructed to omit. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.80/1–958)

2. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 2. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, January 16, 1958—3 p.m.

2415. Yesterday I made an extensive tour d’horizon conducted by Malik following presentation of credentials to President Chamoun that morning. During course of two hour conversation, I made three points authorized Deptel 2810.2 I found Malik much less querulous than during preceding interview: he was reflective, calm and objective. He made extensive observations area-wise which are reported Embassy despatch number 372.3

Coming to problems of Lebanon, Malik placed them in four categories: (1) Leadership:

Lebanon in forthcoming elections will face crisis in determining who will lead republic during the forthcoming critical years. In a country of such delicate balance and of such conflicting creeds and currents of ambition, leadership was of vital importance. Courage was first quality to be sought.

(2) Lebanese-American Relations:

This comprised whole gamut of association between Lebanon and US with aid of paramount importance.

(3) Free World Cooperation within Lebanon to Meet Joint Problems:

Malik here mentioned hope US, UK, France and other free world elements would better coordinate their efforts, not only at top but particularly on working level in order to assure that all assets were lined up in joint effort against Communist and Soviet threat.

(4) Psychological:

Minister referred to successful encroachment by Communism in Lebanese press and its increasing effect in Sidon, Beirut, Tripoli and Jordan. He was likewise worried about Communist attraction among intelligentsia. He said, “If you can capture minds of the fifty young men who will rule Lebanon in years to come, you will have made a real victory”.

In response to his reanalysis and to his once more reiterated complaint US had no policy in Middle East or, at least, since time of President’s last illness and advent of Sputniks had shown signs of vacillation, I said I had not discerned any weakening of resolve on our part to help free Arab nations remain free. Simply because a policy was simple did not mean it lacked vigor or that we lacked will to carry it out. Also, I did not feel it necessary to shout policy slogans from house tops in order to convince our friends where we stood.

On Lebanese-American relations, I said matter of leadership was paramount. This was, however, an indigenous problem and one where Lebanese must help themselves, keeping in mind their own salvation from perils to be faced would primarily be by their own effort.

On aid, I repeated substance paragraph 3 Deptel [Embtel] 2335,4 saying that so far as I was concerned, in a country such as Lebanon, aid would be primarily designed for its political impact both in and outside this country. Malik concurred with enthusiasm, saying it was folly to concentrate on lifting up health standard or building roads if eventually Communists should take over country. He cautioned me, however, to be exceedingly discreet in revealing political motivation of our aid program lest it be misconstrued by our enemies. He suggested I confide directly to President Chamoun my views on how our aid operation should be conducted and to let Prime Minister and a few select leaders know our intentions obliquely.

Malik concluded interview by a parable [garble]. He said he had had a talk with General Chehab, C-in-C, Lebanese Armed Forces, who, in casting about for solution of Lebanese problems, came up with astonishing assertion that “best thing for Lebanon would be to have a US High Commissioner”. Malik said no one could have more patriotic motives than General Chehab, but he felt deeply that strongest power of free world should take responsibility for formulation of policy and operations to achieve that policy in the Levant. With France a strong power, he would opt for a French leader in Lebanon, or, if British were strong (and if he trusted them, which he did not), a Britisher. However, Americans were both honest and above all, strong. Malik concluded his parable by saying he wished above all US policy would assume a bolder and more daring form, although Lebanon was ready to accept responsibility for running risks and for taking action which only native patriotic elements could undertake.

I said I did not doubt American policy could be both imaginative and bold, but it would seek expression through indigenous elements and thus, in fact, the Lord might help those who [help] themselves.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/1–1658. Secret.

2 See footnote 6, supra.

3 Dated January 16. (Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/1–1658)

4 Supra.

3. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Lebanon-Syria Affairs (Waggoner) to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell) 3. Memorandum From the Officer in Charge of Lebanon-Syria Affairs (Waggoner) to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell)1

Washington, January 17, 1958.

SUBJECT

Forthcoming Presidential Election in the Lebanon

Background

The Lebanese Constitution provides for a six year term for the Lebanese President and provides further that a President may not immediately succeed himself. President Chamoun’s term of office will expire on September 22, 1958. In order for President Chamoun to succeed himself, the Constitution must be amended to that end during the regular Spring session of Parliament which will begin in March and end in May 1958.

While there are indications that President Chamoun may have decided to seek re-election, he has not so formally announced. On the basis of the information available to us, it appears more likely that Chamoun has not yet made up his mind whether it would or would not be advisable for him to seek another term.

President Chamoun probably would prefer for personal reasons to continue in power. He probably also believes that his pro-Western policies are likely to be endangered if he is succeeded by someone less forceful and less in command of the situation than he considers himself to be. At the same time, he is no doubt aware that a move on his to amend the Constitution to permit his re-election would very likely intensify internal difficulties within the Lebanon and particularly invite increased agitation among the Moslems. He is doubtless aware that his opponents will receive strong financial and other backing from Syria, Egypt and the Communists.

It is not clear whether he commands the necessary two-thirds majority in the Parliament to amend the Constitution to permit his reelection. Our Embassy believes that he probably does have sufficient Parliamentary support although it is apparently not possible at this point to determine definitely whether this is so.

As the leading foreign power in the Lebanon, the U.S. will inevitably be closely involved in and affected by the pre-election campaign and the election itself. We are closely associated in the Lebanese mind with the recent Lebanese Parliamentary election in which we played an active role. Failure to play an active role in the Presidential election would, I believe, probably have serious consequences in terms of stability within the Lebanon and could substantially affect the Lebanon’s political orientation. [2 lines of source text not declassified] That President Chamoun is of the same opinion is evident in the fact that he himself discussed the matter somewhat obliquely with Ambassador Heath prior to the Ambassador’s departure for Jidda.

The Problem

In order to assure the necessary coordination within the Government and perhaps with other foreign powers (I understand that the British are inclined to support a second term for Chamoun), I believe it necessary that we determine as soon as possible whether it is in our interest for Chamoun to try to succeed himself.

Ambassador McClintock has urged that a decision be reached in the near future. Whether Chamoun should try for re-election depends, primarily, in our view on whether there is another sufficiently strong pro-Western candidate available who 1) could be counted on to maintain the Lebanon’s present pro-West orientation, 2) is acceptable to important segments of the Moslem as well as the Christian community, and 3) for whom broad support can be generated.

If such a candidate can be found, we believe that it would be preferable for Chamoun not to try to succeed himself because of the risk of serious internal strife which such an attempt would almost inevitably produce. We are not in a position to determine with any accuracy what would be necessary to dissuade Chamoun from running and to persuade him to give his very considerable political support to another candidate. Presumably, we would wish to consider supporting him for some suitable position outside the government and indicating that we would be prepared to support him for the Presidency in 1964. I believe that our influence with Chamoun is sufficient induce him to support another candidate, particularly if we are supported by the British. If we determine that it is not desirable for Chamoun to try for a second term, I believe that we should 1) have someone discuss this question in general terms with Chamoun and 2) after a suitable lapse of time, inform Chamoun of our views and proposals.

If a suitable replacement for Chamoun cannot be found, then I believe that we should consider on an immediate basis 1) what steps we can take to strengthen Chamoun’s position and 2) what advice we should give him regarding the manner of conducting his campaign, particularly the desirability of effecting a rapprochement with important anti-Communist, pro-West political leaders who, for a variety of reasons, are opposed to Chamoun’s re-election. [61/2 lines of source text not declassified]

The crux of the problem, as noted above, is whether or not there is available a suitable replacement for President Chamoun. There is attached, for discussion purposes, a list of individuals who either have indicated an intention to put themselves up as candidates or who might be available and suitable.2

Recommendations

1) That this general question be discussed within NEA to determine a tentative State position;

2) that, once this tentative position has been taken, the question be discussed at a suitable level with CIA;

3) that the joint State–CIA position be communicated to our representatives in Beirut with a request for their comments and including a suggestion that a suitable person raise the question in general terms with President Chamoun;

4) that a U.S. position be taken as soon as possible based on the foregoing and that our position be coordinated with the U.K.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/1–1758. Top Secret.

2 The attached list provided a brief discussion of the suitability, from the U.S. perspective, of the following possible candidates: Emile Boustani, Hamid Frangie, General Fuad Chehab, Joseph Hitti, Jawad Boulos, Bechara al-Khoury, Victor Khoury, Alfred Naccache, Charles Helou, Pierre Edde, and Raymond Edde. It is included in the microfiche supplement.

3 There is no indication on the source text of Rockwell’s response to these recommendations.

4. Editorial Note 4. Editorial Note

On January 24, President Eisenhower approved NSC 5801/1, “Long-Range U.S. Policy Toward the Near East,” which had been adopted by the National Security Council on January 22. NSC 5801/1 contained a paragraph which outlined U.S. policy toward Lebanon: “Lebanon

“51. Provide Lebanon with political support, and with military assistance for internal security purposes. Reduce grant economic assistance as feasible and emphasize Lebanon’s capacity to borrow from international lending institutions for purposes of economic development. Stress within and outside Lebanon the theme of Lebanon as a highly successful experiment in which many peoples of diverse religion and culture work together amicably and effectively for the advancement of their country.” (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, 5801 Memoranda)

For the text of NSC 5801/1, see the Middle East regional compilation in volume XII.

5. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 5. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, January 30, 1958—7 p.m.

2573. Foreign Minister asked me to see him this evening. He said President Chamoun had requested him to inform me that peril of subversion in Lebanon was immediate2 although government hoped tonight’s session of Parliament would not set off rioting and had every assurance it would win vote of confidence, security were on alert and leaves had been cancelled for weekend. Malik and Chamoun had agreed it would be comforting if some elements of Sixth Fleet might be moved to eastern Mediterranean in readiness although they did not desire ships at Beirut itself. Malik seemed pleasantly surprised when I told him two British vessels, a destroyer and minesweeper, are due to arrive Beirut tomorrow from Cyprus on 3-day visit.

I gave assurances outlined paragraph 4 Deptel 3000.3 Malik said he had received similar assurances from Secretary, Under Secretary and Loy Henderson but question was how and when. I replied formal degree of our aid in meeting subversion would depend on nature of threat and practical suggestions from GOL as to what form our assistance should take. I said surely neither he nor Chamoun wanted US to land a regimental combat team which would give substance to charge by opposition that Chamoun was an American puppet. I hoped therefore any requests for help would be tailored to meet need and based on practicality.

Comment—Lebanon leaders have wind up but I think their security forces can handle situation.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/1–3058. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Damascus, Paris, London, Cairo, Amman, Baghdad, and Jidda.

2 The Chamoun government was concerned about the impact on the Moslem population of Lebanon of the impending establishment of the United Arab Republic. The union of Egypt and Syria was proclaimed on February 1.

3 Not found.

6. Letter From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Irwin) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy) 6. Letter From the Acting Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Irwin) to the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy)1

Washington, February 6, 1958.

Dear Mr. Murphy: On 8 November 1957, the Secretary of State, in a memorandum for the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff,2 requested that the Joint Chiefs of Staff prepare, on an urgent basis, a plan for possible combined U.S.–U.K. military intervention in event of an imminent or actual coup d’etat in Jordan and/or Lebanon.

Such a plan has been prepared by representatives of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the British Chiefs of Staff. It has been reviewed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and found to be a suitable basis for the conduct of detailed operational planning. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider, however, that the premature dissemination of this sensitive information to the level at which coordinated operational planning would be conducted might compromise the plan and jeopardize the U.S. position both in the United Nations and with the remainder of the Arab World. Accordingly, they consider that coordinated U.S.–U.K. operational planning should not be conducted at this time.

Subject to State Department concurrence, Mr. Quarles has approved the recommendation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that no detailed coordinated U.S.–U.K. operational planning in support of this plan be conducted at this time. Your views are requested.

Upon receipt of your reply,3 the Joint Chiefs of Staff will provide appropriate information to the British Chiefs of Staff.

Sincerely yours,

John N. Irwin, II

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/2–658. Top Secret.

2 Not found.

3 On March 19, G. Frederick Reinhardt, replying for Murphy, sent a letter to Irwin indicating that the Department concurred in the view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that no detailed, coordinated U.S.-U.K. operational planning in support of the overall plan was advisable at the time. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/2–658)

7. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 7. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, February 21, 1958—11 a.m.

2832. Time has now arrived for USG to make up its mind on attitude we should adopt in forthcoming Lebanese presidential campaign. Parliament will, between March 15 and May, have to dispose of question amending constitution if Chamoun decides to run again; and elections will take place probably in July for a president to take office in September.

Embdesps 399, 404 and 4462 are pertinent.

It is evident opposition to reelection of President Chamoun can cause a great deal of trouble and possibly disrupt delicate balance in this country which exists by elaborate feat of political and confessional equilibrium. If menaces of opposition can be taken at face value, upshot of attempt by Chamoun to succeed himself, even though crowned with immediate success, would result in Lebanon being divided not only on a Moslem versus Christian axis but on Maronite versus Maronite schism which would have effect of strengthening more fanatic Moslem factions in their anti-western bias and weakening elements friendly to US. Although external pressure of UAR may force Christian sects into closer step, it may draw Moslem elements toward greater magnetic field of Arab unity. Effect of a second candidature by Chamoun will be divisive.

Chamoun, however, is top dog. Opposition is united in hatred and fear of him, but seriously divided on who to select as a successful challenger to his power. There is no candidate cited in reference despatches who could defeat Chamoun with possible exception of General Chehab who could muster backing of army, command sectors of Christian, confessional and Moslem vote, if only for reason this part of electorate opposes Chamoun. Even here, however, it seems probable Chamoun could defeat Chehab if it were a direct contest between the two men. Chehab, however, shows no interest in assuming presidential office. Bechara El-Khoury is another possible rival candidate with Moslem and Egyptian backing. However, he could be defeated by Chamoun.

If Chamoun should decide not to amend constitution in order to rescind that provision (Article 49) that President may be reelected only after an interval of six years, and retire gracefully to quasi-private life, many of problems which now loom so menacingly would disappear. By permitting some other candidate to take over presidency, Chamoun could neatly finesse opposition not only in Lebanon but abroad; e.g., Egypt and Syria. His enemies, who have been strenuously beating on barrier of Chamoun’s supposed personal ambition, would find themselves pushing against an open door and would almost certainly fall flat on their faces. It is clear that rivalries of various opposition candidates would serve to cancel each other out, and with Chamoun’s control of Parliament he could almost at will assure election of his hand-picked successor. Here Chamoun should exercise caution and skill in order charge not be made his successor was but a puppet.

If, however, President utilizes his control of Parliament to amend constitution and succeed himself, it seems certain he will invite very extensive opposition on part of Nasser which, if not successful in frustrating Chamoun’s election, will almost certainly cause grave discord inside Lebanon. There are already sufficient indigenous elements of discontent in opposition circles to provide ready fuel for any tinder which may be brought in from outside.

From US foreign policy point of view we have delicate problem of not allowing disappearance of Chamoun from presidential scene to be interpreted as a disavowal of his foreign policies including open support of US and Eisenhower Doctrine. Similarly, if he should decide to stand for re-election and trouble breaks out, we must seek to divorce his identity with policies we sponsor from his identity with domestic problems not of our concern. Chances are great, however, that an anti-Chamoun campaign would turn into a fanatic anti-Chamoun-cum-anti-US drive on part of certain elements of Moslem population and those anti-Chamoun Christians who would adopt a neutralist line in order to get rid of Chamoun. Therefore, if Chamoun runs again we must see that he wins and wins handsomely.

I recommend following course of action: (1) That I be authorized initially to discuss with Chamoun himself his views on re-election, stressing US appreciation for his friendship and for courageous leadership he has exerted in Arab world as champion of principles for which free world stands. We would tell Chamoun our interest in his own personal welfare is a continuing one, and we will expect his own influence to be exerted for maintenance of policies he has so effectively followed while in office. At same time we should ask if his analysis of situation suggests he can assure continuance of his policies through support of some other candidate for presidency. In that case we would hope, after interval of six years, that he would still be available to resume mandate as chief executive. If, however, it was President’s carefully matured opinion he should stand to succeed himself now, we would not oppose that decision.

(2) Following such a conversation with Chamoun himself, I be authorized to indicate to friendly chiefs of mission (cf. Embdesp 404) US views as outlined above. It is important that free world embassies do not back rival candidates.

(3) To Lebanese inquiry, we be authorized to state US traditional position is to refrain from intervening in internal political affairs of friendly foreign states, but that because of our continuing friendly regard for Lebanon we would hope elections would follow course designed to unite nation rather than divide it, and that they would produce a president well qualified to maintain Lebanon’s freedom and independence.

(4) Something must be done for Malik, the apostle of Americanism. In my judgment, he should go fairly soon as he is focusing anti-American opinion on himself and his eventual exit, unless expertly handled, might be misinterpreted as a disavowal of Lebanon’s pro-western policy. I recommend we go all out to secure Malik’s selection as president of next GA. This would satisfy requirement in Arab world to be loyal to one’s friends, would be immensely rewarding to Malik himself and would strike cord of patriotic pride even in opposition elements of Lebanon. To gain maximum advantage, decision to support Malik should be taken promptly and made known to him soon.

As for actual candidates who could successfully serve as president and sustain a foreign policy acceptable to US interest, I would say that either of the Edde brothers—Raymond or Pierre—would provide excellent presidential material. Selim Lahoud, present Minister of Public Works, is a man of immense energy and keen intelligence, although he has little popular following and would generally be regarded as a Chamoun stooge. General Chehab is too apolitical to have a foreign policy other than one of strict neutrality and, if elected president, would probably become a neutral legume who would require careful pruning to grow in the right direction. However, as was said of Louis XIV, “All he has is common sense—but a great deal of that”.

I believe we must act with promptness in facing this problem as otherwise by default we will find ourselves ranged tacitly on side of Chamoun with no particular feeling of gratitude from him. If he runs we should derive benefits from his victory; his eventual defeat would be a disaster not only for him but for us. His continuance in office would not, however, be without cost. My own judgment is it would be best for Lebanon, for Chamoun and for United States if he stepped down from power now and resumed it six years in future.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/2–2158. Top Secret.

2 Dated January 23, January 28, and February 14, respectively, these despatches assessed the impending election, the potential candidates for the presidency, and the views of the various embassies in Beirut on the presidential campaign. (Ibid., 783A.00/1–2358, 783A.00/1–2858, and 783A.11/2–1458)

8. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 8. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, February 27, 1958—4:17 p.m.

3375. Embtel 2832.2 Your helpful analysis Lebanese presidential situation most welcome at time when problem is subject Department’s active interest. We share your concern over repercussions should Chamoun decide run again.

1. You should at early date discuss with Chamoun his presidential intentions on an exploratory basis. We consider it most important that in this initial discussion we give Chamoun no reason to assume we will support him if he decides for re-election. We also do not want him to receive impression we have definitely reached conclusion he should not present himself. We hope your approach can in friendly and frank manner make clear our continuing deep interest in welfare and security of Lebanon and convey serious misgivings we have re possible consequences of effort to amend constitution. You should ask for his appraisal effects such a move would have. While stressing our continuing interest in Chamoun’s personal welfare and our appreciation his courageous leadership over last six years, you should frankly seek his views re possible suitable candidates other than himself and inquire re possibilities assuring continuance his policies through his support of someone else in the Presidency. FYI. Our present estimate is that effort by Chamoun to assure his re-election could lead to internal conflict of unpredictable dimensions. We believe suitable alternate candidate can be found and that such candidate with support of Chamoun and West should have no difficulty in being elected. End FYI.

2. We would prefer that you give no further indication our thinking this subject to chiefs friendly diplomatic missions including UK and France until we have had opportunity assess Chamoun’s reaction to approach outlined above. We consider it might be preferable conduct any discussions with UK and France initially either here or in London and Paris.

3. In public our traditional policy of non-intervention Lebanese internal affairs should be firmly maintained.

4. Separate message follows re Malik.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/2–2158. Top Secret. Drafted by Eagleton, Waggoner, and Rockwell and cleared by Rountree.

2 Supra.

9. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 9. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, March 5, 1958—6 p.m.

2964. Pursuant Deptel 33752 I called on President Chamoun this morning and made oral representation outlined paragraph 1 reference telegram. I said I had personally listened to some hundred or more Lebanese personalities, each with his own slant on presidential problem, but had kept my own counsel. My government agreed time had now come to ask Chamoun himself for his estimate of situation.

President said that, although he “had not quite yet made up his mind”, he felt on balance he would have to stand for reelection.

Chamoun then went through process of elimination, ticking off one by one potential candidates. He said, of those who were outside Parliament, it was clear Joseph Hitti did not have sufficient following to be considered as successful candidate, nor did Jawad Boulos, a pleasant man with no political drawing power. General Chehab was possibility, but there were two objections to him: (1) he did not want the office; (2) to bring military leader to presidency would establish dangerous precedent and might involve Lebanese army in politics in future. In fact, only candidate outside of Parliament who Chamoun thought might have serious chance as contender for presidency was Bechara El-Khoury. This he thought would be disaster for country as Bechara El-Khoury had revealed during last term extent to which he and his family had profited by corruption and, furthermore, he had given himself too much to external forces outside Lebanon.

Within Parliament, Chamoun discussed prospects of two Edde brothers, Pierre and Raymond, indicating he thought neither could muster sufficient strength in Chamber to get elected. Another possibility was Selim Lahoud “but he had many enemies” and clearly, in Chamoun’s opinion, did not have sufficient votes to muster majority.

Ergo, by this he came to conclusion only politician who could lead country and evaluate its present foreign policies was himself.

I stressed our hope, because we wished to see Lebanon remain independent and because new currents were swirling in Arab world, that whatever happened in elections result would be to draw various elements in Lebanon into greater union and not to emphasize divisive possibilities which were latent in Lebanon.

President said his own estimate of his popular strength was 90 percent of Christians, 60 percent of Sunni Moslems. If this estimate is correct, it would mean his popular support would be 69 percent of population.

I next inquired Chamoun’s opinion re chances of civil strife if he should succeed himself, recalling what had happened to Bechara El-Khoury, who had also changed Constitution and had been ousted from second term. Chamoun said conditions were different. Bechara El-Khoury had been discredited because of corruption, whereas his own regime could not be accused similarly. Although there might be troubles, he was calmly confident any disturbances could be handled, and seemed to have no fear of discord fomented from outside—e.g., Egyptian and Syrian.

When I probed Chamoun re theory (cf. Embtel 2893)3 some compromise might be found by limiting new presidential term to 2 or 4 years, President was noncommital, but throughout our conversation referred to reelection in terms of six years.

Chamoun, already envisaging second term in office, said he was quite prepared to be clement to opposition and he would be willing early on to indicate readiness to bury hatchet. He explicitly said he felt an opposition was essential to Lebanon and he would be glad to have members of opposition in new government.

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] both Chamoun and Malik might feel they could whistle up Sixth Fleet any time they found themselves in trouble, I recalled assurances given as authorized Deptel 30004 re assistance in preserving internal security and said I had indicated to Malik my feeling means must be tailored to ends. It was my belief if there were riots or civil strife in Lebanon these should be put down by Lebanese themselves. It would be, in my opinion, prejudicial to Lebanon’s own interest if we should be asked to land Marines, as this would be portrayed in Arab world and elsewhere as subjection of Lebanon to an outside power. Chamoun replied he was in complete agreement. He said only time he had discussed possibility of deploying Sixth Fleet was when Jordan not Lebanon was in danger. I am sure he got point I desired to make; namely, that US military strength in Mediterranean should not be used in forthcoming Lebanese political turmoil.

Conclusions: (1) Chamoun has decided to amend constitution and succeed himself for second 6-year term.

(2) Chamoun, consummate politician whose access to political intelligence is undoubtedly greater than that of his rivals, is clearly confident of his popular support and of consequent Parliamentary approval, both in amending constitution and in his reelection.

(3) Chamoun did not ask for US backing but obviously expects that, if he succeeds himself and continues same foreign policy, he will continue to receive US support.

(4) Although Chamoun’s estimate of percentages his popularity is probably on high side, it is clear to us he can in fact be reelected.

(5) I have not altered opinion expressed Embtel 28325 that it would be best for Chamoun, Lebanon and US that he step down for time being and permit compromise candidate to assume Presidency and continue his policies. It is certain trouble will ensue when he takes office for second term. On other hand, we cannot very well dictate to Chamoun in this situation, nor can we against this opposition elect another President. In consequence,

(6) US, given this problem in political arithmetic, can come to only one answer: We should support Chamoun.

If Department concurs this analysis, would appreciate early word in order garner early kudos.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/3–558. Top Secret.

2 Supra.

3 In telegram 2893 from Beirut, February 27, McClintock reported on British Ambassador Middleton’s assessment of what he saw as the dangerous political situation in Lebanon. Middleton suggested that a compromise solution to the presidential problem might be to amend the constitution to extend Chamoun’s term by 2 years, to afford time to groom a suitable successor. McClintock observed that Middleton’s proposed solution was based upon pragmatism rather than principle, but might mitigate the venom of a presidential campaign. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/2–2758)

4 See footnote 3, Document 5.

5 Document 7.

10. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 10. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, March 18, 1958—7:53 p.m.

3626. Embtels 29642 and 2976.3 You should seek early occasion convey to Chamoun our views re Presidential election as follows: 1) We appreciate opportunity discuss this matter frankly with him.

2) We consider Presidential succession internal Lebanese question to be determined in accordance domestic Lebanese political requirements.

3) On basis information available to us it seems clear any efforts amend Constitution to permit Chamoun succeed himself will have important bearing on internal security situation in Lebanon. Questions raised in this connection are ones which GOL is in best position decide.

4) We share his belief that best posture for friendly diplomatic representatives to adopt is one of aloofness from this internal Lebanese problem. We intend maintain such attitude in connection any public or private inquiries regarding US position.

5) We would hope have opportunity review developments with him from time to time.

FYI—We plan convey substance Paragraphs 1–5 above to British and French here. You authorized do same in Beirut. We agree Chamoun appears determined press for his re-election and that it would be undesirable attempt further to dissuade him. We continue believe it preferable avoid any indication for present that we are prepared support him and view his attitude [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] (Embtel 2976) do not believe such commitment now called for. [11/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/3–658. Top Secret. Drafted by Waggoner and approved by Rountree.

2 Supra.

3 In telegram 2976 from Beirut, March 6, the Embassy reported on an interview with President Chamoun in which Chamoun indicated that he intended to place before parliament in May the issue of amending the constitution and his subsequent reelection. He felt that there was sufficient support in parliament to carry the proposal, and added that the best attitude for friendly diplomatic representatives to adopt would be aloofness from the issue. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/3–658)

11. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 11. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, March 20, 1958—5 p.m.

3127. I saw Chamoun last night and coupled démarche authorized Deptel 36262 with information set out Deptel 3629,3 as latter afforded impressive reassurances continuing interest US in maintenance integrity and independence of Lebanon, irrespective of its internal political management. I read out numbered paragraphs Deptel 3626 textually and had no doubt Chamoun comprehended their meaning. He made no comment except to nod his head when I read paragraph 4. [3 lines of source text not declassified]

I asked Chamoun his estimate of situation which had led to such a request. He said re assurances authorized Deptel 3629 danger to Lebanon was less external than internal. He had proof arms were being smuggled by agents of UAR to Lebanon through mountain defiles from Syrian border and by small boats to Tripoli and Sidon. He felt Christians would increasingly demand arms of their own to meet threat from Moslem population. However, from this point on Chamoun for first time in my acquaintance showed confusion of thought as revealed in following anomalies: 1) Although he claimed Syrian-Egyptian agents were smuggling in rifles, Chamoun admitted Moslems to whom these guns were given were in turn selling them to Christians for between 600 and 700 pounds. This does not add up to a very convincing UAR inspired threat by Moslem element against Christian Lebanese.

2) Chamoun said he thought he would increase penalties (30 days to 3 years in jail) for unlawful possession of firearms to 3 years in jail as minimum, and in general would tighten up security measures against arms smuggling. At same time he smiled blandly at my question how arms he requested [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] would be brought in, replying there were “ways and means" for clandestine introduction. In other words, while denouncing smuggling of arms for Moslem element, President of a supposedly united country seeks to connive at smuggling arms for Christian elements.

3) Asked for his estimate of degree of danger of civil war, Chamoun hastily insisted a coup d’etat was “impossible”. He said, “I control most of Shiite Moslems and some of Sunnis in Beirut. Main danger is in Tripoli”.

4) I observed if things went wrong arbiter of Lebanon’s fate in case of civil war would be General Chehab. President made wry face and said Chehab was irresolute and weak. Yet, at same time he confessed Chehab had such a hold over loyalties of armed forces that if he were removed Army might break in two along Moslem-Christian lines of division. In other words, by Chamoun’s own estimate Chehab is far stronger leader than he would like to admit. President lamented further anomaly that defense forces for which greater part of budget was spent could not in last analysis be relied on for defense against internal subversion.

All of this adds up to confused picture and not edifying portrait of Chamoun in a quandary. In consequence, I believe fairly cool assurances contained Deptel 3626 will have salutary influence. On request for arms [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] I do not believe we should accede. In fact, I told Chamoun candidly my judgment that to arm rival factions in manner he suggested might conduce to an irreparable split in Lebanon between Moslems and Christians, with heightened danger UAR might truly take advantage of pretext to intervene on behalf of Moslem brethren. In my opinion a Lebanon which did not take into full account need for cooperation with Moslem population would become, so far as Arab world was concerned, a sort of Christian Israel beleaguered by its neighbors and incapable of sustaining itself except under guns of foreign warships.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/3–2058. Top Secret.

2 Supra.

3 In telegram 3629 to Beirut, March 18, McClintock was instructed to tell Malik that it would be difficult for the United States to spell out specific actions it might take in connection with hypothetical situations. (Department of State, Central Files, 684A.86/3–1558)

12. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 12. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, April 3, 1958—6 p.m.

3310. Re Department’s telegram 38072 presume Department has now received my 32823 reporting views General Chehab which are somewhat in contrast with Malik’s interpretation of General’s position as described [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] report March 31.4 In my view Malik’s listed alternatives before Chehab are too categoric. On the basis of his estimate of situation, Chehab might neither be insubordinate or resign and leave country but merely claim to act as loyal subordinate of government, but to deplore his inability to deal with widespread guerrilla warfare and point to his other mission of defending country against external aggression. This would have political effect of handing Chamoun’s fate to decision of mob.

Furthermore, Chehab in his talk with me did not give impression of being out and out anti-Chamoun as represented by Malik. Chehab, in fact, seemed entirely impersonal, confining his appreciation to military situation and means he had to deal with it.

As indicated Embassy telegram 3255,5 I believe Chamoun will go through several changes of heart before he reaches his ultimate decision. I do not believe stormy interview between Malik and Chamoun reported [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] March 31 can be taken for more than a temperature reading of that moment seen through Malik’s binocular paralax.

Last night (Embassy Despatch 560)6 Raymond Edde told me his bloc of four votes in Parliament would oppose Chamoun’s amending constitution. As time passes and both government and opposition test each other’s strength and determination, as witnessed yesterday’s rioting and killing in Tyre,7 Chamoun will then after Ramadan reach his final estimate of situation whether (A) even in his supposedly secure Parliament he can muster sufficient votes for amendment and reelection; and (B) if successful in Parliament intimations of civil war are so convincing as to threaten his overthrow by violence. In this struggle within Chamoun’s own soul he will be torn between stubborn pride, conviction his policies have been right, and certainty he could pull off reelection if his Western friends stood fast against his own calculated judgment of odds pro or con.

In this very fifty-fifty situation, and with mounting evidence guns will shoot to kill, I am revising conclusions set out a month ago in Embassy telegram 29648 and am trending to judgment it would be better for Lebanon, US interests and Arab World generally, and Chamoun himself, if he stepped down at end of presidential term next September. This is based on reasoning (vide final paragraph Embassy telegram 3282 that if Chamoun is deposed by force pendulum would swing so widely away from West as to crash through the sides of the clock. I am likewise trending to opinion that Raymond Edde would be a competent and generally acceptable compromise candidate to replace Chamoun, who would with less fanfare but with quiet effectiveness maintain a pro-Western policy conducive to our interests. However, I prefer to send in my final recommendations on these points after consultation early next week with French and British colleagues.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/4–358. Top Secret.

2 In telegram 3807 to Beirut, April 2, the Department asked the Embassy to comment on a report that Chamoun had expressed the intention of retiring on September 23. (Ibid., 783A.11/4–258)

3 The reference should be to telegram 3274 from Beirut, April 1, in which McClintock reported on a conversation he had that day with Chehab. McClintock found Chahab calm, dispassionate, but convinced that if Chamoun sought to amend the constitution and succeed himself there would be severe civil strife in Lebanon, amounting possibly to civil war. (Ibid., 783A.00/4–158; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.11/4–258)

5 Dated March 31. (Ibid., 783A.00/4–358)

6 Not found.

7 USARMA telegram CX 55 from Beirut, April 3, reported on clashes which occurred in Tyre on March 28 and April 2 between pro-UAR demonstrators and local security and army forces. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00(W)/4–358)

8 Document 9.

13. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 13. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, April 11, 1958—2 p.m.

3395. Pass ICA/W. I have today received following first person note dated April 9 from Foreign Minister Malik: Verbatim Text

“I have honour to inform you GOL, guided by friendly cooperative spirit which permeates its relations with USG, particularly in field of US economic and technical aid Lebanon, has asked me lodge officially with your Embassy immediate request for American aid Lebanon amounting to $15 million to be allocated from US appropriations for foreign aid in FY ending on June 30, 1958.

“By making this official request I also wish to inform you competent authorities in GOL will soon be ready to submit to USOM necessary information about various projects to which aid will be applied. These projects may include projects related to enlargement of International Airport Beirut, construction of international highways in Lebanon, agricultural development, irrigation, electrification, village water supply, and others. GOL shall presently enter into detailed and intensive negotiations with your mission here with view arriving at technically sound development projects which GOL and USG may agree upon under aid herein requested.

“As this aid is urgently needed by Lebanon to help it develop its economic resources, and as time is rapidly running out for US appropriations for foreign aid in current FY, GOL hopes necessary steps will e taken immediately in order have amount requested allocated Lebanon.2

“Accept, etc.”

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/4–1158. Confidential.

2 On instructions from Malik, Lebanese Ambassador Dimechkie called on Assistant Secretary Rountree on April 16 and on Under Secretary Dillon on April 18 to urge acceptance of Lebanon’s request. These conversations are summarized in telegrams 3960 and 3993 to Beirut, April 16 and April 18. (Ibid., 783.5–MSP/4–1658) On April 24, Malik called in McClintock to inform him that a Parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee, chaired by Malik, had just adopted a recommendation to the government to the effect that “Lebanon should obtain an amount of financial or material aid to justify continuation of Lebanon’s acceptance of aid from American government.” McClintock reported that he asked Malik if the United States should expect future “pistol-at-the-head tactics” in dealing with the Lebanese government. In assessing what he saw as Malik’s “desperate” pressure tactics, McClintock observed that “unfortunately, issue of US aid has become so inextricably mixed with Lebanon’s acceptance of Eisenhower Doctrine that attitudes toward latter color attitudes toward former.” (Telegram 3560 from Beirut, April 25; ibid., 783A.5–MSP/4–2558) These telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement.

14. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 14. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, April 18, 1958—2 p.m.

3481. Subsequent meeting three ambassadors reported Embtel 34782 I last night saw Malik on other matters. He volunteered that at luncheon yesterday with Chamoun President had privately indicated his conviction that to redeem his own personal honor he must seek a speedy determination of reelection issue. Chamoun told Malik he was now resolved bring this matter to a head next month, thus confirming report set out Embtel 3432.3

According to Malik, President said, “everyone around me may collapse, but I shall be the last to collapse.” He depicted President as saying that if issue were merely internal political one of Chamoun against his domestic followers, he would undertake struggle light-heartedly. However, it had become a contest in which massive outside forces were engaged, including those of UAR and such supporters as Nasser had internationally. According to Malik, Chamoun expressed regret his friends among western powers, and particularly US, had not seen fit to express any interest in his fate. One practical application of US friendly interest, said the President, would be merely to tell Edde Brothers, for example, US was friendly to Chamoun. This alone would serve to cast die as between opposition to amendment of constitution by Edde bloc (Embtel 3310)4 and an affirmative vote for amendment.

Comment: In this estimate, Chamoun is undoubtedly right. However, his portrayal of himself as a lonely white knight fighting battle against international powers of darkness is more Wagnerian than situation warrants.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/4–1858. Top Secret. Repeated to London and Paris.

2 In telegram 3478 from Beirut, April 17, McClintock reported on a meeting that day with British Ambassador Middleton and French Ambassador Roche to discuss and coordinate efforts to respond to the mounting political crisis in Lebanon. (Ibid., 783A.00/4–1758; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Dated April 15. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/4–1558; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Document 12.

15. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 15. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, April 23, 1958—4 p.m.

3531. Verbatim text. Re Embtel 3520.2 Following is text of joint appreciation drafted by Middleton with minor amendments by me. Middleton’s classification, however, is “Secret”. [11/2 lines of source text not declassified]

I suggested to Middleton that, since Lebanese in requesting Western guidance invariably referred to “the three ambassadors”, we inform French Ambassador of developments reported reference telegram. He concurs and is asking London authorize him communicate with French Ambassador here, as well as with Quai d’Orsay.

Herewith text: “US Ambassador and myself have reached agreement on following appraisal of present situation: “(A) Chamoun is not so decided (as he was until recently) on standing again.

“(B) He would be prepared to make way, however, for General Chehab.

“(C) General Chehab is aware of this and of fact his election to succeed Chamoun in such circumstances would be acceptable to Americans and ourselves as candidate most likely to ensure internal and external security for which we have given guarantees.

“(D) No other candidate is at present seriously in field.

“(E) General Chehab has so far refused but has given indications he might be willing to be ’drafted’.

“(F) Strong opposition to Chamoun’s re-election is being shown by great majority of Moslems and substantial fraction of Christians.

“(G) Attempt to change constitution to enable Chamoun to stand would probably be occasion for a trial of strength. We are not certain, however, Chamoun can now command necessary two-thirds majority of total number of deputies to enable amendment to be passed in Chamber.

“(H) We would not expect any such disturbances to get out of control as General Chehab has made it clear Army will use every endeavor to enforce law and order if necessary.

“(I) Chamoun is at moment probably weighing up advantages, personal and national, of forcing his re-election by whatever means against disadvantages of trying to govern a deeply divided country for another term of office. There is additional risk that, even if re-elected, he might be ousted before completing his full second term of office; in which case convention by which Lebanon has a Maronite president might be called in question.

“(J) Our (the West’s) interests generally would probably be best served by Chamoun’s re-election only if he commanded sufficient general support for his policies to be effectively implemented. They would probably be less well served by General in office (because his laziness and disinclination for the political game); and if he resigned in short time any likely successor (after perhaps a general election) would probably be less able to keep close bonds with West.

“We therefore must decide, in light of these considerations, whether to intervene now, or at all, in favor of Chamoun or General. It is by no means certain advice to Chamoun to stand down would be well taken; on other hand our encouragement of General might well prove decisive. On whole we consider situation must be allowed to clarify itself further before we act. If, for example, proposal for constitutional amendment fails then Chamoun ceases to be aid in openly encouraging General Chehab to fill vacuum. But we should avoid taking up now a position from which we may afterwards forced by circumstances to depart.”

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/4–2358. Top Secret. Repeated to London.

2 In telegram 3520 from Beirut, April 22, McClintock reported that British Ambassador Middleton had information that President Chamoun was prepared to renounce his aspirations for reelection in favor of General Chehab, if Chehab would accept the office. Middleton also indicated that London and Washington had authorized a joint appreciation of the presidential problem by the British and U.S. Ambassadors in Lebanon. (Ibid., 783A.00/4–2258; included in the microfiche supplement)

16. Letter From Secretary of State Dulles to Foreign Minister Malik 16. Letter From Secretary of State Dulles to Foreign Minister Malik1

Washington, April 29, 1958.

Dear Mr. Minister: Reports have come to me2 of continuing discussion within Lebanon as to the basic relationship between our countries, with particular regard to the policy expressed in the Joint Congressional Resolution of March 9, 1957,3 and the joint communiqué of March 16, 1957.4 In view of this discussion and of the fact that we attach such high value to our friendly relations with the Lebanon, I thought it might be useful to share with you a few thoughts on this question.

The Middle East Resolution (Eisenhower Doctrine) is until repealed a standing offer by the US—an offer to be accepted if and as Middle East nations so desire. It authorized the President within the limit of available appropriated funds to cooperate in the development of economic strength. It authorized the President to undertake military assistance programs with any nation of the area “desiring such assistance”, and in specific circumstances to come to the aid of a Middle East nation which might be the victim of aggression. The authority of the act is in no way dependent upon adherence by any other nation to the terms of the act or to US policy toward the Middle East area or any parts thereof.

In the implementation of this Resolution, the United States has, I believe, been able to contribute significantly to the efforts of countries in the area to strengthen their security and safeguard their national integrity. The states which, like Lebanon, expressed satisfaction with the Resolution undertook no obligations as a result thereof. For example, as I wrote you on November 6, 1957,5 Lebanon is not required to come to the assistance of the United States in the event of hostilities between the United States and any country. Neither is Lebanon committed to collaborate with the United States in the solution of specific problems affecting the Middle East. The relationship between us is based on the principles of the United Nations Charter and our desire to see the Lebanon maintain its national independence and sovereignty and resist aggression, direct or indirect.

We are not unaware of statements currently being made in the Lebanon to the effect that the relationship with the United States, insofar as it concerns the Joint Resolution, has come to involve some sort of a burden for the Lebanon in the present situation in the Near East. That this should be the case is furthest from our purposes and desires. We would not wish, I assure you, to be in any way responsible for a burden being placed upon a country with which we have such close and friendly relations and which we hold in such high regard. I know that the Government and people of Lebanon will reach such decisions as they may deem appropriate in this matter, but I wanted you to have our views because I believe that the friendship between our two countries is such that full and frank examination of every aspect of our relationships can only be constructive.6

Sincerely yours,

John Foster Dulles7

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/4–2958. Confidential; Niact. Drafted by Bergus, Rockwell, and Dulles and cleared by Rountree, Dillon, and Dulles. Transmitted to Beirut in telegram 4107, April 29, which is the source text.In telegram 4106 to Beirut, April 29, the Embassy was informed that the letter was being sent in view of the possibility that the Lebanese Government might repudiate its adherence to the Eisenhower Doctrine. At the same time that McClintock delivered the Secretary’s letter, he was instructed to inform Malik that his request for additional aid had received the highest level of consideration within the Department, but unfortunately funds to meet such a request were not available. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/4–2858; included in the microfiche supplement)

2 See footnote 2, Document 13.

3 For text of the Middle East Resolution, commonly known as the Eisenhower Doctrine, which was adopted by the Senate on March 5, by the House of Representatives on March 7, and approved by the President on March 9, 1957, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1957, pp. 829–831.

4 Reference is to the communiqué issued at Beirut at the conclusion of the visit by the President’s Special Representative, Ambassador James P. Richards, to discuss the implications of the Eisenhower Doctrine. The communiqué defined common purposes shared by the United States and Lebanon. For text, see ibid., pp. 835–836.

5 Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, vol. XIII, pp. 220–221.

6 McClintock reported, in telegram 3627 from Beirut, April 30, that he had seen Malik that morning, conveyed the Secretary’s message, and made the démarche instructed in telegram 4106 (see footnote 1 above). Malik agreed with McClintock’s suggestion that it was in the interest of both countries to keep the issue of economic assistance separate from the question of the Eisenhower Doctrine. McClintock noted that Malik was disappointed that the United States could not provide additional aid, but realized that the long delay on the part of Lebanon in submitting the request was a major factor contributing to the negative response. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/4–3058; included in the microfiche supplement)Malik replied to Dulles’ letter on May 11 with a lengthy letter in which he discussed the danger of “anti-Lebanese, anti-Western and anti-American" forces operating in Lebanon in an effort to undermine the Chamoun government. He pointed to the importance of large-scale, long-term assistance from the United States to ensure Lebanese stability, and noted his concern over the impact on the Middle East of an ill-conceived rapprochement between the United States and the UAR. (Department of State, Central Files, 611.80/5–1258)

7 Telegram 4107 bears this typed signature.

17. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, May 2, 1958 17. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, May 2, 19581

Washington, May 2, 1958

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

3. I spoke of the situation in Lebanon. The President felt strongly that we should try in every possible way to do something to help out. He even indicated that he thought we should try to find some grant aid. He thought that it was much cheaper to try to hold the situation than to try to retrieve it. I said I thought the situation could be met if, in addition to our present package which I outlined, we gave some P.L. 480 Title 22 aid. I said the Canadians might not like this but that I thought we might have to ignore that. The President felt that the Canadians should accept any commercial disadvantage, having regard to the great importance of the political objective.3 I said that I had at my staff meeting indicated that we should not look too closely into the local disaster because the important thing was to act quickly. The President said that he would do anything which he had to do in this connection to insure prompt action.4 We also spoke of the element of military assistance and he concurred in that.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

1 Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President. Secret; Personal and Private. A note on the source text indicates that Herter was also present.

2 Title II of Public Law 480 authorized the President to use U.S. agricultural commodities as emergency aid to combat famine and malnutrition abroad. For text of Title II as amended, see 7 USC 1721. The Title II commodity envisioned here was wheat.

3 On May 5, Dulles spoke to Canadian External Affairs Minister Sidney E. Smith at the NATO meeting in Copenhagen about the proposal to provide P.L. 480 wheat to Lebanon. Smith said that he was aware of the situation and raised no objection. (Secto 13 from Copenhagen, May 5; Department of State, Central Files, 411.83A41/5–358)

4 The offer of additional P.L. 480 assistance was transmitted to Beirut in telegram 4162, May 3. (Ibid., 411.83A41/4–2958) McClintock reported, however, in telegram 3671 from Beirut, May 3, that Malik was still pressing for large-scale, direct U.S. aid which he described as a test of the Eisenhower Doctrine, and Malik dismissed offers of Development Loan Funds and P.L. 480 assistance as too little and too late. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/5–358) Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement.

18. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 18. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut May 4, 1958—8 p.m.

3674. Re last paragraph Embtel 3673.2 Following is text joint appreciation agreed to by British, French, and American Ambassadors:

Begin text

1. Internal situation in Lebanon is likely to reach critical stage within the next week. After consultation with my American-French/French-British/American-British colleagues following is our joint appreciation for urgent consideration by our respective governments (my colleagues are reporting in identical terms).

2. (a) General Chehab is clearly unwilling to accept presidential succession from hands of Chamoun and thereby incur a political debt. Only if serious unrest threatens and no other solution seems possible might he be persuaded to stand; but it would be as an independent or opposition candidate. First alternative would have suited our interests but second alternative would necessarily represent a clear defeat for Chamoun’s pro-western policy and is therefore undesirable.

(b) Chamoun is in our view almost certain to seek amendment of constitution and stand for re-election. We know he has solicited and been promised active sympathy and support of Iraq, Iran, Sudan and Turkey and possibly other countries such as Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Greece, Italy, etc. His success or failure must therefore be judged in much wider context than mere internal Lebanese politics. Once he has announced his intentions western failure to support him will have repercussions among all most moderate and responsible friends and allies of west in ME area. Chamoun has come to symbolize to them forces of resistance to Nasser.

(c) Parliamentary situation is uncertain but Chamoun can probably command necessary 2/3s majority for amendment of constitution and re-election. But opposition representation in Chamber of Deputies not proportional to its popular support and many Moslem and some Christian elements seem determined to mobilize their adherents outside Chamber and resort if necessary to extreme measures to frustrate Chamoun. Disorders must therefore be expected. Extent of danger this factor represents depends upon willingness of Army (i.e., General Chehab) to maintain order at all costs.

(d) General Chehab mistrusts Chamoun and is inclined to remain aloof in any civil conflict, which would inevitably tend to assume a communal character. But we consider he is first and foremost a loyal soldier and citizen and that declared policy of three western powers will be determinative in deciding his attitude.

(e) President Chamoun has clearly indicated his final decision will be taken about May 7. He can then be expected to appeal to us for open support. Time will be very short as parliamentary measures for amendment of constitution and re-election could be forced through in a single session.

3. In our view optimum solution would be that Chamoun should hand over presidential office to General Chehab or to some other mutually agreed candidate. This now seems excluded. We are therefore likely to be faced with stark alternative of supporting Chamoun or standing aloof. For reasons in paragraph 2(b) above in particular we consider we shall have to support Chamoun despite known risks.

4. Practical measures short of open support might involve: (a) Approach to General Chehab to ensure maintenance of law and order (see 2(d) above).

(b) Financial aid to deal especially with press which is hostile but venal.

(c) Coordination and mobilization of diplomatic support by countries mentioned in 2(b) above.

(d) Provision of equipment to strengthen government radio station Beirut.

(e) Clear warning UAR interference will not be tolerated.

5. We are not able to assess reaction of EG [sic] Soviet Government which may be extremely sharp owing to presence of Nasser as their guest. But we consider that despite possibility of internal disorder and external complications failure to support Chamoun represents greater long term risk.

6. Grateful for very early instructions, since President has already asked to see American Ambassador on Wednesday morning, May 7.

End text

Suggest Department pass Copenhagen for Secretary.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–458. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London and Paris.

2 Telegram 3673 from Beirut, May 4, reported on a May 3 meeting among the U.S., British, and French Ambassadors to consider the political situation in Lebanon. In the final paragraph, McClintock noted that the three ambassadors agreed to draft a joint appreciation of the situation and forward it to their governments for approval of the recommendations contained in the appreciation. McClintock asked for a response before his scheduled meeting with Chamoun on May 7. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

19. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State 19. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State1

Copenhagen, May 6, 1958—11 p.m.

Dulte 10. Re Tedul 8 and Tosec 29.2 After conferring with Mr. Lloyd and Mr. Laloy we agree with basic policy decision to support Chamoun on basis of paragraph 3 of joint appreciation3 of British, French and American Ambassadors.

Secretary leaves to Department and Embassy the implementing of this basic decision in accord with British and French but suggests that if we do back Chamoun we should do so wholeheartedly and possibly Tedul 8 might be somewhat depressing for Chamoun.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–658. Top Secret; Niact. Also sent to Beirut.

2 Tosec 29 to Copenhagen, May 5, repeated to the Secretary the texts of telegrams 3673 and 3674 from Beirut. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1505) Telegram 3674 is supra, and telegram 3673 is summarized in footnote 2, supra. Tedul 8 to Copenhagen, May 5, from Herter to Dulles, also sent to Beirut as telegram 4173, suggested that, in view of the short time remaining before McClintock’s May 7 meeting with Chamoun, Dulles should coordinate a U.S.–U.K.–French position on the impending Lebanese presidential election with Selwyn Lloyd and the French representative at the NATO meeting in Copenhagen. [31/2 lines of text not declassified] (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.11/5–558; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Transmitted in telegram 3674, supra.

20. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 20. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut May 7, 1958—5 p.m.

3709. Copenhagen for Tosec. Chamoun received me this morning. He said I was first man to whom he had communicated his decision to run again for presidency of Lebanon. He had appointment tomorrow with British Ambassador to whom he would give same word. He stressed special relationships he felt because of his policies between himself, US and UK.

Chamoun said there were only two possible candidates for presidency who could carry on his foreign policy: himself and General Chehab. However, latter had indicated his decision not to run (a statement somewhat at variance with Chehab’s version reported Embtel 3700)2 and in any event might not be depended upon to stay the full course if elected. As for being steadfast in policy, Chamoun said he had seen other countries where once a slip was made it was impossible to foresee where one would wind up. For these reasons he was resolved to succeed himself.

In light first paragraph Dulte 10, Copenhagen’s 3 sent Beirut3 indicating concurrence of Selwyn Lloyd and Laloy in basic policy decision to support Chamoun, I revealed our tripartite conversations and joint recommendation, indicating that my British and French colleagues would presently speak for themselves in this regard.

Having in mind Secretary’s comment (Dulte 10) on backing Chamoun wholeheartedly, I injected an extra dose of vitamins into representation authorized Deptel 4173.4 I also pointed out that so far back as early March (Embtel 2964)5 I had recommended we support Chamoun, and was glad three governments were now in agreement on this issue. At same time, I stressed need for utmost discretion in manner of manifesting our support. Chamoun said it would be fatal if our backing were overt.

We agreed most immediate need is for three Ambassadors to approach Chehab and set him right as to three power support of Chamoun and need for Commander-in-Chief Armed Forces to do his duty in maintaining internal security. Chamoun said he had not yet determined date when he would undertake parliamentary steps for amendment of constitution, but thought we should see Chehab early next week; say Monday or Tuesday. I summarized in part conversation with Chehab earlier this morning, as reported Embtel 3700, with particular stress on my advice to Chehab he should not turn in his soldier suit at this time.

As for other measures of covert assistance, President mentioned possibility of our speaking to the Edde brothers (cf paragraph 7–C Embtel 3673).6 He then mentioned venal press of Beirut and extent to which it was bought up by Egyptian and Soviet money. He regretted western powers usually attempted to purchase papers already in Egyptian pay, neglecting more honest but poverty stricken papers which had refused to sell out to foreign influence. However, I pointed out need now was to secure foreign press support for Chamoun which would have maximum impact. President laughed ruefully [4 lines of source text not declassified].

President also said he had been informed by police and gendarme commandants of need for standardization of weapons for mobile fighting forces. He mentioned BARS in this connection. I asked him to have his security people get in touch with their opposite numbers in the Embassy to see what requirements are and what we might be able to do.

In his over-all estimate of security situation President said he thought Beirut would be relatively calm. In tribal areas of Chouf and Hermel he had already taken practical steps to divide populace, on theory there would be a de facto balance of power which would discourage uprisings. He thought (and here Druze leader Jumblat agrees) there would be a stand-off as between anti- and pro-Chamoun Druze factions. President thought there might be trouble in Tripoli, but indicated he was taking measures to meet it by approaches to such Moslem leaders as Rachid Karami. He had no hope of being able to change views of other Moslem anti-Chamoun protagonists such as Saeb Salaam and Abdullah Yafi, former because of conviction and latter because of heavy Egyptian subsidies he receives for his newspaper As Sayasah.

President said, despite opposition of religious leaders such as Maronite Patriarch and Grand Mufti of Beirut, he had 90 percent of Christians on his side and a substantial Moslem support extending possibly to 65 percent of latter.

This estimate we consider too high. He thought Druzes would cancel each other out, but if there were any majority it would be in his favor.

Re attitude of UAR, Chamoun thought Nasser would continue his subventions to newspapers and politicians, while Syrians would continue sending of clandestine arms. However, he was inclined to agree with me there is as yet no evidence of a concerted UAR plan of campaign against Chamoun once his decision to stand for reelection is announced.

Although Chamoun said he had not yet made up his mind as to date when Parliament would be called to act on amendment to constitution, he thought it would be very soon. He was waiting, however, until tempers had cooled before giving final go ahead signal. In response to my question, he said amendment of constitution would merely permit him to succeed himself. His present term would expire on September 23 and, if successful, he would take oath of office immediately thereafter for a second six-year term.

At close of interview President produced from his wallet clipping of Alsop article re impact Lebanese elections on other pro-western leaders in ME, taken from Herald Tribune April 30.

I said either Joe Alsop could have written joint appreciation of three Ambassadors or three Ambassadors could have written Alsop’s column.7

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–758. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, and Copenhagen.

2 In telegram 3700 from Beirut, May 7, McClintock reported on a conversation that morning with Chehab in which Chehab indicated that he had reached the conclusion that he would only accept the presidency if it were clear that no other leader could assure the safety of the state. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Supra.

4 See footnote 2, supra.

5 Document 9.

6 Paragraph 7–C of telegram 3673 from Beirut recommended following up on assurances of Western support for Chamoun’s reelection effort with “Other political efforts; e.g. a word to the Edde brothers.” This telegram is summarized in footnote 2, Document 18.

7 McClintock also reported, in telegram 3710 from Beirut, May 7, that he discussed the question of U.S. aid to Lebanon during this meeting with Chamoun. Chamoun indicated that, although the issue had become politically sensitive in Lebanon, he favored a continuing economic aid relationship, but hoped that the United States could assist in financing Lebanon’s 6-year development plan. McClintock responded there was a recession in the United States and Congress was in no mood to consider increased foreign aid funds. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/5–758; included in the microfiche supplement)

21. Letter From the President to the Secretary of State 21. Letter From the President to the Secretary of State1

Washington, May 7, 1958.

Dear Foster: I was tremendously interested in your conversation with Selwyn Lloyd on the subjects of Libya and Lebanon.2 Press reports this morning indicate that Lebanon has made some extraordinary demands upon us, accompanied by warnings that can be scarcely regarded as anything else than threats.3 Of course the press reports may be unreliable. At the very least it would appear that Lebanon expectations are much greater than we had anticipated. I believe the figure of 170 million dollars over a 7 year period was mentioned.

Thank you very much for your report. I hope you are keeping well.

As ever,

DE4

1 source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–758. Secret; Priority. Transmitted to Copenhagen in Tedul 15, marked “For Secretary from Acting Secretary,” which is the source text. Drafted by President Eisenhower.

2 Dulles reported on his May 4 conversation with Lloyd in Dulte 7 from Copenhagen. In commenting on the discussion of problems in Lebanon, Dulles noted that the British “are particularly anxious to have us do something for Lebanon.” Dulles added that he explained the possible gift of wheat in response to Lebanese requests for aid. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1505)

3 In telegram 3696 from Beirut, May 7, the Embassy reported that Beirut papers that day featured reports that the Lebanese cabinet had decided that Lebanon would renounce U.S. economic aid if it was not unconditional and sufficient. The press reported that the Lebanese Government intended to ask the United States for a total of $160 million over a 6-year period. (Ibid., Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/5–758)

4 Tedul 15 bears these typed initials.

22. Editorial Note 22. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on May 8 on significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles offered an assessment of the situation in Lebanon: “Turning to the situation in the Middle East, Mr. Dulles noted that the question of the Presidential succession in the Lebanon had now become very serious. If pro-Western President Chamoun decided to run for re-election, it would require a Constitutional change. We don’t know that he has actually decided to run again, but that was the probability. Such a decision would be bound to cause internal difficulties which Nasser was certain to exploit. Meanwhile, the Lebanese Government has been putting the heaviest kind of pressure on our State Department to secure very large amounts of grant aid. Indeed, the amount desired was very far beyond the needs of Lebanon, and really constituted a kind of economic blackmail.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 365th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason on May 9; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

23. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 23. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 11, 1958—5 p.m.

3772. Rome for RLG and Sixth Fleet. London also pass CINCNELM. Crisis in Lebanon is rapidly reaching very serious state.2 Contrary to reassuring report set out Embtel 37693 I have just received telephone call from American missionaries in Tripoli that situation is “very, very bad” and no guards have yet been posted at mission hospital. I got into immediate touch with Malik, who was with President and General Chehab. Latter sent instant orders to his forces in Tripoli to protect US property and citizens there.

Raymond and Pierre Edde are exerting utmost effort as intermediaries between opposition and Chamoun. They gave me following sequence of events: (1) Opposition got wind of Chamoun’s decision to amend constitution this week, apparently on Monday. Under leadership of Rashid Karami, Saeb Salaam and Abdullah Yafi, with acquiescence of third force and Henri Pharaon, Moslem leaders decided use pretext of assassination editor Telegraph to foment rioting and forestall Chamoun’s parliamentary play for reelection.

(2) Opposition met last night and formulated demand for Chamoun’s instant resignation. They appointed Raymond Edde as a Maronite to carry this decision to Chamoun, which he did this morning. However, Edde made clear to opposition and Chamoun he and his national bloc would not support demand for resignation but would insist Chamoun continue constitutionally in office until end of his term.

(3) As was to be expected, Chamoun flatly turned down opposition demand for his resignation. He refused to be drawn out by Edde on question of reelection.

(4) Saeb Salaam, Henri Pharaon and Raymond Edde then called on General Chehab. Edde brothers are urging formula whereby present Sami Solh Government would resign and be replaced by a government of national coalition, headed by General Chehab himself. Despite unwritten agreement Prime Minister must always be a Sunni Moslem, he does say in this crisis Moslem leaders would accept a Maronite Prime Minister if it were Chehab, as they would believe Chehab’s assumption of government responsibility would effectually spike any hope of Chamoun for reelection.

(5) In response to direct question Chehab told Edde, Salaam and Pharaon this morning sole cause of present revolutionary crisis in Lebanon is Chamoun’s selfish determination to succeed himself in office. General explicitly disavowed any connection between foreign policies of Chamoun and his personal ambition again to be President. In other words, so far as Chehab is concerned issue is a straight personal one drawn between country and Chamoun.

(6) General gave his interlocutories a very gloomy picture of security situation, pointing out country is now saturated with clandestine arms and threatened with imminent civil war. According to his latest intelligence, number of armed Druzes who have crossed from Syria is not 200, as reported Embtel 3769, but 300. He expects sabotage and guerrilla activity in the Chouf this afternoon.

(7) General Chehab could not make up his mind on proposition of Raymond Edde that he take Prime Ministership, but showed strong reluctance to assume this responsibility which was clearly political and not military.

(8) Edde brothers are now attempting to see Chamoun to persuade him to accept their formula. They say that if Chamoun and Chehab agree country will return to a state of calm, all legal requirements, both constitutionally and otherwise, will be served; Chamoun will remain as President and Parliament can deal with issue of elections some time in July. (Practically, however, they feel issue of reelection of Chamoun would be killed.)

(9) According to Eddes (and in this estimate we are prone to concur) time is exceedingly short. One ominous sign is Pharaon’s cancelling of afternoon races which will release a turbulent crowd in Beirut today with nothing to do but seek excitement. Edde brothers predict Moslem general strike in Beirut for certain tomorrow and are undecided what attitude they and Phalangist Party should take on Christian shops remaining open. If Christians close, it will be taken as protestation against Chamoun, but if shops stay open Moslems may start to riot against Christians and an out and out religious war may ensue.

(10) In judgment of Raymond Edde, fighting will almost certainly commence in Beirut this evening unless a compromise solution is found. Beirut will probably be in full crisis tomorrow in that event, with perhaps open civil war to be expected on Tuesday4 when inflammatory press (now silenced by self-imposed strike) will start beating the torn toms.

(11) I am endeavoring to consult with British and French Ambassadors this afternoon and shall use my own judgment on seeing Chamoun and Chehab this evening. One may need suasion and the other needs stiffening.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1158. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Paris, Rome, and London.

2 On May 8, Nasib Matni, publisher of the opposition newspaper Telegraph, was assassinated in Beirut. The assassination led to a call on the part of opposition political leaders for a general strike in the country. Antigovernment rioting broke out in Tripoli on May 9, and the USIS Library in Tripoli was burned on May 10. Lebanese army forces controlled the rioting, but 15 were killed and 150 wounded. (Telegram TDCS 3, 354, 891 from Beirut, May 10; ibid., INR Files: Lot 59 D 600, A)

3 In telegram 3769 from Beirut, May 11, the Embassy reported that the situation in Beirut and in Tripoli was quiet. (Ibid., Central Files, 783A.00/5–1158)

4 May 13.

24. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 24. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut May 11, 1958—8 p.m.

3775. Rome for RLG and Sixth Fleet. London also pass CINCNELM. Malik asked me to call this evening. He said Lebanon was at a most critical juncture and this was not a repetition of events in 1952. Now hostile foreign services were engaged. I had already heard of the 300 armed partisans which had crossed frontier from Syria and I could be assured both Soviet and UAR Embassies were working on a 24-hour basis to destroy integrity of Lebanon. Because of emergency, President had sent me a handwritten note asking “to send the twenty tanks by airlift with the ammunition”. This apparently was with reference to our offer to discuss with Lebanese military supply of 18 light tanks as authorized by recent Department telegrams. I said I had no idea where such equipment might be found or if it were available, but would pass on Chamoun’s request.

Malik then said he and President, thinking out loud, wondered if it would not be appropriate now to make forward planning for possible deployment of “a division of American marines” in event Syrian-Egyptian aggression proved more overt. I said my instant reaction was that nothing could be more harmful to Chamoun than that. Malik then backed off and stressed this was most tentative sort of thinking.

Malik was not au courant with today’s latest political developments and had to be brought up to date on events described Embtel 3772.2 He agreed with me that of primary necessity is for Western Ambassadors to stiffen General Chehab. I told him I had already made an appointment to see General this evening (8:30 at his home in Junieh) and that I would not hesitate to make clear US support for policy Chamoun had followed, for Chamoun himself, and for integrity of Lebanon defended by a loyal army. I see Chamoun at ten tonight and shall report on my talk with General. At same time I shall leave with President ARMA memo3 to me describing impracticability of airlifting tanks on grounds of lack of immediate airlift, equipment, and Lebanese trained personnel to man tanks once they arrive.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Paris, Rome, and London.

2 Supra.

3 Not found.

25. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 25. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 11, 1958—11 p.m.

3779. I saw both General Chehab and President Chamoun this evening separately.

1. General confirmed his refusal accept Prime Ministership as suggested by Raymond Edde; and vigorously reaffirmed his support of President for legal term of office. However it was clear Chehab is now out and out in opposition to Chamoun’s re-election. He can be expected reluctantly to do his duty to maintain President in office only until September.

2. I said as General knew events in Lebanon had transcended local politics and would have effect far beyond frontiers of this country. I recited concern manifested by numerous governments in Middle East over continuance of policies personified by Chamoun and recalled Arab fidelity to friendship. I said it was measured opinion of the three Western Governments whose advice Chehab had so frequently importuned that best man to carry on these policies and to maintain independence of Lebanon for which three governments had pledged support was Chamoun.

3. General took this statement calmly and I was certain with his present limited mental focus he did not project our support beyond his own target date of standing loyal to President for his present term of office. I remarked upon this later to Chamoun who said he quite understood and thought it best that for present we work on Chehab in short term rather than long range. Both President and I agreed it was too much to expect Chehab to change his mind on question of Chamoun’s re-election.

4. In Chehab’s estimate tomorrow will be a difficult day in Beirut but he believes security dispositions can control situation. He said several times “day after tomorrow will be the critical one”. Chehab shared opinion of Edde brothers Christians would have a difficult decision to make whether or not to close their shops tomorrow, as officer responsible for security, he obviously hoped all stores would be closed, thus giving no pretext for Moslem attack on Christians. However President Chamoun felt very strongly Christian stores should remain open tomorrow and try to carry on business as usual. President thought tomorrow would be critical day while as indicated above, General regards Tuesday as the touchstone. Both authorities amply warranted extensive security precautions taken by this Embassy.

5. Re Chamoun’s request for 20 airlifted tanks, I pointed out to Chehab various practical difficulties which my ARMA indicated might lie in way. Chehab said need for tanks would be a continuing one over next several months but he would be satisfied by delivery within next two weeks. General explicitly said he had sufficient trained personnel to man tanks. I later told Chamoun we might have some difficulty and asked if an airlift was really necessary. President said no provided tanks were forthcoming.

6. I told President when Malik had asked us to think tentatively of landing “a division of Marines” in Lebanon this would work against Chamoun’s own interest. President very soberly replied that if Syrians invaded Lebanon in force as they might do in the Hermel he would feel constrained to send a personal appeal to President Eisenhower.

7. I told Chamoun I found General ready to make a good try at maintaining law and order in immediate future but that we would have to give him constant injections of resolution and courage if we were to go the whole course. President said he knew this but was deeply grateful for what I had done with General tonight.

8. Greatest impression I gained on Chehab was to quote Field Marshal Slim, whom I had heard at NWC stating that for riot control human lives were saved by his policy of “one brick-one bullet”. At end of an hour’s interview I found General repeating as a sort of magic refrain—"une pierre-une balle”.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1158. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Paris and London.

26. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 26. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 12, 1958—noon.

3783. Reference last sentence Embtel 3033,2 time is now growing very short before situation foreseen reference telegram becomes actual on basis of my conversation last night with Chamoun (paragraph 6 Embtel 3779).3 Have no doubt whatever he has fullest intention of requesting landing of Marines by direct message to President Eisenhower if Syrian forces whether irregular or otherwise appear in some number on Lebanese soil.

Department will no doubt have already considered best means of responding to such appeal, including UN (with certainty of Soviet veto) action under Eisenhower Doctrine (which probably does not apply in view of absence of overt Communist aggression) or by simple and legally justified landing of forces in response to request by friendly government.

I believe Chamoun has already long discounted propaganda stigma of being called “US stooge” and would prefer to take that rather than what to him is more imminent and tangible peril of Syrian military operations against Lebanon.

Department will from its wider vantage point be able to calculate reactions of Communist bloc, including possibility of Soviet or other “volunteers” entering Near East as counter-poise to any US military intervention.

Purpose of this message is to reaffirm once more our conviction contingency foreseen some months ago is almost at our doorstep.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1258. Top Secret.

2 Telegram 3033 from Beirut, March 12, assessed the dangers that would arise when the “Egyptian-Syrian honeymoon” ended, and Syria might be tempted to intervene in Lebanon. (Ibid., 786.00/3–1258)

3 Supra.

27. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 27. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 13, 1958—2 p.m.

3826. Rome for RLG and COMSIXTHFLT. As indicated Embtel 3820,2 Chamoun saw three Ambassadors this morning. He said situation was “very grave” although not yet desperate. President said General Chehab had told him this morning he could make a determination within next 24 hours to 48 hours on Army’s capability of maintaining upper hand. According to Chehab’s run-down of military situation, Tripoli, Beirut and Saida are in complete Army control, but there is little other control elsewhere. A pitched battle continues at presidential summer palace of Beit Eddine between Junblat Druzes and gendarmes. President said, quoting Chehab, General fears a movement originating in Bekaa which will descend upon Beirut within 24 hours, but he is at present unable to assess magnitude of this development.

President recounted clash at border post of Massna, leaving five Lebanese customs guards dead after a spirited resistance (cf. Damascus 2917 sent Department).3 President said aerial reconnaissance of Beit Eddine revealed attackers were using automatic weapons and grenade throwers. Plane was hit by automatic fire but returned safely. He cited these incidents as further proof of an attack against Lebanon’s integrity by UAR.

Chamoun said he wished three Ambassadors separately to send following oral message to his chief of state: Situation in Lebanon is very grave and he wishes Chief of State to recall guarantees given to Lebanon through diplomatic channel for maintenance its integrity and independence. President wishes each Chief of State to consider possibility of landing armed forces in Lebanon within 24 hours after an appeal for such intervention by President of Lebanon or GOL.

In response to questions, Chamoun said he had not yet made up his mind to ask for foreign troops but would probably make a decision within next 24 hours. If he did ask for friendly forces, this would mean their arrival in Lebanon not later than Thursday.

I said, speaking purely personally and in no sense even implying US would send forces, that I was certain any US contingent would not place itself under orders of General Chehab. I wanted no doubt on this point, even in this very early stage. All Ambassadors agreed with Chamoun that if a request were made and affirmatively answered there would, of course, be complete coordination between the government, military authorities and friendly forces.

I asked Prime Minister, who was present at meeting, re report set out Embtel 3820 saying that at this critical juncture we must know exactly where we stood with respect to loyalty of Lebanese armed forces. Sami Solh confirmed in part message sent through intermediary [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. He had received visit from Colonels Salem and Chehab, but said they had not asked for Chamoun’s resignation. They had however, he said, by inference implied that this was necessary. Contrary to report in Embtel 3820, Chehab is not absent at Junieh but is at his headquarters in Beirut. French Ambassador saw General this morning and was told Army would stand loyal and do its utmost “so long as its endurance continues,” which he thought by implication meant that when troops were tired they might cease activity. Although French Ambassador would not say this to Chamoun, he told Middleton and me privately that Chehab had said he thought a “political solution” was necessary within next 24 hours. Three Ambassadors concur Chehab is vacillating and evidence from Army headquarters indicates high command has no stomach for going on much longer.

We queried Chamoun in event an airlift of troops should materialize if there were a safe drop zone at Khalde airport in Beirut and he said this area was under close military guard. He did not know if airport at Tripoli was in safe hands, although he had been told Lebanese Army was posted there.

All three Ambassadors suggested to President immediate need of making Lebanese case known to world press and for lifting of military censorship, which has thus far hampered filing of accurate reports.

Three Ambassadors concurred in suggesting that, if President does ask for tripartite military intervention, a simultaneous appeal be made to Security Council to forestall charges from Communist side of “imperialist intervention”. I pointed out that under Article 52 of UN Charter right of collective measures in self-defense was preserved pending effective SC action.

Three Ambassadors likewise urged that crisis of Lebanon transcends issue of presidential election. What is now at stake is national existence of Lebanon and not of any particular person. Chamoun said he thoroughly concurred in this appraisal.

Request immediate instructions as to readiness US provide emergency forces in event (as I think he will) Chamoun requests them. His response to my question re estimate of forces needed was “a very large division”.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1358. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, and Rome.

2 In telegram 3820 from Beirut, May 13, the Embassy reported Prime Minister Solh’s concern about an apparent change of disposition on the part of the army. Solh stated that he had received that morning a demand for the immediate resignation of President Chamoun from the Army Chief of Staff, who was a cousin of General Chehab. Solh felt that the implication was that the army could not be relied upon to maintain order unless the government complied with the ultimatum. McClintock noted that he considered the situation to be “most ominous,” and added that he planned to discuss it with Chamoun and with his British and French counterparts. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Dated May 13. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1358)

28. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 28. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut May 13, 1958—4 p.m.

3832. Since decision on sending armed forces to Lebanon by three Western powers transcends local views, I have foreborne making recommendation pro or con. However, it is clear, as seen from Lebanon, that if we do send troops or make a naval demonstration immediate steps must be taken to forestall UAR/Soviet propaganda charge US and its friends are lining up against Moslem world. As indicated Embtel 38172 there is a sufficient basis of genuine Lebanon antipathy for Chamoun’s second tenure of office to provide a fertile seed bed for charges Western “imperialist” powers are intervening in favor of one local politician against what would be represented as an authentic will of the people.

I cannot, given degree to which events have moved, see how under any circumstances, even if order is restored in Lebanon, Chamoun can have temerity to propose to continue six additional years in office after amending constitution. Political wounds inflicted in recent fighting in Tripoli, Beirut and elsewhere run deep because they are wounds in the body politic. They will not heal quickly.

In my judgment it would be a capital political mistake to support Chamoun’s re-election if, in fact, we do forcefully intervene to maintain integrity and independence of Lebanon. By doing so we will be made to seem ranged against the Arab world in favor of a narrow Christian minority. We shall have achieved a military and political beachhead comparable to the potential one in Israel.

These are advance thoughts projected for the Department’s rumination. My present feeling is that if we are called upon by Chamoun to land forces in Lebanon we should tell him straight out that this does not imply any further commitment to support him for reelection.3

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1358. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London and Paris.

2 In telegram 3817 from Beirut, May 13, McClintock reported on a meeting the previous day with Malik and the British and French Ambassadors. Malik reviewed evidence of foreign involvement in anti-government activities in Lebanon, raised the possibility of resort of the U.N. Security Council, and asked what sort of aid the Lebanese Government could expect from the three powers which had guaranteed Lebanon’s independence and integrity. McClintock noted that in the course of the discussion he had made the point that, despite Syrian-Egyptian interference in Lebanon’s internal affairs, there was also an authentic indigenous element of opposition to President Chamoun which could not be dismissed as “Nasserism.” (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 In telegram 3840 from Beirut, May 13, McClintock added that Chamoun was still the duly-elected President of Lebanon and had not been charged with crimes or misdemeanors. The call of opposition leaders for a general strike and resistance to the government was, McClintock felt, “purely and simply sedition and rebellion”. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1358)

29. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Dulles in Washington and Foreign Secretary Lloyd in London, May 13, 1958, 12:50 p.m. 29. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Dulles in Washington and Foreign Secretary Lloyd in London, May 13, 1958, 12:50 p.m.1

May 13, 1958, 12:50 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM SELWYN LLOYD

The Sec returned the call.

L said he wanted to have a word about Lebanon. Does the Sec have a telegram2 and the Sec said no. L said it is very bad—they have had a Cabinet about it and if we are disposed to give an affirmative answer they will play their part…. that we will come to his assistance if he needs it—this in the telegram.3 L said the Army looks queer. The Sec said it is not supporting him. L mentioned if it is known we are prepared to back him it might give him more courage. The Sec said Caccia is coming in. L said there is so little time he wanted this personal word. L said an Adm. Holloway is in London and if there is anything to be done their people would like to talk to him. There are big issues but it has to succeed. The Sec said he may be making a mistake trying to hold on. L said if he gives in and resigns then what happens.

[Here follows discussion of Indonesia.] The Sec said there will be a meeting at 4 re Lebanon. The Sec then repeated L’s judgment is to give the declaration and L said yes. Otherwise it is hopeless.4

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 Lloyd apparently was asking whether the Department of State had prepared a response to the message from Chamoun which was transmitted in telegram 3832, supra.

3 Ellipsis in the source text. Presumably it indicates that Bernau could not hear the conversation.

4 Dulles telephoned Eisenhower at 4:01 the same afternoon and discussed Lebanon, calling attention to the problems involved in cooperating with France in support of the Lebanese Government:

“The Pres then asked re the British. The Sec said Caccia just left and he is having a meeting now with Defense—they are disposed to give a favorable response if we are. The French were invited and the Br don’t want them and the Sec thinks it would be a mistake because of their close ties with Israel and because of the complications of North Africa, Algeria etc. The Sec will talk with the military people to see what we can do. He thinks it important to get the support from an Arab country but it may get overthrown. The Sec said he would be in touch in about an hour.” (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations)

30. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, May 13, 1958, 5:50 p.m. 30. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, May 13, 1958, 5:50 p.m.1

White House, Washington, May 13, 1958, 5:50 p.m.

SUBJECT

Lebanese Crisis

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The Secretary of State

Governor Herter

Mr. Allen Dulles

General Twining

General Gruenther

General Goodpaster

Mr. John Irwin, Department of Defense

Mr. William M. Rountree, NEA

The Secretary read to the President telegram number 38262 from Beirut. He added his own comments concerning the gravity of the situation. He said that he had received a telephone call from Mr. Selwyn Lloyd,3 and later a message from Mr. Lloyd conveyed by Ambassador Caccia,4 informing him that the British Cabinet had considered the possibility of responding to President Chamoun’s request for military intervention, and that the Cabinet had decided that the United Kingdom should respond favorably, if the United States agreed. Mr. Lloyd had said the British would be prepared to do what they could although they assumed that the major responsibility would be American.

The President thought it would be a great mistake if the French would participate in such a military intervention. The Secretary agreed, and said he had discussed the matter with the British who shared this view.

The Secretary and the President discussed generally the problems involved in United States intervention. The President observed that it was well to consider such problems, but that we also had to take into account the apparently much larger problems which would arise if the Lebanese needed our intervention and we did not respond. The Secretary agreed, and said he had been giving thought to the mission of any forces which might be sent in. Perhaps our dispatch should be on the basis of protecting, at the request of the Lebanese Government, lives and property of United States citizens, and of assisting the Lebanese Government in connection with its military program.

In response to the President’s question, the Secretary pointed out that he did not see how we could invoke the provisions of the Middle East Doctrine relating to the use of United States forces specifically, since that would entail a finding that the United Arab Republic had attacked Lebanon and that the United Arab Republic was under the control of international communism. The mission of the United States forces could be brought into context with the Middle East Doctrine at least to some extent, however, because of the Mansfield Amendment, which stated that the preservation of the independence and integrity of the nations of the Middle East was vital to the national interests and world peace. Nevertheless there was a question of constitutional authority to send in combat troops for a stated mission of fighting for Lebanese independence.

The President recalled our former so-called “gun boat policy” and asked by what authority we had sent such missions to South American countries. The Secretary responded that this policy in the world today no longer represented an acceptable practice, unless the forces went in at the invitation of the host government. Such an invitation, of course, was not a condition to the introduction of American forces at the time referred to by the President.

The President was aware of considerable Congressional excitement over the Lebanese issue and what the United States proposed to do to help its friends in the Middle East. Senator Knowland in particular had raised this matter with him. He felt that resolute action should be taken as necessary to preserve the situation.

In outlining the implications of the introduction of American forces, the Secretary mentioned the following: once our forces were in, it would not be easy to establish a basis upon which they could retire and leave behind an acceptable situation; the move might create a wave of anti-Western feeling in the Arab world comparable to that associated with the British and French military operation against Egypt, even though the circumstances were quite different; it was probable that oil pipelines would be cut in Syria; action by Egypt in connection with the Suez Canal was not predictable, but at least there was a strong possibility that the Canal would be closed to American and British shipping; the action might result in a new and major oil crisis. Another important consideration, the Secretary said, was that while we might get support initially from the Iraqi and Jordanian Governments, such support might lead to pressure upon them which could result in their collapse. The President thought that if it became necessary to move forces in, we should have our Ambassadors call on the various governments and explain that we had no intent other than helping a friendly government to maintain its sovereignty and independence; that the move was not in any way directed toward legitimate interests of other nations. The Secretary said that most of the Arab governments to which such representation might be [made?] had in fact asked us to give all necessary support to Chamoun. However, there was a problem in this case, that often arose in such matters, that the governments were prepared to say helpful things privately but not publicly. The President thought there would be a great advantage in having the Arab states join Chamoun in asking for our help.

The Secretary expressed the view that any communication to Chamoun informing him of our willingness to intervene should make it clear that our purpose was not to back him for a second term as President. The President agreed, saying that we must know exactly what Chamoun was asking help for.

Mr. Irwin pointed out the necessity for making clear to the military forces whatever mission they might have. They would be fighting forces, and there should be no doubt in their minds what they would be called upon to do and the extent to which they were able to protect themselves, and, if necessary, be reinforced for that purpose.

In commenting upon the President’s observation that it was difficult to see how we could afford not to respond to a properly worded request by President Chamoun and the Lebanese Government if circumstances clearly showed that our aid was essential for the preservation of Lebanese independence, the Secretary reviewed current Communist methods of warfare throughout the world. He mentioned their tactics in Venezuela, Burma, Indonesia, Lebanon, etc., where they employed techniques of inciting rioting, which were techniques extremely difficult to combat. At least in the case of Lebanon, however, there might be an instance in which we could comply with a legitimate request and, operating “in accordance with rules of the game as set forth in the Charter of the United Nations”, do something constructive. If we did nothing, we would have to accept heavy losses not only in Lebanon but elsewhere.

The President speculated upon the desirability of sending some sort of message to Congress setting forth an evaluation of the situation and asking specifically for authority to move in United States forces if they should be required. The Secretary recalled that even at the time the Middle East Resolution was being considered in Congress many members had said that the President already had authority to take military action to protect United States interests.

The President said that at some stage we might give a report to the Congress of what we do. In it Congressional action would not be requested, that Congress would be given a full account of an important development affecting our security.

The President concluded by saying that he thought it was right to let the Lebanese know that we would help them in case it should become necessary. He thought the military should immediately issue a warning order to our forces and put them on the alert.5

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President. Top Secret; Personal and Private. Drafted on May 15 by Rountree.

2 Document 27.

3 See supra.

4 Not found.

5 Another memorandum of this conversation was prepared on May 15 by General Goodpaster. According to Goodpaster’s account, there was further discussion concerning deployment of U.S. forces, and “the President indicated agreement that the Marines should start moving eastward.” When Secretary Dulles raised the question of a possible Soviet reaction, Eisenhower responded that he did not consider a significant Soviet reaction likely if the military intervention was limited to Lebanon, but if U.S. forces were to attack Syria, “that would be something else again”. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries; included in the microfiche supplement)

31. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 31. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, May 13, 1958—9:23 p.m.

4271. You are authorized to inform President Chamoun orally as follows: The United States considers that the introduction of Western forces into Lebanon is a grave step which could have the most serious and far-reaching consequences and one which should not be lightly requested or other than under the most compelling necessity to meet a situation where the integrity of Lebanon is genuinely threatened and where its own forces do not suffice for protection.

1. The U.S. is prepared upon appropriate request from President and GOL to send certain combat forces to Lebanon which would have the dual mission of (a) protecting American life and property and (b) assisting the GOL in its military program for the preservation of the independence and integrity of Lebanon which is vital to the national interests of the United States and to world peace. They would of course also be authorized to act in self-defense. FYI. We believe these two courses are clearly within the President’s constitutional authority without further Congressional action but that the President is not authorized by Section 2 of the Joint Resolution2 to send armed forces to fight for Lebanon’s independence since there has not occurred “armed aggression from any country controlled by International Communism”.

For these reasons the request should be couched in the terms indicated. Once the troops are there they would, in fact, serve to protect the independence of Lebanon. If for example they were stationed in Beirut and Tripoli to protect American life and property, that would presumably release Lebanese forces, and if the elements which were there to assist GOL in its military program became engaged in hostilities they would, acting in self-defense, counterattack.

You may use the foregoing on your own authority to explain the underlying rationale of point one. End FYI. Steps are already being initiated to put substantial combat forces into readiness to respond promptly, but the date of their arrival could not be counted on before two or three days after request received.3

2. The U.S. would expect that at least concurrently with any public request to the U.S. the GOL would file a complaint with the United Nations Security Council, alleging the interference from without in its internal affairs and the consequent threat to its integrity and independence.

3. The U.S. assumes that at least some Arab states will be prepared publicly to support Lebanon in its appeal to the U.S. and in its appeal to the Security Council.

4. The U.S. assumes that as stated in your 38264 President Chamoun recognizes that the crisis of Lebanon transcends the issue of Presidential election or the future of any particular person and that President Chamoun will not push his candidacy should this appear seriously to divide the support which should be counted upon to preserve the integrity and Western orientation of Lebanon.

The above four points are interdependent.

FYI. We are concerting our action with the U.K. We are convinced as we believe is the U.K. that French participation in the military operations would be unproductive. Furthermore, there is at the moment no French government to deal with such a problem.5 This aspect of the matter will of course have to be handled with great delicacy but also we believe with firmness. We see no reason why you and the British Ambassador should not inform your French colleague as to what you propose to do. Also, we believe that to avoid embarrassment you and your British colleague should make consecutive and not joint reply. Please keep in touch with your British colleague, who will be getting corresponding instructions.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1358. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Dulles and cleared by Rountree. Repeated to London.

2 Reference is to the Middle East Resolution; see footnote 3, Document 16.

3 Telegram 24953 from CNO to CINCNELM, May 13, drafted by Admiral Burke, instructed the Mediterranean command to move two Marine battalions toward Lebanon: “Sail amphibious forces with both battalions towards Eastern Med as soon as practicable. No publicity.” (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58)(Sec. 1))

4 Document 27.

5 Telegram 4278 to Beirut, May 13, noted that the investiture of the new French Government did not change the estimate that it was unwise for the French to participate in joint military action in Lebanon. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1358)

32. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 32. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 14, 1958—1 p.m.

3869. I saw President Chamoun at 10:45 and went over in very great detail four points set out Deptel 4271.2 I am certain Chamoun understood every word. His only comment when I indicated four points were interdependent was to say that on third item—support of Arab States in Lebanon’s appeal to US and Security Council—he could not regard this as a condition precedent as it was beyond his power to pledge action of other independent Arab countries. All the other points were matters strictly relating to himself, his government and the US. I said it was surely not intention of USG to make third point a condition for implementation of remaining three.

As forecast Embtel 3863,3 with improved security situation, Chamoun is hopeful he will never need to request intervention by US or UK. However, he asked me to express his profound thanks for this immediate and impressive manifestation of US support.

I mentioned our reservation re use of French forces. Chamoun said he readily concurred and did not believe, as practical matter, French would be in position to send troops even if they wished to. However, he felt it necessary to make démarche to three Ambassadors yesterday, because France had given guarantees to Lebanon.

I discussed leak reported last paragraph Embtel 3863 with President, expressing deep concern lest Osseiran utilize it to disadvantage of Western Powers and Lebanon. Chamoun said he had in Cabinet meeting yesterday merely informed government he had recalled with three Western Ambassadors guarantees their governments had severally given Lebanon. This would explain how Pierre Edde may have put his busy mind to work on possibility of foreign intervention. Chamoun said Osseiran had reached similar conclusion by deduction. He concurred in my assessment of danger lest Osseiran resort to some unauthorized and stupid action. Chamoun said reflectively he thought Osseiran might get “sick.”

I gave President current list of members UN Security Council and suggested (as will also Middleton) that if GOL decides have recourse to SC, it commence diplomatic preparations with view to securing maximum support for its case. As for Malik’s presentation of Lebanon’s case in his wandering press conference yesterday and what I regard as over-generalized protest to Cairo (Embtel 3862)4 I urged that GOL be as specific and factual as possible. I said that my British colleague and I had discussed between ourselves possibility GOL might declare UAR Ambassador Ghaleb persona non grata. Middleton would presently hand Chamoun names of three other members of Egyptian Embassy here [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] more dangerous than Ghaleb himself. I pointed out I was offering this observation without instructions from my government and on an entirely personal basis, adding that to declare an Ambassador persona non grata did not mean breaking diplomatic relations. Chamoun said, however, he thought if this action were taken, UAR would break with Lebanon.

In closing interview, President left no doubt his fullest comprehension numbered paragraph four Deptel 4271; and reiterated he hoped he would never have to ask for course of action outlined in that telegram.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1458. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Repeated to London.

2 Supra.

3 McClintock reported on a meeting with General Chehab in telegram 3863 from Beirut, May 14. Chehab’s assessment of the security situation in Lebanon was “much more reassuring, although Army was stretched to its utmost capability.” McClintock concluded that the situation was currently under control. He added, however, that Chehab had serious reservations about the impact on the Lebanese army of the possible introduction of foreign forces into Lebanon. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1458; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Telegram 3862 from Beirut, May 14, transmitted a translation of a protest note from Lebanon to the UAR concerning UAR efforts to foster opposition to the Government of Lebanon. The Embassy received a copy of the note from the Lebanese Foreign Ministry on Malik’s instructions. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1458; included in the microfiche supplement)

33. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, May 14, 1958, 1:13 p.m. 33. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, May 14, 1958, 1:13 p.m.1

Washington, May 14, 1958, 1:13 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT

The Sec gave the Pres the gist of the cable from Beirut.2 The Pres thinks the thing for him to do is announce he is not going to do any running. The Pres hopes the Amb is so encouraging him. In these preparatory moves they are going to make he would not let them too close to the area though maybe they did not order them—the Marines can go anywhere but he would tell them in Europe to stop it quick.3

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 An apparent reference to telegram 3869, supra, which was received in the Department of State on May 14 at 9:30 a.m.

3 Dulles called John N. Irwin, II, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, immediately after speaking with the President. He spoke of the Marine battalions which had begun moving in the Gibraltar area, and noted that such activity was apt to prompt questions. Dulles said that the President did not want “anything to stir things up.” Dulles and Irwin agreed that, in response to any questions which might arise concerning the movement of the Marine units, the explanation would be that it was a routine maneuver. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations)

34. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the British Ambassador (Caccia), Washington, May 14, 1958, 6:48 p.m. 34. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the British Ambassador (Caccia), Washington, May 14, 1958, 6:48 p.m.1

Washington, May 14, 1958, 6:48 p.m.

The Sec returned the call and C said he got a message saying the Sec thought it unwise to tell Nuri and Hussein. Does the Sec want to press it. In London they felt they are bound to hear of it and our relations are such if they heard from other means and had not heard from us voluntarily it would undermine their confidence in us. The Sec asked what they would say? C said addressing themselves to the request, it was put to us by Chamoun and we emphasized we hoped no request would be made but did assure if it were we would do our best to respond as substantially and as quickly as we could. Now it looks as though he has hopes of holding it without a request. The Sec said he would add we would respond but only if some of these other Arab states were prepared to back it up. C agreed. The Sec said Rountree is against it because it would leak in exaggerated form that we had agreed to send troops to Lebanon and cause trouble here—it would not be interpreted properly—Nuri would blow it up. C said he thinks we can try to protect it along the lines the Sec suggested. We would be disposed to respond but an integral part would be whether they would themselves support any action we might take. The Sec said also to say we think it would be very unfortunate if the situation deteriorated to a point where it would be called for—it would create serious difficulties. Our response would be the lesser of two evils and we hope both can be avoided. The Sec said if you feel you have to do it he would acquiesce. C thinks they would feel that and is grateful for the Sec’s answer. C said from the conversations yesterday he would hope Nuri would take the same view—it would put him in a bad position if we were forced to do it. The Sec agreed.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Phyllis D. Bernau. The source text indicates that Ambassador Caccia placed the call.

35. Telegram From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Commander in Chief, U.S. Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (Holloway), at London 35. Telegram From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Commander in Chief, U.S. Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (Holloway), at London1

Washington, May 14, 1958—5:28 p.m.

JCS 941782. USNMR pass to SACEUR.

1. UK governmental position: a. Command of combined forces used in Lebanon operations will be United States.

b. For both political and military reasons United States forces should precede UK forces into Lebanon.

c. These two points agreeable to State Dept and approved by JCS.

2. FYI. British suggest detailed planning should be done in Mediterranean and not in London.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 1. Top Secret; Operational Immediate; Noforn. Repeated to USCINCEUR, CINCLANT, and USNMR.

36. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt 36. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

Washington, May 15, 1958—7:28 p.m.

3117. You should at once see General Amer and orally give him following. You should convey same to Nasser soonest after his return.

Legally constituted Government of Lebanon, a country which is friend of US, is currently object of effort to destroy its authority and bring about its overthrow by promotion of insurrection. We have received from source independent of GOL circumstantial information that those engaged in this subversive effort in Lebanon are being aided by elements and arms from UAR territory. US has for some time been committed to assist Lebanon to maintain its independence and integrity, and Lebanon has been reassured of this. There should be no doubt whatsoever that US intends to live up to this commitment. US desires UAR to know this in order to be better able evaluate consequences of actions which may be carried on against integrity of Lebanon from UAR territory.

In view of what Nasser told US Ambassador March 202 re his grave concern about possibility confessional strife and armed conflict in Lebanon and of his statement that last thing he wanted to see was bloodshed in that country we assume that activities to which we are referring are not authorized by government of UAR and we trust that UAR will concur in desirability of putting a stop to them. We also have in mind assurances which Nasser gave US Ambassador April 253 that he desired good relations with USG. We desire UAR government to know that continuation of assistance from UAR territory to subversive efforts being directed against Lebanese Government would be very serious obstacle to betterment of relations between US and UAR which we, like President Nasser, desire.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1558. Top Secret; Niact; [distribution indicator not declassified]. Drafted by Rockwell and approved by Dulles. Repeated to Beirut, Damascus, and London.

2 See vol. XIII, p. 435.

3 See ibid., p. 447.

37. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 37. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 16, 1958—3 p.m.

3949. Following my conversation with Chehab reported Embtel 3937,2 I conferred with British Ambassador who is now beginning to share my conviction it is clearly outside realm of political possibility for Chamoun to think of succeeding himself for a second term as president. I likewise told Middleton of Chehab request three western ambassadors jointly intervene with President. Middleton is telegraphing London to recommend his government rapidly consider need of suggesting to Chamoun he make some act of renunciation of a second term.

At end of my talk with Chamoun today as separately reported,3 I said that despite seeming improvement in security situation and possibility not only of diplomatic help in Cairo and Security Council by Lebanon’s good friends, I could not blink [at] the fact that a basic cause of present civil war in Lebanon was conviction on part of many citizens, mostly Moslem, that Camille Chamoun was determined to have second six years in office.

President said he had never made any such statement. I agreed, but pointed out that since most of country thought he did want to succeed himself in office and half the country seemed so opposed to that concept as to resort to armed violence, this was a situation which became a political fact irrespective of technical written record.

I then said, speaking purely personally and as a friend, that I did not see how the imminent risk of inter-communal fighting could be avoided if there were not some certain sign from Chamoun that he did not intend to amend constitution and get himself reelected. I was adamantly opposed to Chamoun stepping down before end of his term and was opposed to government quitting under fire. I also was opposed to any indication that Chamoun would be forced to renounce his constitutional rights or Parliament its constitutional authority under threat of civil war. This being said, however, I personally could not see how present threat to Lebanon as a state could long be prevented from becoming absolute unless there was some act of self-abnegation on the part of Camille Chamoun.

President made no comment except to thank me very much.

I made this purely personal approach with view to preparing way for possible tripartite or UK–US action if our governments so desire and on a basis which can be easily disavowed if that is the policy decision in Washington, London and (possibly) Paris.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London.

2 In telegram 3937 from Beirut, May 16, McClintock reported on a conversation that morning with Chehab. Chehab was contemptuous of politicians on both sides, but indicated that he would stay with Chamoun “until the end”, which McClintock noted meant the end of the presidential term. Chehab insisted, however, that there could be no thought of Chamoun’s reelection. (Ibid.)

3 Reference is to telegram 3948 from Beirut, May 16, which summarized a discussion of the security of the frontier with Israel. (Washington National Record Center, RG 84, Beirut Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, May 1, 1958–May 20, 1958; included in the microfiche supplement)

38. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 38. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut May 16, 1958—5 p.m.

3958. Verbatim text.

Subsequent to Embtel 3949,2 French and British Ambassadors met with me and have agreed upon following joint appreciation: “Three Ambassadors have met to appraise situation in light of subsequent events following joint submission outlined Embtel 3674.3

Although it seems clear from General Chehab’s estimate of military situation today Army is in a fair measure of control and degree of foreign infiltration is less than Lebanese Government might wish us to believe, it nevertheless seems certain that unless a political solution is promptly found Lebanon may explode in communal Christian versus Moslem fighting within short time.

Three Ambassadors feel that western governments have gone further than need to have been expected by Chamoun in his support. Governments have given him assurances which fully justify in concrete terms previous guarantees for Lebanon’s integrity and independence. The three governments have likewise gone all out in their attempt to provide Chamoun himself with political support.

Notwithstanding the extent to which Chamoun has been backed by UK, France and US, we now find ourselves facing a situation of civil war in Lebanon.

We are agreed any political solution terminating present internecine hostilities must not involve capitulation of government to opposition. Any settlement should not involve accepting a change in either head of state or government in submission to insurrection. On former point, namely retention of head of state throughout his constitutional term, we are pleased to find General Chehab is in firm agreement.

Although commander in chief armed forces has requested three Ambassadors to intervene with President requesting him firmly to indicate his renunciation of intent to amend constitution and succeed himself, we feel it would suffice if three Ambassadors suggested to Chamoun that at this critical juncture where not his own personal fortune but safety of state itself is at stake, he should indicate by a change in government that, in fact, he does not intend to seek reelection.

It would be our thought that Chamoun, without at once jettisoning Sami Solh as Prime Minister, could summon a cabinet of national union made up of Sami Solh as Prime Minister, with Chehab as Minister of National Defense and a few other members, some taken from moderate opposition, the nature of this cabinet itself thus publicly proclaiming to all Lebanese the impossibility of Chamoun seeking to change constitution. Such a cabinet would take office on one platform: that question of presidential succession should be decided by the cabinet and parliament in accordance with existing constitutional procedure. Presence of Chehab, to whom Chamoun would have given private guarantees with our knowledge, would be necessary assurance of President’s decision not to run again.

Such a formula would prevent opposition from crowing victory and would go far in our judgment to save face all round. It would then be essential for Chamoun and other moderate politicians to decide upon a candidate for the presidency who would carry out pro-western policies of Chamoun’s present regime.”4

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London and Paris.

2 Supra.

3 Document 18.

4 In telegram 4353 to Beirut, May 16, the Department of State responded to the recommendations in telegram 3958:“We are consulting with UK re recommendation in joint appreciation. We have not reached definite conclusions but our preliminary reaction is that while it might be desirable for three Ambassadors, speaking in name of their governments, separately to inform Chamoun of their concern over possibility development confessional strife and their belief that prompt political solution is necessary to avoid this, it would not be desirable for Ambassadors to make specific recommendations with regard to nature of such solution. We believe such approach would serve to put Chamoun on notice that three governments believe he should now take steps to remove principal cause of strife, without creating explicit impression US, UK and France withdrawing the support they assured him of. View fact that troubles in Lebanon not yet over we believe it desirable Chamoun’s own morale and confidence be kept high as possible.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1658)

39. Memorandum for the Record of the State–Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, May 16, 1958, 11:30 a.m. 39. Memorandum for the Record of the State–Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, May 16, 1958, 11:30 a.m.1

Washington, May 16, 1958, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Executive Session of the JCS with the State Department on 16 May 1958

1. Jordan and Iraq are willing to move in support of Lebanon if the U.S. and U.K. actively intervene militarily.

2. Mr. Murphy says the same dangers inherent in U.S. and U.K. moving into Lebanon, from the point of view of the Arab world that existed when the British and French moved into Egypt. This could be made even worse if the French insisted on military support of the operation. Two difficult points are how would we get out of Lebanon and would the Russians support the UAR by technicians slipped in to both Syria and Egypt.

3. There is very clear indication that the UAR is arming partisans in Lebanon especially since the defeat of the Druzes by the Lebanese Army.

4. Embassy Cairo was told by SecState to tell Nasser that the U.S. is aware that the UAR is openly intervening in Lebanon and that the U.S. will support Lebanon militarily if necessary. The U.S. assumes that this support by the Syrians and Egyptians is not sponsored by the Government and must be stopped by Nasser. Gen. Twining suggested to Mr. Murphy that Nasser should consider that in case the U.S. has to move into Lebanon that in view of the difficulty of defining the borders of the UAR, especially those of Syria and hostilities might inadvertently extend outside of Lebanon.

5. Turkey has not been cut in in any way because they are very leaky in security matters but the State Department feels that they will help the Lebanese if fighting begins. Israel has told Lebanon not to worry about their contiguous borders.

6. Mr. Murphy was told that the two Marine BLT’s were currently afloat off Naples proceeding eastward. The first element could reach the Levant Coast by noon local time on the 21st of May. The second slower Marine element could be in position 24 to 48 hours later.

7. Mr. Murphy was informed of CINCSPECOMME’s talks with the U.K. and given an outline on the availability of British forces in Cyprus and Malta and the possible closing times, which could be about 24 hours after the word to go from Cyprus. General Picher informed Mr. Murphy that it was the U.K. governmental position that for both political and military reasons the United States units should be first on the beach, and that therefore the controlling time was when the U.S. could reach the area.

8. General Twining explained to Mr. Murphy that we would need base rights and overflight rights in several countries and was in agreement with the State Department position that this was no time to ask any country for them. In case of U.S. action we would ignore the requirements. Mr. Murphy agreed with this position but cautioned against the use of Wheelus field in Libya, because of the uncertainty of the reaction of the Libyans. He further stated that Israeli bases would probably not be available, but was informed that overflight rights only were needed.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files. Top Secret. Prepared by Major General O. S. Picher, USAF, Director of The Joint Staff. A memorandum summarizing the first part of this discussion, prepared by Richard B. Finn of the Department of State, indicates that the discussion opened with a general briefing on developments in Lebanon by the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs, Stuart W. Rockwell. (Department of State, State–JCS Meetings: Lot 61 D 417; included in the microfiche supplement)

40. Editorial Note 40. Editorial Note

On May 16, Admiral James L. Holloway, Jr., in his capacity as Commander in Chief, U.S. Specified Command, Middle East (CINCSPECOMME) sent to the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Burke, for the consideration of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, an outline plan for combined U.S.–U.K. military operations in Lebanon in support of the Lebanese Government. Holloway noted that the combined outline plan, prepared at his headquarters in London, had been coordinated with and received general approval from the British Joint Chiefs of Staff. The plan, which took 17 pages to develop, was given the code named “Blue Bat.”

The mission outlined in the plan was to support or, if necessary, to reestablish the authority of the Lebanese Government. A subsidiary mission was to protect U.S. and British nationals and national interests. The concept of operations was limited to Lebanon and the use of the minimum force necessary to reestablish effective control over the country by the Lebanese Government. The initial objective of the operation was the Beirut area. The primary assumption of the plan was that U.S. Marines would secure a beachhead in the Beirut area as a base of operations, and British land forces would be deployed in the area thereafter. An alternative assumption was that the initial base of operations would be secured by a U.S. airborne battle group flown in from European bases, and again supported by a subsequent commitment of British land forces. (Telegram 162001Z from CINCSPECOMME to CNO, May 16; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files)

A May 16 message from the Chairman of the British Chiefs of Staff to General Twining, as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, reiterated British support for the plan, but expressed concern that U.S. amphibious forces in the Mediterranean could not respond to a call for help from President Chamoun in less than 48 hours, given the position of the Sixth Fleet. The British Government felt that it was important to bring U.S. airborne forces in Europe to a state of readiness to enable them to react quickly to an emergency situation in Lebanon. (The text of this message was passed to the Joint Chiefs of Staff by the British Embassy in Washington; ibid.) The Joint Chiefs of Staff approved the Blue Bat outline plan of operations in telegram 941935 from JCS to CINCSPECOMME, May 17. (Ibid.)

41. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, May 18, 1958, 4:30 p.m. 41. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, May 18, 1958, 4:30 p.m.1

Washington, May 18, 1958, 4:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary of State

Sir Harold Caccia, British Ambassador

Lord Hood, British Minister

Foy D. Kohler, EUR

Philip Farley, S/AE

The British Ambassador called at the Secretary’s request at his home at 4:30 p.m.

Following discussion of the Khrushchev letter,2 the British Ambassador said he would like to bring up three points regarding the Lebanese situation.

The first was the question of what the Ambassadors would be authorized to say to President Chamoun about his own personal position. In this connection he showed the Secretary a telegram from the British Ambassador at Baghdad, Sir Michael Wright, calling attention particularly to the opinion of King Feisal and Crown Prince Abdul-ilah that in the absence of an adequate alternative it was better to support Chamoun for reelection even at the price of a civil war now, rather than having a civil war later under a weaker regime. Sir Harold indicated that British Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd agreed with this opinion. The Secretary said this view was persuasive; obviously if someone dependable were available to succeed Chamoun, this would be the ideal solution. Lord Hood commented that we had tried to find another adequate candidate but had failed. The only possibility had seemed to be General Chehab, but he had proved unwilling.3 The Secretary pointed out, however, that Chehab opposed Chamoun. The British Ambassador said that it was important, in any case, that we should at least not give Chamoun the impression that we were going

to pull the rug out from under him. If we could not decide now affirmatively to support him, at least he would not indicate that we had made a contrary decision.

The British Ambassador’s second point related to what should be told Chamoun with respect to the military support the United States and the U.K. are prepared to give him. The Ambassador said that he had understood that we would give Chamoun rather full information on the first installment of help and say that more would follow as required. During this phase of the conversation, the Secretary consulted Assistant Secretary Rountree by phone and indicated the latter felt that if we were too encouraging in what we said, Chamoun would be tempted to call our help forward rather than persevere in solving his own problem; that it might be better to leave him on the “anxious seat.”4 The Ambassador replied that the Foreign Office feels that it is important that the Ambassadors received discretionary authority to inform Chamoun at least the order of magnitude of the first installment—say 5000, in a proportion of 3 to 2—available within 24 hours. The Secretary indicated general agreement, but emphasized that the Ambassadors should not volunteer this information but produce it only if asked by Chamoun. The Ambassador agreed.

After further discussion by phone with Assistant Secretary Rountree, the Secretary told the Ambassador that the Department would send guidance tomorrow to our Ambassador at Beirut along the lines of this discussion, indicating that in absence of a satisfactory alternative we would not refuse our support to Chamoun. He observed in this connection, however, that the French felt Chamoun should get out.

The Secretary went on to say that the Department would also get out instructions to our Ambassador tomorrow, after checking with the military, authorizing him to inform Chamoun of the order of magnitude of our support.

The Ambassador then raised his third point as to whether we should encourage Lebanon to go to the U.N. In reply to the Secretary’s question, Sir Harold said the telegram from Baghdad indicated that Iraq would support the Lebanese in the Security Council. The Secretary commented that Ambassador Lodge was rather nervous about the adequacy of the evidence which would be available. The Secretary said he had replied that while the evidence was important the votes were more important. In this connection, he commented that while some evidence is not usable we know that the conspiracy exists on the part of the United Arab Republic to overthrow the government of Lebanon; consequently, if we have the votes we can, in good conscience,

support proceedings in the Security Council. However, the Secretary said that he had no present opinion as to the timing of possible action in the Security Council.

The Secretary asked whether the Ambassadors in Beirut were working closely together. Sir Harold replied that they were indeed working closely together—but the trouble is they are all reaching the wrong conclusion. However, the answer to the question was that they were working together “admirably”. The Secretary commented that if they disagreed at least one of them would be right, and the interview concluded on this note.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1858. Top Secret. Drafted by Kohler.

2 Apparent reference to the May 9 letter from Khrushchev to Eisenhower concerning Soviet proposals for aerial inspection zones. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 1386–1387.

3 McClintock confirmed Chehab’s reluctance in telegram 4012 from Beirut, May 18. In a conversation with McClintock that morning, Chehab had expressed satisfaction with the success of the army in restoring order in Beirut, but added that he had no intention of agreeing to build on that success by accepting the prime ministership or the presidency. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1858)

4 This conversation was transcribed in the Secretary’s office. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

42. Memorandum From Colonel D. J. Decker of the Joint Middle East Planning Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Chief of Naval Operations (Burke) 42. Memorandum From Colonel D. J. Decker of the Joint Middle East Planning Committee of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Chief of Naval Operations (Burke)1

Washington, May 19, 1958.

SUBJECT

Meeting at Department of State, 1115 Monday, 19 May 1958 2

1. Meeting in Mr. Dulles’ office, 1115–1200. a. Mr. Rountree discussed the apparent differences with the British as to the circumstances under which U.S.–U.K. would intervene. From the outset the British have shown an enthusiastic attitude. They would like to see Chamoun informed that the U.S.–U.K. were prepared to move militarily. They have urged that the U.S. and U.K. Ambassadors be provided with the combined plan. They have proceeded with Iraq and Jordan to the limit of their agreement with U.S. The British are urging that Lebanon take its case against Syria to the United Nations.

b. Mr. Rountree can see circumstances where the U.S. should intervene militarily to save the country but the current internal political situation is a powerful factor for staying out if possible. If we intervene the U.S. will be in the position of supporting the continuance of Chamoun in office against the present terms of the constitution and possibly without Army support. The U.S. has good contact and good relations with Chehab who is pro-West. Chehab would not like to see the U.S. intervene in the present circumstances as it would be most damaging to our future influence in the Middle East. Chehab would probably support a pro-West Christian for President.

c. The problem is to “get off the hook” of one’s individual government. Mr. Rountree suggested the possibility of urging Chamoun to announce publicly that he puts the welfare of Lebanon above himself and looking to find a solution to the internal political problem. Mr. Dulles suggested the possibility of a postponement of the September elections or an extension of Chamoun’s term for one year.

d. The theme of the discussion was to find a solution for the internal political problem in Lebanon and to cool down the British on their enthusiasm for immediate action. The military now have the situation in the country fairly well under control but it still has great explosive potentialities.

e. The urgent problem of providing a statement for the press at a 1200 conference was discussed.3 Mr. Dulles felt that we should treat the Russian statement opposing interference by the West in Lebanon4 as a repetition of the numerous similar statements which are made in similar situations every time U.S. protection of its nationals seems required.

2. At 1200 the Secretary of State left and the meeting assembled in Mr. Herter’s office. Mr. Herter had two points in connection with the Lebanese situation upon which a position must be taken. a. United Nations. The U.K. is pressing the U.S. to urge the Lebanese to take the case before the U.N. immediately. Mr. Malik, the Lebanese representative at the U.N., has developed a series of points upon which the case could rest but the Department of State has not seen the documentation of these points. The U.S. feels that the case must be airtight before it is presented and it is doubtful if such a case can be made. There are disadvantages for Lebanon to take a case against another Arab nation before a non-Arab body such as the U.N. At the present time the disadvantages of taking the case to the U.N. seem to outweigh the advantages and it is presently planned that the U.S. will sit tight and take a neutral attitude. State considers it undesirable for the case to be presented. State will endeavor to discourage the British and Lebanese from pushing it.

b. The second and more difficult point was what to do in Lebanon. It was quickly concluded that we should deemphasize the prospect of military action and play down military preparations. The problem of continued readiness over a long period was mentioned.

c. State telegram to Beirut No. 4353 of 16 May5 was discussed. This message states that consultations are being held with UK and that preliminary reaction is that Ambassadors might inform Chamoun of their concern over the possible development of confessional strife and that a prompt political solution is necessary to avoid this. Such an approach would serve to put Chamoun on notice that he should take steps to remove the principal cause of strife without withdrawing the support which has been assured him.

d. The necessity of maintaining Chamoun’s morale and confidence in face of further trouble was mentioned. “We can not deal Chamoun out.” If there is to be civil war we had better have Chamoun in. The Army would probably support Chamoun in such circumstances at least until elections.

e. It was agreed that efforts must be made to induce Chamoun to find a solution to the internal political problem without reducing his strength in the present situation. Alternate means were mentioned but it appeared that he should not be given a selection of solutions but should be left to come up with a solution on his own. Mr. Rountree was to draft appropriate instructions.

f. Mr. Allen Dulles stated that the Syrians are anxious to move and have a tremendous amount of hardware collected and ready to move into Lebanon. However, he doubted that they would openly deploy military forces into Lebanon. They will continue their infiltration tactics into the country. It was felt that they have pretty free access from Syria into Northern Lebanon.

g. Mr. Irwin pointed out that overflight and staging rights would be required in case of military action. The messages that have been prepared to send to our Ambassadors on execution were mentioned. Admiral Burke stated that Wheelus was not essential. “You send the messages, we send the planes.”

3. The meeting broke up at 1240 after which Admiral Burke, Mr. Allen Dulles and Mr. Irwin met for a few minutes alone.

4. The meeting in Mr. Dulles’ office was opened with a short summary of the U.S.–U.K. military situation by the Joint Chiefs of Staff representatives.

5. A list of those attending is attached.6

Very respectfully,

D.J. Decker7

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 62 A 1698, 092 Lebanon TS Sensitive. Top Secret.

2 A list attached to the source text indicates that the participants in the meeting included Dulles, Herter, Rountree, Rockwell, Andrew H. Berding, R. Gordon Arneson, John W. Hanes, and Joseph J. Sisco from the Department of State; Allen Dulles and Norman Paul from the CIA; and Burke, Irwin, and Decker from the Department of Defense.

3 Dulles’ comments concerning Lebanon and the applicability of the Eisenhower Doctrine at his May 20 press conference are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 938–939.

4 On May 17, the TASS news agency in Moscow issued a statement warning that U.S. or other Western intervention in Lebanon could have serious consequences for Lebanon and for peace in Middle East.

5 See footnote 4, Document 38.

6 See footnote 2 above.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

43. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 43. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, May 19, 1958—8:57 p.m.

4400. Deptel 4353.2 We have agreed with British, and British tell us French concur, re following approach to Chamoun which should be made separately by three Ambassadors in Beirut. You authorized concert with your UK and French colleagues, unless you perceive serious objection to proposed course. Approach to be as follows:

We are very concerned danger of civil war in Lebanon, with its possibilities of interference from UAR, and have been considering, as President no doubt also has, whether anything can be done to avert it. We would be grateful for President’s views. One possibility would be to broaden government and we wonder whether President has considered this.

If, but only if, President replies that broader government would not be possible without his renouncing a second term, you should say that this of course matter for him to judge but it seems to us really important thing is to insure continuous existence of a genuinely independent Lebanon and the continuation of the pro-Western policies which he has done so much to establish and which we believe are in the true interests of Lebanon.

We would appreciate your views on following:

Does Chamoun at moment believe that political solution is urgent?

If so do you believe he would be prepared to give clear indication he has decided against seeking second term?3 We note (Embtel 3826)4 Chamoun’s thorough concurrence in appraisal of three Ambassadors that what is at stake is national existence of Lebanon and not of any particular person. We continue believe however (Deptel 4353) that it would be undesirable for three Ambassadors now to press Chamoun to indicate publicly his willingness to step down. We would have a different reaction if there were good reason to believe that Chamoun has already reached conclusion this is proper course of action and needs some sign that we agree.5

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1958. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree, Herter, and Dulles. Repeated to London and Paris.

2 See footnote 4, Document 38.

3 McClintock responded to these questions, on the basis of previous conversations with Chamoun, in telegram 4071 from Beirut, May 20. He noted that Chamoun did believe that a political solution was urgent, but preferably on his own terms. McClintock also felt that Chamoun was reluctant to give a clear indication that he had decided against seeking a second term, but might be persuaded to do so secretly. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2058)

4 Document 27.

5 In telegram 4077 from Beirut, May 20, McClintock reported that he saw Chamoun that night and conveyed to him the second paragraph of telegram 4400 to Beirut. Chamoun responded that he had discussed the situation with General Chehab, and Chehab had reversed his previous position and indicated that he was willing to accept the post of Prime Minister in a revised Chamoun government. Chamoun said that he deplored asking Sami Solh to stand down but would accept the sacrifice if the good of the country demanded it. On the question of renunciation of a second term, Chamoun said that if the opposition would accept the “Chehab formula,” he would abandon any thought of reelection. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2058; included in the microfiche supplement)

44. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State 44. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1

Cairo, May 20, 1958—7 p.m.

3029. In over 2-hour talk with Nasser this afternoon I conveyed contents of Department telegrams 31172 re Lebanon and 31343 re basic relationship, opening with latter.

Nasser listened to discussion re our basic intent with close attention and expressed appreciation but mention of Lebanon raised storm clouds since he had apparently just been given ticker report of statements attributed to Deputy Under Secretary Murphy and Director Allen Dulles (whom he seemed have confused with Director George Allen) in closed hearings of Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Nasser coupled these statements with others emanating from London and Paris as part of deliberate build-up in preparation for some unknown conspiratorial action. He also strenuously objected to portions of statements (unavailable to Embassy) which by implication or otherwise gave the impression that UAR was working with Moscow. Nasser said that in circumstances he would have no recourse but to react to these charges. I tried calm him down and he seemed respond somewhat but difficult know whether effect will last.

Nasser then launched into tendentious discussion of Lebanese situation per se. Unpredictable problems were always arising in ME and he said UAR unavoidably becomes involved. He had heard of Lebanese situation by radio in Moscow and had called Marshal Amer to warn against becoming involved until his return, at which time he felt that publicity was one-sided and unfair and had ordered that opposition side of story should be told, including statements of opposition leaders; while at same time denying alleged UAR involvement. How was it possible to maintain that opposition was wrong when it included all former Prime Ministers except Solh, two of three Speakers of Parliament, former President Khoury, the Maronite Patriarch, and leaders such as Jumblatt and Frangie? Was there one of these opposition leaders who was not pro-Western? How could they all be wrong and just Chamoun and Malik right? Chamoun seemed intent on following course which would eventually lead to war between Moslems and Christians than which nothing could be worse. Why did we insist on backing Chamoun in these circumstances while putting him (Nasser) in position of being tied up with Russians? Greatest mistake of USG in Middle East was that it failed understand that basic fact of life in area is that people are tired of being exploited. Why did we continue support leaders who were out of sympathy with people? Nasser admitted that he sometimes acted in rather high-handed manner, such as when he ruled that some people could stand for election and others

could not. This was obviously not democratic but people approved because they were convinced he was acting in their interest; that was reason they supported him.

As far as alleged UAR involvement in Lebanon was concerned, he denied such the case and would be interested in any evidence that could be produced to contrary. It was of course possible that there might have been some crossing of border by persons, especially Druses, and some arms smuggling but UAR had nothing to do with it. There is always tendency assume Egypt has greater capability than it has. Did I know how much its total budget for intelligence was? Only 1 million pounds. What could you do with that?

Except for a few interruptions to endeavor keep record somewhere near straight, I allowed this somewhat incoherent tempest run its course and then observed that, regardless of incidental details, I had impression that both of us interested in seeing Lebanese situation settled quietly and prevented from developing more seriously. Was that correct? Yes, said Nasser, but there is now stalemate and difficult see what could be done. I said repeating difficulties would get us nowhere. How about thinking instead in terms of settlement?

Much to my surprise, Nasser’s whole attitude changed at this point. He said had heard of plan to replace Solh [with?] Chehab as Prime Minister which seemed reasonable to him and he did not know why it had been refused. In fact he did not understand exactly what opposition really wanted but in his opinion settlement might be worked out somewhat along following lines: (1) An amnesty for opposition. This is of first importance because greatest preoccupation of opposition leaders in that they will be court-martialed and, as long as there is prospect that Chamoun will take his revenge, they obviously will not talk of settlement.

(2) General Shehab to become Prime Minister since he is respected and enjoys confidence of both Christians and Moslems.

(3) Chamoun to disclaim intention to seek change constitution but to serve out term. Nasser said understood opposition insisting on his resigning now but this would obviously present complications and he saw no reason for insisting on this provided there was fully guaranteed amnesty.

(4) Possibly have new elections.

Nasser said that he sincerely wished be helpful and would be glad to attempt use his influence with opposition leaders in effort obtain their assent to any formula on which we might agree. He also suggested Ambassador McClintock might be able get in discreet touch with Saeb Salaam. Nasser said he would be glad see me at any time in event I had any ideas. He added unfortunate several days had already been lost while attention devoted entirely to refutation of charges of UAR complicity.

Although I am still somewhat mystified by this sudden change of Nasser from the tendentious and querulous to thoughtful and reasonable (a change which was also reflected in his entire manner), I feel that we may have struck lead which can be profitably pursued. If so, it would surely be preferable do so rather than have case go to Security Council where it could hardly fail to degenerate into a propaganda battle between Lebanon backed by West and UAR backed by USSR. Perhaps this is Nasser’s worry since recurrent theme of conversation was his aversion to being linked with Soviets in connection Lebanon.

Suggest Embassy Beirut may wish comment.

Hare

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2058. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Beirut, Damascus, and London.

2 Document 36. In the absence of Nasser and General Amer, Hare had conveyed the message outlined in telegram 3117 to Hussein Aziz, Permanent Under Secretary of the Foreign Office, on May 16. Given the importance of the message, Aziz indicated that he would arrange for Hare to meet with Nasser when he returned to Cairo. (Telegram 2985 from Cairo, May 16; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1658)

3 In telegram 3134 to Cairo, May 17, Ambassador Hare was instructed to respond to Nasser’s concern over U.S. intent toward the UAR. Hare was to tell Nasser that the United States was not interfering in the internal affairs of the UAR, nor seeking to remove Nasser or his government. Hare also was to emphasize that an important factor in the U.S. approach to the UAR was the UAR attitute toward the security and national integrity of other states in the area, “particularly those maintaining close relations with US.” The full text of this telegram is printed in vol. XIII, pp. 450–451.

45. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the British Ambassador (Caccia), Washington, May 21, 1958 45. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the British Ambassador (Caccia), Washington, May 21, 19581

Washington, May 21, 1958

At the British Embassy I spoke to the British Ambassador, saying I wanted to do so in the most private and confidential way. I thought I should warn him that some of our people, not just in Washington but elsewhere, had the impression that we were being crowded by our British colleagues into intervention in Lebanon. I emphasized that we regarded this as merely the lesser of two evils, each of which was very great, and that our ardent hope was to avoid any military intervention. Caccia rather indignantly denied that that was their purpose. He said that all they wanted to do was to plan against the contingency, and that our people seemed indisposed even to sit down with them for planning purposes.

I urged that the British people involved with us in this operation should be quite clear as to the basic policy involved.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2158. Top Secret. Drafted by Dulles. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at dinner.

46. Editorial Note 46. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on May 22 on significant world developments affecting United States security, Allen Dulles offered the following assessment of developments in Lebanon: “As for the situation in Lebanon, said Mr. Allen Dulles, the reports regarding internal developments were not very encouraging. While Beirut was fairly quiet, Tripoli was still a standoff between the Army and the rebels. The Syrian border was still wide open, and there was a steady infiltration of Syrians. Thus the situation had shown no improvement in the last few days. The forces available to the government in Lebanon were quite small. There were 9000 men in the Army and 2500 in the gendarmérie.

“The Chief of Staff, General Chehab, has been busy dabbling in politics, and last night tried and failed to form a Cabinet. With respect to the struggle over a possible second term for President Chamoun, Mr. Dulles pointed out that Chamoun was by all odds the strongest man among a pretty weak lot of Lebanese politicians. Mr. Dulles felt that Chamoun would probably agree not to be a candidate again for the Presidency if he could be assured of a strongly pro-Western substitute for himself. Otherwise, Chamoun felt that Lebanon would be lost to Nasser.

“There was a good deal of political maneuvering going on in characteristic Near Eastern fashion. Some reports indicated that Nasser was favoring the candidacy of Chehab for the Presidency of Lebanon. If true, this should give us some significant second thoughts as to the desirability of Chehab as an alternate to Chamoun for the Presidency of Lebanon.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 366th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason May 23; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

47. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 47. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 22, 1958—2 p.m.

4123. General Chehab sent me cryptic message last night through ARMA indicating his attempts form government had failed. Middleton informs me Chehab was deeply enraged by attempt to offer Prime

Ministership to Qawugji (Embtel 4097)2 and disgusted by increasing stiffness of opposition who are now howling for Chamoun’s head immediately. Chehab also portrayed as irked at Chamoun’s press statement yesterday.

Situation seems to be rapidly disintegrating. I feel possible means of relieving tension and of at last removing albatross of Chamoun’s reelection from everyone’s neck would be for Chamoun forthwith to announce that he does not intend to amend the constitution or seek to succeed himself. He could then call for Cabinet of National Unity under Sami Solh to carry on and Chehab could issue order of the day insisting that Chamoun remain until September 23.

Middleton agrees with this course but has explicit orders from Selwyn Lloyd to continue support for Chamoun unless some reliable alternative can be found. It looks as if there is a divergence of view between British Government and possibly French and ourselves on all-out support of Chamoun to bitter end.

Middleton and I concur conditions for introduction of UK–US forces in Lebanon are distinctly not propitious. There are no foreign forces engaged which can be easily identified and our troops would find themselves fighting Lebanese once they landed here.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2258. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London and Paris.

2 In telegram 4097 from Beirut, May 21, McClintock reported on what he described as a short-lived attempt by President Chamoun to offer the position of Prime Minister to “a fly-specked soldier of fortune named Fawzi Qawugji.” (Ibid., 783A.00/5–2158)

48. Editorial Note 48. Editorial Note

On May 22, Karim Azkoul, Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations, addressed a letter to the President of the Security Council in which he asked, upon instructions from his government, for an urgent meeting of the Council to consider a complaint by Lebanon concerning intervention by the United Arab Republic in the internal affairs of Lebanon. (U.N. Doc. S/4007, May 23, 1958) Telegram 4138 from Beirut, May 22, reported that the Lebanese Government had voted to submit the complaint to the United Nations but that Foreign Minister Malik expressed the hope that the Security Council would not take up the matter for a few days. A similar complaint had been submitted to the Arab League, and he wanted the League to have an opportunity to consider the problem before it came up in the United Nations. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2258) On May 23, the Department of State sent instructions to the U.S. Mission at the United Nations concerning the Lebanese complaint. The instructions, which were approved by Dulles, defined U.S. objectives as providing and developing support for the Lebanese case in the Council, and demonstrating through such support U.S. determination to ensure the integrity and independence of Lebanon. References to the United Arab Republic, however, were to be made in terms of regret over actions rather than “bitter direct attacks.” The U.S. Delegation was to follow the Lebanese lead in the timing and development of the case in the Security Council, but was instructed to encourage the Lebanese to present “as airtight case as possible.” (Ibid., 330/5–2358)

49. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 49. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, May 23, 1958—8:14 p.m.

4482. We share your deep concern over dangerous effects of continuing political stalemate and specifically re likelihood that initiative may pass to opposition and that when this occurs Chamoun may seek to play what he may consider his trump card of foreign military intervention.2 We understand from British that you and Middleton were to see Chamoun today and believe that you may already have taken opportunity to recall to him one of conditions stipulated in connection with our statement re sending US forces, i.e., that crisis transcends issue of presidential election or future of any particular person and that Chamoun will not push his candidacy should this appear seriously to divide support which should be counted upon to preserve integrity and Western orientation of Lebanon. We also said we considered that Western forces should not be lightly requested or other than under most compelling necessity to meet a situation where integrity of Lebanon is genuinely threatened and where its own forces do not suffice for protection. We believe you should make clear to President we have of course assumed in above circumstances Lebanese security forces would be exerting maximum effort to defend independence of Lebanon. He should be under no misapprehension that US forces can be counted upon to intervene in circumstances where Lebanese forces are unwilling to fight.

We think you should in manner which you believe will be least likely adversely affect Chamoun’s attitude, yet which will leave him in no doubt our concern, make clear to him that he does not have blank check re sending of Western forces. He should be disabused of any confidence he may have that he can refrain from taking decisive action to dissolve continuing political problem because he can count upon foreign forces to back him against domestic opposition.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2358. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and in substance by Dulles. Repeated to London and Paris.

2 In telegram 4151 from Beirut, May 23, McClintock reported on a conversation with Chehab which reinforced McClintock’s conclusion that a dangerous stalemate existed in the wake of the failure to establish a consensus government around Chehab as Prime Minister. Given the stalemate, McClintock felt the “only course” was for him to work with the British Ambassador to help promote a prompt solution. The danger he saw was that “as Chamoun’s position crystalizes, particularly under impact of Security Council debate, he may seek to cash in on blank checks we, British and French have issued.” (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

50. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 50. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 24, 1958—5 p.m.

4181. Deptel 44822 arrived after three Ambassadors saw Chamoun at Palace 10 p.m. yesterday. We felt in view of increased gravity of situation we could not delay expressing to President our concern along line identical with those sent out Department’s 4482. Chamoun took this tripartite reception harshly. He commenced by saying three Ambassadors seemed more unquiet than himself and made a pointed reference to character of guerrilla warfare as exemplified in Algeria and Cyprus. At several points in a very lengthy interview he asked if we were trying to “turn the knife in the wound”. Re his stand on re-election he stated flatly this was completely out of the picture but when asked why he could not indicate that fact more openly to Lebanese, he said “if I did so my Christian supporters would cease their resistance”. This statement we interpreted as the final

rationalization of a hard-pressed, stubborn and desperate man who will not admit to himself that one of the root causes of his difficulty has been his refusal to clarify issue of re-election.

When Ambassadors deplored fact leaders of rebellion in Lebanon continue to go scot-free and even hold international press conferences, Chamoun said “something” must be done; but it was very clear “something” could not be done without more wholehearted concurrence of army and its leader General Chehab.

President said he had confronted General that evening with a demand for a detailed plan of campaign to put an end to insurrection. He is to meet at 9 a.m. today with Chehab to examine this plan of action.3 Although President repeatedly said that under constitution he was Commander in Chief, it was clear real authority armed forces rests with General.

President gave no indication of any readiness to find political formula or to change government. He interpreted resignation of two Shiite Ministers as due to personal cowardice rather than from pressure from Moslem community. This explanation we took with grain of salt.

We expect to see Chamoun again this morning after his climactic interview with General Chehab. After that I imagine I shall have to resume my almost daily pilgrimage to Junieh to find out where General stands. On balance, although last night’s interview was unpleasant for all concerned it did achieve purpose Department 4482.4

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2458. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London and Paris.

2 Supra.

3 The three Ambassadors found Chamoun in a more relaxed mood following his meeting with Chehab the next morning. Chamoun apologized for the atmosphere of the previous night’s meeting and indicated that Chehab seemed resolved to pursue a campaign against the insurgents aggressively. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2458)

4 In telegram 4225 from Beirut, May 26, McClintock reported that he had met with Chamoun on the previous night and made certain that there was no misapprehension in his mind as to circumstances under which U.S. forces might be deployed in Lebanon in case of extreme necessity. Chamoun replied that with the improved military situation he thought the possibility of calling on outside intervention was remote. (Ibid., 783A.00/5–2658; included in the microfiche supplement)

51. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt 51. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

Washington, May 27, 1958—4:07 p.m.

3223. Now that Lebanese Government has publicly pledged that it will not be party to any attempt to amend constitution2 we believe that central issue in Lebanese crisis, possibility of second term for Chamoun, has been removed and that every effort should be made to facilitate restoration of quiet and order. We think that this might be propitious moment for you to have another conversation with Nasser concerning Lebanese situation, with particular reference to Nasser’s expressed desire to use his influence with opposition leaders in helpful manner (Embtel 3029).3 In order however to minimize to greatest extent possible impression which we would consider highly undesirable, that US negotiating with Nasser a solution of Lebanese crisis, we believe that you should state your initiative is on purely personal basis and not under instruction.

We suggest that you recall to Nasser fact that he said he sincerely wished to be helpful re Lebanon and would be glad attempt use his influence with opposition leaders, and also expressed view that Chamoun should serve his full term. You could say that now GOL has publicly pledged itself not to seek amendment of constitution, central issue in crisis would appear to be out of way and it would be very helpful if Lebanese opposition were to react in constructive manner by taking steps to lessen tensions prevailing in Lebanon. Specifically Nasser might wish use his influence to dissuade opposition from continuing to demand resignation of Chamoun before his term expires. According to Lebanese Constitution presidential elections can be held as early as July 23, and you hope Nasser agrees that political developments in Lebanon should be permitted to transpire according to normal constitutional processes.

You might add that if insurrection in Lebanon continues now that central internal political issue had been removed and especially if insurrection is encouraged and supported from outside it will in your judgment be increasingly difficult for anyone to sustain view that Lebanese crisis is purely internal matter. Would seem likely that more and more observers would come to conclusion that what was being

aimed at was not solution of a domestic problem but the undermining and destruction of Lebanese independence and sovereignty. As Nasser knows US is pledged to assist Lebanon to defend its integrity, and we remain determined to do so.

You should make clear that you have not come to bargain with Nasser but merely to take him up on his statement that he would be glad to see you at any time you had any ideas about Lebanon. You come in the belief that a propitious moment had arrived for constructive action in the interests of restoration of tranquility and order in Lebanon and of strengthening stability of the Middle East. You hope that Nasser will agree and that he will wish to take immediate steps to persuade Lebanese opposition to match step taken by Government.

Nasser probably will refer to his previous argument that amnesty for opposition is prerequisite to settlement. This we could not advocate and you should not even on a personal basis encourage Nasser in this regard. You might say however if this subject comes up, that opposition should have much less concern about possible revenge by Chamoun in view of unlikelihood of second term for President.

With regard to possibility of Chehab as Prime Minister you might, if Nasser raises this, express view on basis information you have received that General appears not interested but that if he were would probably be possible work something out.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2058. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and approved by Rountree. Repeated to Beirut, London, and Paris.

2 On May 27, Lebanese Prime Minister Solh read a statement over Radio Beirut in which he pledged that the Chamoun government would not introduce an amendment to the constitution to permit reelection of the president to a second consecutive term of office. (Telegram 4272 from Beirut, May 27; ibid., 783A.00/5–2758)

3 Document 44.

52. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 52. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 28, 1958—8 p.m.

4302. At meeting of three Ambassadors today following information was exchanged and course of action decided upon: (1) Pro-Chamoun Druze religious Sheikh Rashida el-Hamadeh told British Ambassador Druzes were seeking to compose their differences and hoped compromise could be found based on Jumblat taking a long trip abroad. They were impressed by Sami Solh statement yesterday (Embtel 4272)2 and told British Ambassador at least their faction of Druzes would agree to support any candidate for presidency acceptable to western powers.

(2) In opposition camp there is indication of some readiness to consider compromise political formula.3 Philip Takla, moderate opposition deputy, went to both Middleton and Roche indicating he had been authorized by Saeb Salaam, Abdullah Yafi and Rashid Karame to convey proposals back and forth. His initial suggestion that Chamoun appoint a new government headed by Rashid Karame or Hussein Oueini would have, however, been tantamount to capitulation by having invited heads of rebellion to form cabinet. British and French Ambassadors indicated such a proposal would be out of question. Nevertheless, French Ambassador has secret word from Abdullah Yafi intimating a Chehab government might be acceptable provided General did not ask for open support from opposition.

(3) Third force of wealthy anti-Chamoun Christians is now thoroughly frightened and is importuning all three Ambassadors to intervene with General Chehab to take over government as Prime Minister.

(4) Present Prime Minister, Sami Solh, has indicated to British Ambassador [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] he is ready to stand down only in favor of Chehab as his replacement.

(5) Former Minister of Public Works Lahoud told me this morning that yesterday he, former Finance Minister Mikkawi, and Emile Bustani received assurances from Patriarch latter would agree to Chamoun remaining in office for full length of his constitutional term. This is a change in Meouchi’s attitude as hitherto he has been lending comfort to opposition demand for Chamoun’s instant resignation. Three deputies requested patriarch to use his influence on opposition in favor of Chamoun remaining until September 23.

(6) Chehab continues to view military situation with deep pessimism. Attaches of our three Embassies concur he is now stretched to maximum and could probably do little more than checkmate partisan bands without having sufficient strength to prevent massive infiltration from across Syrian border if that should be decided upon by UAR.

(7) Most secretly former gendarmérie chief, General Nofal, sent word to me this morning he had been approached by circles “near Chamoun” to inquire if he would be willing to take command of armed forces in replacement of Chehab. Nofal said he was a close friend of Chehab and would be reluctant to do so but would only consider offer if he were certain US Ambassador primarily and British Ambassador secondarily gave their support, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] I am checking out with Chamoun this offer to Nofal.

(8) Three Ambassadors decided: (A) Middleton will see Chamoun tomorrow to attempt a bit of shock therapy, saying that now Sami Solh has removed issue of Chamoun’s re-election from political arena we suppose need for allied forces to be on alert no longer exists. We think this will bring Chamoun more out into open as to his real intentions. All three Ambassadors fear from evidence cited my recent telegram Chamoun may still have in mind calling on foreign intervention not only to keep him in office to end of term but to perpetuate him for second term.

(B) French Ambassador will call on Patriarch tomorrow morning to reaffirm our desire Chamoun fill out his constitutional period as President and to say we hope Patriarch will use his influence on opposition to agree.

(C) French Ambassador will likewise make contact with Abdullah Yafi along similar lines and indicate hope opposition will find ways and means promptly to end civil strife.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2858. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to USUN, London, and Paris.

2 See footnote 2, supra.

3 In telegram 4297 from Beirut, May 28, the Embassy had reported, however, that initially the opposition had reacted intransigently to the statement by Solh. Saeb Salaam, speaking for the opposition national front, declared that no solution short of the immediate resignation of Chamoun would be acceptable. The opposition press reflected the same attitude. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–2858)

53. Editorial Note 53. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on May 29 on significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Allen Dulles provided an assessment of developments in Lebanon which promoted a brief discussion: “Mr. Dulles observed that information coming in last night and this morning on the situation in Lebanon, was somewhat more favorable in tone, but the situation essentially seesawed back and forth, and must be regarded as very delicate indeed. The rebels controlled a large part of the countryside, and some of the towns and cities, as for example, the Moslem quarter of Beirut. There were continuing reports of the infiltration of Syrian irregulars across the long and uncontrolled Syrian-Lebanese border.

“Eighteen U.S. light tanks had arrived in Lebanon yesterday by sea and would be promptly turned over to the Army. A government announcement to the effect that it had no intention of amending the constitution in order to permit President Chamoun to have another term of office, had had a disappointingly slight impact upon the rebel forces, who were anxious to get rid of Chamoun at once. Accordingly, the outlook over the longer term was very bleak. The Syrian ’volunteers’, with Nasser’s backing and plenty of weapons, can continue to send in as many people as they want. The virtual civil war in Lebanon provides these people with admirable cover.

“Chief of Staff Chehab’s attitude was hard to analyze. He had started out vigorously to clean up the situation, but recently had appeared to be sitting on his hands. The time may therefore well be near at hand when President Chamoun and his Prime Minister will feel it necessary to call for U.S. and U.K. intervention with military forces. To make matters worse, in parts of the country the situation has degenerated into a struggle between the Christian and the Moslem elements of the population, a development which the Central Government had desperately tried to prevent. Accordingly, the United States must prepare to receive a possible request for the intervention of our armed forces, perhaps within a week if the situation continues to deteriorate.

“Mr. George Allen warned that if the United States and Britain were actually to intervene, such a course of action would inevitably be regarded an intervention on behalf of the Christian element in Lebanon’s population. The Lebanese had for many years tended too much to place reliance on the protection of outside powers—the Turks, the French, the British, and, lately, ourselves. It would be very much better if somehow the Lebanese could win through with our political and military backing, but without the actual intervention with U.S. troops. If they did succeed this time, they would not in future continue to look to Paris or London or Washington for their own protection.

“Mr. Herter, the Acting Secretary of State, pointed out that Lebanon’s case against the United Arab Republic was presumably to be considered by the Arab League on Saturday. There had accordingly been a delay in considering Lebanon’s complaint against the UAR in the United Nations Security Council. Moreover, the U.S. Government has insisted to the Government of Lebanon that we could not contemplate intervention in the hostilities until the UN had considered Lebanon’s complaint and until we received a request for intervention, which should come not only from President Chamoun but from the Government of Lebanon as a whole. We wanted a sympathetic Lebanese Army if our own forces were to enter the country.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 367th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason on May 29; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

54. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 54. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, May 30, 1958—11 p.m.

4361. Verbatim text. Ambassadorial SITREP.

(1) Throughout morning Ambassadors were generally surrounded by self-appointed emissaries advocating Chehab Cabinet as a solution of present state of civil war in Lebanon. These included various messages through intermediaries from opposition leaders; increasingly shrill protestations from third force (e.g., Pharaon, et al) and Maronite Archbishop of Tripoli, a former staunch advocate of Chamoun’s reelection, who now feels Chehab Cabinet is only means of ending conflict. Bishop told me this morning he had told both Chamoun and Patriarch yesterday question of Chamoun’s renewal was completely dead and in this received Chamoun’s concurrence.

(2) French Ambassador yesterday evening saw Patriarch and said three Ambassadors had received assurances from Chamoun on question of re-election. Patriarch concurred Chamoun should last out his term and indicated willingness use his influence with opposition to get them to agree to a cease-fire and lifting of general strike if a Chehab Cabinet could be formed.

(3) Roche then saw Chehab last night at Junieh. General was noncommittal as to his own candidature. He revealed his continuing profound suspicion of Chamoun and need for bona fides latter would not try to succeed himself and came up with counterproposal it would be far better to set up a “neutral” government in which all sectors of Lebanese opinion might have confidence. However, names he mentioned were so neutral as to be neuter. Chehab also had intricate formula for convocation by Patriarch of a Moslem-Christian groupment to triple-rivet guarantees against Chamoun’s re-election; a letter signed in blank by President for dissolution of government to be used “in case of necessity”; and an approach via US Embassy Cairo to Nasser. French Ambassador indicated strong doubt that he and his colleagues could envisage such a complicated arrangement as meeting urgent necessities of moment.

(4) Three Ambassadors met before lunch and agreed it was of essence to find out whether or not Chehab would accept Prime Ministership. It was agreed I should see General as soon as possible. Immediately before departure for Junieh for my appointment at 3:30 this afternoon [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Malik had learned from Turkish Ambassador he had found Chehab in complete funk this morning and General had estimated he could not militarily continue longer than two days. At Cabinet meeting according to Malik (later confirmed [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] by Chamoun) government discussed whether or not Chehab should be asked to resign. I later checked both with General and President and was told by Chehab he had made no such estimate to Turkish Ambassador. Chehab said he had confined his observation to saying that within next four to six days he would see more clearly how military situation in Tripoli could develop. My own estimate is that Turkish Ambassador misconstrued whatever Chehab told him. What is certain is Chamoun’s assertion to me this afternoon that Malik got into flap and advised Cabinet Chehab was running out on them and that they had better seek another Commander-in-Chief. Chamoun said he is summoning both Chehab and Turkish Ambassador this afternoon to form his own conclusions on this particular episode. (Prime Minister later told [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] General would be summoned before Cabinet.) This would be of minor importance were it not possible that it may trigger off decision by Chamoun to remove Chehab as Commander-in-Chief. Whether Army would remain steadfast following departure of its General is a major question mark.

(5) Chehab confirmed report brought me by ARMA this morning that govt has asked General to prepare military plans for opening a major thoroughfare through Beirut Moslem quarter of Basta. Middle-ton tells me this is a suggestion originating with Mikkawi who impressed Chamoun and Solh with his urging that a group of tanks and fifty men could open Basta completely. Chehab said Sami Bey had taken one and a half hours of his time discussing this subject but he, Chaheb, would not attempt to open Basta because carnage involved would not be worth results obtained. This question is cited not for its intrinsic importance but because again it may be used by govt as pretext for removal of Chehab.

(6) I told Chehab this afternoon three Ambassadors had received evidence of a general desire that he take Prime Ministership provided this would bring end to civil strife. However, as had French Ambassador last night, I found General still of a divided mind. He said main fear was that if he took Prime Ministership he would be sabotaged by “that bloc” around President. By this he apparently meant principally Phalange Party since this was only name he mentioned. However, it was clear General is still rankled by sabotage work on him last week in the Fawzi–Qawugji affair. General said he still felt solution of a “neutral” govt would be best and that he had not made up his mind on acceptance of Prime Ministership.

(7) I returned directly from Junieh to see Chamoun and told him of efforts Ambassadors had made at his suggestion in endeavoring to find a political solution. I said there were now so many intermediaries running to and fro that we had to deal with principals directly. However, all three Ambassadors felt time was rapidly running short for them to be of much further utility if on one hand General did not wish to take office and if on other President had not clearly resolved to offer it to him. Chamoun said his readiness to appoint Chehab as Prime Minister would be conditioned by his certainty Chehab govt would bring a prompt end to hostilities. Otherwise he would stand steadfast with Sami Solh.

(8) Foregoing was drafted before Ambassadors received text of Patriarch’s press conference this morning (Embtel 4357).2 At our evening meeting I found French Ambassador livid with what he calls a super-double cross from Patriarch. All three Ambassadors are also not happy over milk-toast communiqué issued by Malik after his departure in which he “roars like a dove” at UAR. All three of us share view that following Patriarch’s demand for Chamoun’s resignation and his refusal to accept Chehab formula, plus continuing indecisiveness of General, plus Chamoun’s resolution not to accept Chehab unless this can bring a definitive solution, there is little more we can do. We plan to take a short long week-end.

(9) Test will come in my own opinion on issue of whether Chamoun dares to dismiss Chehab and, if so, if General who said once more to me this afternoon, “I have the rifles,” might then be tempted to take power. Fortunately, in Lebanon, everyone (except, of course, the three Ambassadors) is decisively indecisive.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–3058. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to USUN, London, and Paris.

2 In telegram 4357 from Beirut, May 30, the Embassy reported on a statement that morning by Maronite Patriarch Boulos Boutros Meouchi. Meouchi told a group of foreign correspondents that President Chamoun “should take a vacation abroad” in order to bring an end to the present crisis. (Ibid.)

55. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State 55. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1

Cairo, May 31, 1958—2 p.m.

3151. Re Deptel 3223.2 In talk with Haikal yesterday following that with Bustani3 reported Embtel 3940,4 former said he was one who had urged Bustani come and arranged for his being given visa at airport when visa refused by UAR Ambassador Beirut, who personal enemy of Bustani. Conversation then led to general discussion of Lebanese situation which brought out little of interest except for fact that Nasser’s formula for solution is “peace without victory or defeat” and assertion that UAR has mass of information available re atrocities in eviction of Syrians (some actually being sent over border nude) but was not releasing for fear making bad situation worse and possibly raising question of action against Lebanese here. Conversation did however afford occasion to refer to Nasser’s reported disposition to renew discussion of situation with me and to Haikal’s undertaking to arrange, which seemed fit in well with Department’s instructions in reftel to seek approach Nasser on personal basis. As consequence I saw Nasser for well over hour last night and approached as instructed.

Nasser was definitely in one of his difficult moods and, whatever may have been real cause or causes, it was obvious this due at least in part to what he professed regard as return of USG and American people to position of hostility to him which belied our recent professions of desire for more normal relations. In particular, he mentioned: (1) Secretary Dulles’ press conference of May 215 in which Nasser felt Secretary had pre-judged case by uncritically accepting Lebanese assertions. Nasser seemed attach particular importance to fact that Secretary’s statement was made on day following our conversation of May 20 (Embtel 3029).6 I suggested Nasser read transcript in entirety and felt he would get quite different impression.

(2) Reported statement by Ambassador Lodge to UAR representative Loutzir in New York that USG had taken definite position in support GOL.

(3) Recrudescence of anti-UAR material in American press centered around “now is time to get Nasser” theme. Nasser dwelt on this at considerable length and indicated his conclusion reached by personnel of American press.

(4) Appearance of new item in Beirut newspaper An-Nas of May 29 (text by despatch Number 1174)7 correctly reporting essential points he had proposed me in our last conversation of settling Lebanese crisis. Nasser did not however belabor this point.

(5) Fact we had not seen fit respond to suggestions he had made for settlement, which he could only regard as turn-down. He had made proposals in good faith and was disappointed that we had not seen fit respond.

In reply my renewed effort to emphasize desirability of Nasser’s exerting constructive influence, especially with view to convincing opposition of desirability of reciprocating decision not seek change constitution by dropping demand that Chamoun resign, Nasser said he still felt Chamoun should stay on until another president elected but he did not feel justified in urging this point of view on opposition unless there was clear guarantee that Chamoun would not victimize opposition in revenge during few months remaining of his term. What position would he (Nasser) be in if he urged opposition be reconciliatory and then have government institute persecution campaign program against them, especially since situation developing into confessional conflict with Christians, led by Chamoun, out to get Moslems?

He had not, said Nasser, played part in starting present troubles, had not maintained contact with opposition and could not assume responsibility of intervening to bring conflict to end unless he could do so by agreement with USG and on understanding latter would underwrite any guarantee given to safeguard opposition. I said [I] had been talking personally and not in position suggest deal. Situation is that we have been doing everything we can to reduce dangerous potential in Lebanon, and on assumption Nasser similarly disposed, I ventured renew hope he would do what he could. However, he remained obdurate, maintaining that risk of unilateral action was too great; would only intervene in association with US.

Meanwhile, added Nasser, he convinced that he is faced by conspiracy of governing heads of Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon against UAR and has no option but to fight back by exposing plot. That is what radio now doing under his orders. It is matter of defense and UAR will be equally prepared defend itself if present difficulty assumes international proportions. Such development would not be of its seeking but UAR entertains no fears if it should materialize.

Only light note in conversation was when Nasser observed still recovering from fatigue of trip to USSR. Daily routine of formal lunch and dinner, each inevitably lasting three hours including speeches, had really gotten him down.

Hare

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–3158. Top Secret. Repeated to Beirut, London, and Paris.

2 Document 51.

3 Emile Boustany, a Deputy in the Lebanese Parliament, with extensive commercial contacts in Egypt. [1 line of text not declassified] (Despatch 544 from Beirut, March 26; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/3–2658)

4 In telegram 3140 from Cairo, May 30, Hare reported on a conversation with Boustany concerning Boustany’s meeting with Nasser on May 29. Boustany said that Nasser was concerned that developments in Lebanon were not only damaging to Lebanon but also inimical to UAR interests, particularly in light of his hope for improved relations with the United States. Boustany suggested that Nasser discuss the situation with Hare, and Nasser replied that it was difficult for him to take the initiative, but he would respond to a request from Hare for a discussion of Lebanon. (Ibid., 783A.00/5–3058)

5 Reference is to Dulles’ remarks on May 20; see footnote 3, Document 42.

6 Document 44.

7 Not found.

56. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 56. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 2, 1958—7 p.m.

4404. There is at present a precarious lull in Lebanon. Military situation seems to have reached tacit cease fire with army preventing partisans on either side from engaging in communal strife. However G–2 reports indicated steady buildup of anti-government irregulars, although no central organized command has been identified. Although conditions in Tripoli are tense life in Beirut is returning to normal with exception that Moslem Basta district is still closed and very much in hands of partisan bands, estimated at 2, 100 against Chamoun, probably balanced by a similar number defending the President.

On POL front a similar stalemate continues. Following declaration of Prime Minister Solh (Embtel 4272)2 giving assurances his government will not amend constitution to pave way for Chamoun’s reelection, main domestic bone of contention has been removed. Clamor of extreme opposition leaders for Chamoun immediate resignation now has less appeal; and Maronite Patriarch’s extraordinary press conference (Embtel 4357)3 has boomeranged against Chamoun remaining in office until end of constitutional term but with his government pledged to no renewal for a second term.

With Lebanon case under consideration by Arab League and held pending in Security Council of UN it seems useful to review causes of conflict which are numerous and not as simple as various partisans would have us believe. In particular, with Malik now in New York, USUN and Department will receive his very partial account of how

Lebanon difficulties began. In all objectivity it cannot be said this is a black and white issue of UAR aggression against Lebanon. Although evidence of UAR infiltration and subversion is conclusive, in my judgment root cause of Lebanon’s present difficulties was of domestic origin. It was Chamoun’s determination to stand for a second six year term in office which provided pretext for this near rebellion, although Nasser and his henchmen were quick to take advantage of issue thus presented.

Department and USUN (as well as Embassies London Ankara Baghdad and Amman) may wish to keep in mind following points: (1) With or without question of Chamoun’s desire to succeed himself a trend had set in in Lebanon toward a more neutral stance in foreign affairs prior to recent crises. However, present state of quasi civil war has not been fought on a foreign policy issue and it would be a great over-simplification to ascribe Lebanon’s present division only in terms of “pro or con Eisenhower Doctrine.”

Attitudes toward Chamoun’s foreign policy may have contributed to basic likes or dislikes for Chamoun as a leader but were not in my opinion controlling factors. This judgment describes domestic opinion; it does not bear on Nasser’s enmity for Chamoun and his supporters which probably is based on foreign policy issues.

(2) Although not of noble motivation one of main springs of present insurrection was simple desire of the “have-nots" to become “haves.” Basic personal hatred for Chamoun of such opposition leaders as Saeb Salaam, Abdullah Yafi and Junblat sprang not alone from ideological differences on foreign policy but more intimately from fact that in 1957 elections Chamoun brought about their defeat for Parliament. In fact alleged issue of Eisenhower Doctrine was in some measure merely coincidental with timing of last Parliamentary elections where rankle of personal political defeat coincided with Chamoun’s espousal of Eisenhower Doctrine.

(3) There has been undoubted subversion and infiltration from UAR particularly Syria, but this has been going on over past two years. There have been a number of political enemies of Chamoun living in voluntary exile in Syria; and it is fairly clear Serraj and Company have been only too willing to supply Lebanon partisans with clandestine arms, funds and other support. Evidence of actual involvement of Syrian agents and particularly of military cadres is much more difficult to substantiate. Certainly Lebanon Army has not thus far secured any impressive number of prisoners whose presence on Lebanon soil in flagrante delicto would have provided major proof for GOL allegations against UAR. At maximum it would seem UAR was ready and willing to assist opposition against Chamoun once they had called general strike and had unleashed a not very well coordinated action of armed insurrection, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] suggested UAR deliberately brought about Metni assassination which triggered off general strike and led to armed conflict. Most palpable evidence of UAR intervention against GOL lies in incontrovertible proof of press and radio incitement to civil war both from Damascus and Cairo. It would be interesting if UN might some day be able to establish a norm of international conduct (if not international law) violation of which would indicate wrongful interference by one state against another through use of radio and press.

(4) Another cause of Lebanon difficulty is ancient division of country between Moslems and Christians. By tradition and practice Christians have had edge over Moslems both in assignment of political plums (President always being a Maronite Catholic) but also because Christians have had a much higher standard of living and have tended to monopolize more lucrative offices and professions. Although in pious theory Christians are a slender majority (51 percent) we suspect that in fact more prolific Moslems are today more numerous than Christians. Fact Christians have not dared take a census since 1936 corroborated this conclusion. There is in any event a built-in Moslem inferiority complex and feeling of ranking inequity which has been exacerbated by recent dreams of Arab glory awakened by Nasser.

(5) There is as yet no clear cut manifestation of desire by Lebanon Moslems to join UAR. Although in moments of exaltation probably all the Sunni Moslems could be worked up to demand such a union. They are but 25 percent of population. We very much doubt if Shiites would wish to submerge their confessional identity in larger Sunni community: and have similar reservations re Druzes. Christian population almost unanimously would strongly resist incorporation in UAR. Thus recent fighting in Lebanon has not been caused by question of incorporation of Lebanon into UAR.

In consequence, because this is a highly fragmented problem which defies simple black and white diagnosis, I believe we should adopt an attitude of caution in our UN presention unless for other motives, we desire to use Lebanon issue as a means for carrying out a conscious policy of enmity toward Nasser and UAR with a view to splitting off Syria and trying a “neo-Suez” against Nasser. As seen from here British, Turks, Iraqis, and Jordanians would like nothing better than to seize upon present difficulties in Lebanon as an excuse for fighting Nasser. To do so they will have to stretch the case to an extreme in order to fit the procrustean bed of their policy if the issue is to be fought on facts as they are in Lebanon. All that can be said is that for largely domestic political causes this little county has come to a crisis in which issues of foreign policy were subordinated to issues of personalities even though those personalities symbolized foreign policy; and that interference from UAR was contributory but not controlling to the main dispute.

What we may hope to see internally in Lebanon is continuation of Chamoun and Solh government sufficiently strengthened to resist inevitable demand of opposition for recourse to new elections. In this I am encouraged by fact that General Chehab has twice volunteered opinion to me it would be disastrous to hold such elections following deep division resulting from present insurrection. Elections would most certainly return a Parliament far less friendly to the west and would serve internally to divide Lebanon with possibility of ultimate Moslem dominance. This would certainly turn Lebanon pro, and eventually might force her in, UAR.

On wider stage of foreign policy most recent development of Eisenhower Doctrine by the Secretary and President as indicating US readiness to assist in preservation of independence and integrity of nations of Middle East as vital to our own national interest and world peace will have contributed much, I think, to general stabilization and security in this area. This determination manifested by US will enhance our prestige and influence and may long postpone, if not avert, a future attempt by UAR against the integrity of Lebanon.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–258. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, Ankara, Amman, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, Tel Aviv, and USUN.

2 See footnote 2, Document 51.

3 See footnote 2, Document 54.

57. Editorial Note 57. Editorial Note

On June 3, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles briefed the National Security Council on significant world developments affecting U.S. security. His briefing included an assessment of developments in Lebanon which prompted a question from President Eisenhower: “There had been no great change in the situation in Lebanon, said Mr. Dulles, since he last reported to the Council. However, no change was not good news, because the absence of change plays against the Lebanese Government, which was failing to put down the revolt. General Chehab, the Chief of Staff, seemed to lack the guts to use his army against the dissident forces. There would be no doubt, either, of massive support for the rebels by the United Arab Republic. The current tactics of the rebels seem to be to cut off the northern half of Lebanon from the southern half. Thus the total picture, while it changed from time to time, was generally gloomy, and President Chamoun was still counting on US–UK intervention if other measures against the rebels failed.

“The President inquired whether President Chamoun needed more weapons. Mr. Dulles replied that the Lebanese armed forces had all the weapons they needed, but lacked the will to make use of

them.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 368th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

58. Telegram From the Embassy in Iraq to the Department of State 58. Telegram From the Embassy in Iraq to the Department of State1

Baghdad, June 4, 1958—11 a.m.

1999. Foreign Under Secretary Gailani asked Fritzlan2 call on him evening June 3 to discuss important and urgent question which turned out to be Lebanese situation.

Gailani, stating he was speaking on behalf Arab Union Government, said that reports received from Iraqi Embassy Beirut indicate position of Lebanese Government steadily deteriorating and that drastic treatment will be needed if situation is to be retrieved. There had been, he remarked, some expectation that General Chehab would be asked to head a government, and that would have helped, but now it seemed doubtful if Chamoun would do this.

Coming to the point, Gailani said AUR Government believed time had come to apply Eisenhower Doctrine to Lebanon and that Lebanon’s friends should encourage Chamoun to invoke Doctrine.

Fritzlan commented that question of applicability of Eisenhower Doctrine to Lebanon was under constant study by US and that doubtless Chamoun himself was giving it much thought, that implications of invocation of Doctrine were very far reaching and to a large extent unfavorable to Chamoun’s position and that he seemed to realize this. There was, of course, basic question of whether threat to Lebanon came from countries under control of “international Communism”. Gailani appreciated these difficulties but continued to press for application of Doctrine as only way of saving Lebanon from domination if not absorption by UAR.

In response to a question as to exact thinking of AUR Government concerning remedy to situation Gailani said US and UK should respond to an appeal from Chamoun by making available forces which would quickly quell insurgency. Gailani indicated he was going to make similar representations to British Embassy. Gailani had no faith in Arab League’s ability to help Lebanon and very much doubted UNSC would be able take any effective action.

Fritzlan asked if AUR Government had yet urged Chamoun to invoke Eisenhower Doctrine. Gailani said he believed Jamali en route to New York had done so in talk with Chamoun. Beyond this there had been no “official démarche” on subject.

I would appreciate receiving Department’s instructions as to what should be said to Gailani on question he now raised.3

Gallman

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London and Beirut.

2 A. David Fritzlan, Counselor of Embassy.

3 The Department responded in telegram 3154 to Baghdad, June 4, with an assurance for the Arab Union government that the United States was determined to take whatever steps would prove necessary to insure the independence and integrity of Lebanon. Ambassador Gallman was instructed to call on Prime Minister Nuri al-Said to convey this assurance, but, at the same time, to note that the United States would not take such measures in order to insure the maintenance or installation of any individual in the presidency, or in situations in which Lebanese security forces were willing to take firm and effective action in defense of Lebanese independence. Gallman added: “At this juncture we feel possibility situation developing to point where US armed forces would be required, and could be usefully employed, receding rather than advancing.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–458; included in the microfiche supplement)

59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt 59. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

Washington, June 5, 1958—9:39 p.m.

3302. Embtel 3188.2 We are not averse to consultation with Nasser about Lebanese situation if this will lead to his exerting constructive influence on Lebanese opposition. However we like you cannottake at face value line which Nasser and Haikal putting out re posture of UAR in this crisis. Furthermore it seems to us Nasser trying induce us to join with him in advocating to GOL an arrangement which would be regarded by GOL and Arab friends of US as attempt to facilitate achievement of desires of Lebanese opposition and as whitewashing of intervention which UAR has employed to assist this opposition. We do not wish to accept political repercussions both in NE and in other parts of world which would result from what we believe would be regarded as placing by US of seal of respectablility upon Nasser’s intervention against legally constituted Lebanese authorities. It would also be impossible for us, even if we so desired, to guarantee future conduct of Lebanese Government with regard to domestic opposition.

While we thus cannot envisage a situation where Nasser and USG would join hands in urging upon GOL a detailed solution of what is essentially a Lebanese internal problem, we are anxious to see this problem solved before implications grow any wider. We believe it now clear that Chamoun will make no effort to succeed himself. With this issue out of way and in light UAR acknowledgment of capability clear up matter in 24 hours and of their expressions of concern over implications situation further dragging on, we fail to see good reason why Nasser does not attempt exert moderating influence forthwith. We cannot take at face value his expressed concern for fate of opposition leaders. Realities of internal Lebanese politics and kid glove treatment of opposition leaders during height of insurrection belie such apprehension. In effort to facilitate exertion by Nasser of constructive influence in Lebanon, and in order continue consultation with him and to dispel idea we turning deaf ear to UAR proposals we are willing, if Nasser is agreeable, simply to convey his proposals to Chamoun for latter’s consideration. In causing this attitude to be known to Nasser you should state that we ready take this action in view our desire be helpful in present situation but that in our view problem is basically internal one which must be decided by Lebanese authorities themselves. Specifically we would be unable undertake to guarantee future conduct of GOL toward domestic opposition leaders just as we are unable to guarantee or control action of any sovereign government in world toward its own citizens. If however Chamoun proves receptive to idea of amnesty and offers one covering activities of opposition to date, and should later there be indications effort being made by GOL not to live up to terms of amnesty with respect of acts of opposition prior to date thereof, we would be prepared use our influence in Lebanon against such effort.

We will not take above action until we learn whether Nasser desires us to.3

Thoughtful questions penultimate paragraph reftel4 are as you anticipated being given constant consideration.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–458. Top Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and Dulles. Repeated to London, Beirut, Paris, and USUN.

2 In telegram 3188 from Cairo, June 4, Hare reported that, since his talk with Nasser on May 30, he had met three times with Muhammad Hussanein Haikal, editor of Al Ahram and confidant of Nasser whom Nasser used on occasion to communicate with Hare. The purpose of the meetings was to discuss Lebanon. The line taken by Haikal, Hare noted, was identical with Nasser’s position, which was that the Lebanese Government had initiated trouble by making accusations against the UAR, and the UAR was merely responding in kind. Haikal said that the only way to bring the crisis to an end was by agreement between the United States and the UAR on a “third force” plan whereby Chamoun would serve out his term while a neutral government, possibly under Chehab, would be established to assume responsibility and offer amnesty to the opposition. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Hare reported, in telegram 3228 from Cairo, June 7, that he had seen Haikal that morning, and had passed on the substance of telegram 3302 to Cairo to be conveyed to Nasser. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–758)

4 The penultimate paragraph of telegram 3188 reads as follows:“But most important of all is posture in which we foresee ourselves emerging after Security Council or other action. Do we, for example, envisage possibility of forcing issue to point where we shall be indefinitely committed to maintaining a strongly pro-Western government in Lebanon in face of what appears be general desire for more neutral orientation? Do we anticipate conducting campaign of such vigor in SC as to make it appear that we have abandoned all hope of even modest normalization of relations with UAR? Have we reflected that use of military force (except for immediate purpose of assisting in evacuation of American nationals) could well result in situation where withdrawal could be difficult and, when made, would probably result in collapse of government so supported and advent to power of really hostile opposition? Are we fully bearing in mind possible repercussions of a ’strong policy’ in Afro-Asian area and opportunity which might be afforded for Soviet exploitation?”

60. Special National Intelligence Estimate 60. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, June 5, 1958.

SNIE 36.4–58

CONSEQUENCES OF POSSIBLE US COURSES OF ACTION RESPECTING LEBANON

The Problem

To assess the situation in Lebanon, its implications in the area, and the likely consequences, in Lebanon and elsewhere, of possible US courses of action.2

The Estimate

I. The Situation in Lebanon

1. The situation in Lebanon, as in the rest of the Arab world, has been profoundly influenced by the rise of radical Arab nationalism and the expansionist objectives and subversive activities of the UAR. Underlying the present conflict in Lebanon is a condition of increasing tension between forces favoring open alignment with the West and those favoring the “positive neutralism” of the radical pan-Arab movement led by Nasser and reflected in the UAR. There is a rough correspondence between these contradictory tendencies and the Lebanese Christian and Moslem communities; the sharpening of the issue tends to break down the modus vivendi whereby those communities have hitherto combined to form the Lebanese state.

2. The present conflict was touched off by indications that Christian President Chamoun intended to amend the constitution in order to succeed himself. This has antagonized some pro-Western elements as well as the neutralist elements, and provided Nasser with an opportunity which he has exploited. The situation is complicated by personal and political rivalries within the Christian and Moslem communities as well as between them. The opposition, which includes Christians as well as Moslems, has no common objective other than forcing Chamoun from office and as yet has no common leader. Many of its most militant elements have been stimulated by the rise of radical pan-Arab nationalism to challenge the status quo in Lebanon. They have also received from UAR policy guidance, propaganda support, and weapons, supplies, and “volunteers,” which have greatly increased the difficulties facing the Lebanese government security forces in their efforts to cope with the uprising.

[Here follow paragraphs 3–6 containing general information on the situation in Lebanon.]

II. Consequences of a Collapse of a Pro-Western Government Without US Intervention

7. Most politically conscious elements in the Middle East identify Chamoun with the US. They probably believe that the US is committed to the preservation of a Western-oriented regime in Lebanon if not to the continuation of Chamoun himself in office. In these circumstances, if Chamoun’s government or a pro-Western successor government collapsed under the onslaught of anti-Western opposition elements, friends and enemies of the West alike would believe—irrespective of whether any formal request for help had in fact been made—that the US had proved itself unwilling to come to the aid of its declared ally and friend, and that it had capitulated to Nasser. The governments of Middle East countries disposed toward cooperation with the West would be strongly influenced to revise their policies.

8. The reaction to a US failure to intervene would be strongest and most harmful to the US if there had been a publicized request for US assistance prior to the collapse of a pro-Western government in Lebanon.

9. We believe that the disorders in Lebanon have already cost the US some prestige in the area, since they are widely interpreted as evidence of deep-seated and powerful opposition to a chosen instrument and client of the US. Any political compromise in Lebanon will cause some further loss of prestige, and the overthrow of Chamoun by clearly anti-Western forces would be construed as a drastic weakening of US resolve to maintain its interests in the area.

10. Moreover, collapse of a pro-Western government, with no US action, would almost certainly accelerate the activities of the UAR and its supporters in seeking to undermine anti-Nasser regimes. Popular sentiment would be more inclined to view the UAR as the wave of the future, and there would be some increase in the danger of collapse of anti-Nasser regimes.

III. Probable Consequences of US Intervention

11. Lebanese generally are probably fearful of the consequences of intervention by Western troops. Reactions would be conditioned, however, by the circumstances in which intervention took place. In a situation in which the Lebanese believe that domestic conflict was primarily the result of internal differences, most would tend to oppose intervention; many would accept intervention if they believed that the UAR sought to dominate and absorb Lebanon; but most Moslems would probably prefer domination by the UAR to Western occupation.

12. If the US were to intervene at the request of President Chamoun under present circumstances, the reaction of the Christian community would be divided and a majority of Moslems would be strongly opposed. If Chamoun were to gain a larger measure of control of the internal political situation and if the integrity of Lebanon appeared to be threatened by Lebanese extremists and the UAR, most of the Christians would probably rally behind him and accept intervention, but only a small part of the Moslems would do so. If Chamoun were to yield to a successor government committed to maintaining Lebanon’s integrity and tacitly friendly to the West and if the integrity of Lebanon under that government were in turn jeopardized by Lebanese extremists aided by the UAR, such a government could probably get most Christians and some Moslems to support it if it asked for US intervention.

13. In the complex Lebanese situation, one immediate problem confronting the intervening forces would be that US forces would probably find themselves in hostile contact not only with UAR-controlled subversive elements, but with a wide variety of local elements not presently hostile to the West but acting either in opposition to Chamoun or to foreign intervention in principle. Even if General Chehab were willing to cooperate fully, some of the Moslem elements in the army might desert. In any event, clashes with opposition forces and expanded opposition activities probably would force the US to commit large forces to deal with large areas of Lebanon. For instance, it probably would prove necessary to conduct operations in areas other than the principal coastal cities in order to cope with guerrilla or terrorist activities and to block logistical support being sent to opposition forces from Syria. This would increase the risk of clashes with UAR forces and of inadvertent violations of UAR territory.

14. US military intervention would keep any pro-Western government in office. If it took place in behalf of a pro-Western government which had succeeded Chamoun, most of the Christian population would unite behind it. In any event, US intervention would be widely regarded as a move to perpetuate Christian dominance. The government’s capability to govern the Moslem portion of the population would be drastically reduced. The local Moslem-Christian conflict would not only be intensified but would also be more closely identified with the broader issues between pan-Arab nationalism and the West.

15. Thus, it would be extremely difficult to create a stable situation not clearly dependent on US forces. In the longer run, any regime so dependent would probably be held in widespread contempt, not only by anti-Western but also by most moderate elements. It probably would not long survive the withdrawal of Western forces. Thus, the US might find itself faced with the onerous choices of a prolonged stay in Lebanon or a withdrawal while the situation was still unstabilized.

16. UAR Reaction: Nasser and the UAR leaders have assiduously exploited the Lebanese crisis to promote the cause of radical pan-Arab unity. They would treat US military intervention as a direct challenge to their long-range objectives, but would also regard it as presenting substantial opportunities for exploitation in the area. Their reaction would be sharp: a. They would be certain to step up their propaganda campaign against the US, the Baghdad Pact, and the anti-UAR governments, notably those of Jordan and Iraq. They would take vigorous action in the UN, almost certainly with Soviet support.

b. They would probably continue and possibly increase covert assistance to opposition forces in Lebanon, including support for terrorist actions against US troops and civilians. However, Nasser would try to avoid direct clashes between regular UAR forces and those of the US.

c. They would probably take sabotage action, directly or by proxy, against Western oil interests in Lebanon and possibly by closing down or sabotaging the Syrian pipelines. They might also attempt sabotage against oil operations in Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Kuwait, Bahrein, and Aden.

17. Elsewhere in the Area: The governments of Jordan and Iraq would probably welcome US intervention as a blow against Nasser and as an encouraging demonstration of US determination to support its friends in the area. However, there would be strong adverse popular reaction in these countries against the US move. This popular reaction would limit the freedom of action of the governments. In these circumstances, effective Iraqi and Jordanian cooperation in the intervention cannot be assumed. Other Arab governments, such as those of Libya and the Sudan, which are vulnerable to Nasser’s moves, would also welcome US intervention, but would be even more restrained than Iraq and Jordan from openly supporting it. The governments of Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan would almost certainly support the US move. The Saudi Arabian Government would probably seek to avoid involvement in the situation.

18. To the extent that the intervention succeeded in restoring a stable pro-Western government in Lebanon, Arab popular reaction would become colored by respect for US firmness. There might be some decline in belief in the UAR as the wave of the future and the pace and scope of UAR expansion might be reduced for a time. This would not, however, seriously weaken the long-term trends in the area toward radical pan-Arab unity. If the US were forced to maintain its forces in Lebanon for a protracted period, the popular reaction would become increasingly adverse, since the occupation would be played up and probably accepted as evidence that the US intended to re-establish Western imperialist control in the area.

19. Israel would view intervention by the US as a favorable precedent. However, realizing that its open cooperation would be unwelcome to the West and would probably serve mainly to unite the Arabs, Israel would probably avoid direct involvement in the situation as long as the conflict remained confined within Lebanon.

20. Soviet Reaction: The nature of the Soviet reaction to US intervention with military force would vary according to circumstances and the Soviet assessment of opportunities to damage the US position. If the US were to intervene in Lebanon in order to assist the government to cope with a UAR-supported uprising, the Soviet reaction would probably be confined to vigorous diplomatic and propaganda action. If, in the course of this intervention, the US became involved in military action on UAR territory, the Soviets would react more strongly, possibly increasing military assistance and providing “volunteers.” Although the latter course of action would increase the chance of a Soviet-US conflict through miscalculation, we believe it unlikely that the USSR would take action which it estimated would involve serious risk of general war.

21. Effect of UK Participation: We believe that adverse reaction to intervention would be intensified if the UK participated, but the considerations set down above would not be significantly altered.

Outlook

[2 paragraphs (21½ lines of source text) not declassified]

24. Whatever the outcome of the present crisis, we do not believe that the present political-religious balance, with its slight edge in favor of the Christians, can long be maintained in Lebanon as presently constituted. The UAR will almost certainly continue to exert formidable pressures upon Lebanon, encouraging the Moslem element to reach for greater power, to contest the Christians’ Western orientation, and to move in the direction of neutralism and pan-Arabism. Thus, the long range tendency appears likely to be in the direction of increased instability, with the possibility of fragmentation or some accommodation with the UAR.

1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Top Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet: “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.” All members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in the estimate on June 5, except for the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside of their jurisdiction.

2 We assume that if US forces were to intervene in Lebanon, they would be accompanied by UK forces. [Footnote in the source text.]

61. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 61. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 6, 1958—noon.

4472.1 had a general talk with President Chamoun last night and found him sorely perplexed at military and political situation. It was obvious President had increasing doubts as to fidelity of General Chehab. We know Chamoun has been given forced feeding of suspicion and rumor by his advisors including one story of an elaborate Chehab family plot against Chamoun which would result in an almost compete sell-out to Nasser. In this atmosphere, and given General’s own refusal vigorously to prosecute military campaigns against insurgents, it is not surprising that President is of uncertain mind on what to do about the General. For example, Chamoun complained to me Chehab had actually requested permission to take a week’s leave at his home in Junieh on ground he was “fatigued”. President likewise was much vexed at reports from Air Force General had ordered pilots not to fire on given objectives, apparently for fear they would hit partisan bands or rebel villages.

When I asked Chamoun if he intended to get a new Commander-in-Chief, President said I must keep in mind this was a very small country and firing of General was not as easy as it might be in a larger country. Chamoun therefore seems saddled with Chehab whether he wants him or not.

President said General had been charged with writing up one more of his seemingly endless series of “plans de campagne” and that he the President would make up his mind “within 48 hours” on what final decision to take re General. We have been through a month of “48 hours” and I do not expect that any determinative action will be taken at end of this next two-day period. More ominous was Chamoun’s statement that if in next few days situation did not improve, “I might have to ask the three Ambassadors to consider new means of finding help.”

Immediate military interest centers on what our ARMA considers to be an effective battle plan prepared by G–3 for reduction of the Basta. This operation should commence this morning and is militarily feasible in opinion of Colonel Stinnes. It can therefore be taken as a test, first of Chehab’s readiness to move in effectively against the main focus of insurgent infection; and second, of degree to which either by his own desire or by possible sabotage in the General Staff, a feasible operations plan may possibly miscarry.

Chamoun last night read me translation of an intercept from a voice radio outside Lebanon which he said was in obvious Egytian Arabic. It called upon rebel forces under Sabri Hamadi in the Bekaa to effect junction with Jumblatt’s Druzes with apparent intent to cut line of communications between Beirut and the Bekaa with ultimate objective of moving against Beirut. At the same time rebels in the Akkar were ordered to move apparently as a diversionary measure. Three times during this voice message, date of June 7 was indicated as zero hour. This again may furnish some evidence of outside direction of rebel forces; or it may be, if authentic, a rebel counter-measure against operation being mounted in the Basta. At all events next few days should militarily provide a crisis and enable us to draw certain conclusions both as to rebel capabilities and—of possibly greater importance—degree of loyalty of General Chehab and his staff.

On political front I asked Chamoun where he thought opposition leaders now stood. He said that while individually many of them were prepared to be reasonable and to consider a peaceful end of insurrection, when they gathered together they became more bellicose, each vying to exceed the other in shouting defiance.

I said that if this were the case, it seemed to me obvious antidote was to separate opposition leaders and keep them from meeting. I likewise indicated Nasser’s continued interest in amnesty for leaders of opposition. Chamoun said he was prepared to see that all had easy routes of escape if that would satisfy Nasser.

Foregoing account is supplemented by [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] interview2 with Chamoun following my visit.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–658. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Dated June 6. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Beirut Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, June 1, 1958–June 15, 1958; included in the microfiche supplement)

62. Editorial Note 62. Editorial Note

On June 6, Foreign Minister Charles Malik asked the U.N. Security Council to consider the complaint against the United Arab Republic which Lebanon had addressed to the Council on May 22. (See Document 48) Malik charged that arms had been supplied on a large scale by the United Arab Republic to “subversive elements” in Lebanon and added that those elements has been “trained in subversion” in the United Arab Republic and then sent back to Lebanon. He also charged that officials of the United Arab Republic had participated in the “direction” of the rebellion, and were waging a “violent” press and radio campaign against Lebanon. (U.N. Doc. S/PV.823, pages 1–22)

The Representative of the United Arab Republic, Omar Loutfi, denied Malik’s charges and termed them unsubstantiated. He maintained that the underlying cause of the present “troubles” in Lebanon was the desire of President Chamoun to be reelected “at any price.” (Ibid., pages 22–32)

James W. Barco, Deputy U.S. Representative in the Security Council, referred to the charges brought by Malik as “disturbing” and added that the evidence adduced by Malik to support his charges was impressive. He took note of Loutfi’s statement that his government had no intention to intervene in Lebanon’s domestic affairs or to threaten Lebanon’s integrity, but concluded that the situation merited the Security Council’s consideration. For text of this statement, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, page 941.

63. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State 63. Telegram From the Embassy in Egypt to the Department of State1

Cairo, June 7, 1958—10 p.m.

3241. Reference: Deptel 33022 and Embtel 3228.3 Haikal called this afternoon to say Nasser would see me at 5:30 and I have just returned from what, on surface at least, was much more satisfactory discussion than when we last met (Embtel 3151).4

After I had repeated substance Deptel as previously transmitted through Haikal, Nasser said wanted repeat two things in hope he would be believed. First was that he does not seek incorporate Lebanon in UAR because believes would be mistake. Second is that he doesn’t want have government in Lebanon subservient UAR. When there had been GOL governments in past headed by persons friendly to Egypt he had made no demands on them. All he wants is government that will not be hostile. When Osseiran came here prior Nasser’s Moscow trip and asked what he wanted, he had replied in this sense.

As regards present situation in Lebanon, it is bad and getting worse. Both sides are continuing to arm and blood calls for blood. It is imperative do something, not because he fears charges being made against UAR. He is confident these can be handled adequately. That angle is secondary. What is important is tragic deterioration in Lebanon itself.

This is why he had discussed possibility of joint approach in our two previous talks because it was only approach which he felt would work and he still felt that way.

Regarding our offer to pass on his ideas to Chamoun, he was frankly dubious since he knew Chamoun disliked him and would probably spurn any of his ideas out of hand. Furthermore, putting forth such ideas unilaterally could lay him open to charge of interfering in domestic politics. Would be much better work jointly. Why not?

I replied not in position explain why idea of joint approach had not appealed to USG other than to say that Nasser’s proposals to that effect had been fully reported and that our present proposal made against that background. Inferentially this dictated joint approach had not found favor in Washington and, by renewing proposal to that effect, we would seem to be going back to just about where we started.

Nasser thought for a while and then said he had another suggestion. Why didn’t USG make same proposal itself? Then, if GOL responsive, he would do all he could to get opposition to accept it exactly same way he would have done if approach had been joint. Furthermore, he was willing not press for elections, as mentioned in our first talk on Lebanon (Embtel 3029).5 He could see would be difficult in present highly emotional situation. He did feel, however, that Chehab only answer to question of replacement Solh and he also thought he would be logical man for presidency since he seems to be one person who is generally trusted. Nasser said knew Chehab pro-West and not pro-Egyptian and also that would not be in conformity normal pattern have Christian as Prime Minister. But these things were not important. What is essential is to look to future Lebanese security and that means now having Prime Minister whom opposition trust and later President on whom there should be general agreement in advance. If this were done and choice were Chehab, prospects would be much more promising.

Nasser seemed accept without question our reluctance to guarantee amnesty but willingness use influence to maintain amnesty if GOL accepted.

Nasser also said wished make plain that he does not have close contacts with opposition as seems be generally assumed. In fact he is not exactly sure what happening or what opposition want. As consequence, ideas which he suggested had not been discussed with opposition and could not be sure they would accept. However, he would do best through means at his disposal, including UAR Embassy Beirut.

My impression of conversation was that, despite negative character of our suggestions, Nasser was at least gratified hear that his proposals had been considered and, as consequence, seemed to be in mood to make serious effort toward solution of Lebanese crisis. What his basic thinking may be still remains difficult fathom but, for tactical or other reason, he gave definite impression this afternoon of wanting see Lebanese situation cleared up under a Christian president and I feel we would be well advised to seek means to hold him to his word, which means, of course, that reciprocating gesture by US would now be in order so as keep ball in play.

Incidentally, at end of conversation I asked Nasser frank question why, if he had no designs on Lebanon, he had for sometime past long antedating present crisis, given GOL such rough time. He said answer was simple. It was because GOL had worked actively against Egypt in other countries of area, mentioning specifically Jordan and Saudi Arabia, and because GOL had allowed Lebanon to become haven for plotters against Syria and Egypt formerly and now UAR. If this type of hostility would cease, there would be no problem.

Naturally, this was not whole story but I did not think it would be profitable to vitiate generally constructive tone of conversation by becoming involved in prolonged debate on this many-faceted question.

In conclusion, wish renew suggestion that reasonably prompt reaction on our part to foregoing could be helpful.6

Hare

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–758. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Beirut, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Document 59.

3 See footnote 3, Document 59.

4 Document 55.

5 Document 44.

6 Hare supplemented this telegram on June 8 with telegram 3244 from Cairo, in which he concluded:

“Sum and substance of foregoing would seem to be that, for reasons not entirely clear and probably rather complex, Nasser would like to liquidate his (disclaimed) commitment in Lebanon and bring crisis to end. To extent that he has become involved in Lebanon, I do not feel my heart wrung by compassion to bail him out when things may not have gone as foreseen. However, real question is security of Lebanon, not giving Nasser object lesson, however desirable that might be, and, viewed in that light, I would suggest that we give serious consideration to his proposals in reftel and indicate our reaction as soon as possible.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–858)

In telegram 4548 from Beirut, June 9, McClintock supported Hare’s suggestion that Nasser’s proposals should be given serious consideration. He felt that it would not be impossible to negotiate an agreement with the Chamoun government on the amnesty issue and on the proposal that Chehab should be installed as Prime Minister. (Ibid., 783A.00/6–958) Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement.

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt 64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

Washington, June 9, 1958—2:30 p.m.

3337. We are unwilling to advocate to GOL as coming from ourselves Nasser formula set forth Cairo’s 32442 for reasons set forth in first paragraph Deptel 3022 to Cairo3 and because formula seems to us essentially one-sided in favor of UAR. However we would feel differently were it possible to put forward more balanced formula which might provide greater benefits for GOL as well as larger likelihood of facilitating re-establishment stability in Lebanon. If for example Nasser

were to agree to enlargement of his present formula of (1) Chamoun to finish term (2) Chehab to become Prime Minister and (3) amnesty for opposition by addition of (4) opposition to undertake to seek its objectives in future by constitutional means only and (5) UAR to undertake make every effort prevent use of UAR territory and facilities for purposes of inciting or supporting insurrection and subversion in Lebanon, we might then be in position advocate this proposal to GOL as one which we believed it should accept as leading to termination current crisis.

Your comments urgently requested as to probable reactions Governments UAR and Lebanon to such proposal.4 Foregoing Noforn.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central files, 783A.00/6–858. Top Secret; Niact; Noforn; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree. Also sent to Beirut and repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

2 See footnote 6, supra.

3 Document 59.

4 Hare responded from Cairo on June 10 in telegram 3255: “Additional points suggested reference telegram are so obviously reasonable that Nasser would be hard put to refuse if he really serious in avowed desire promote peaceful and constructive solution of Lebanese crisis. If Beirut agrees, I should favor putting amended formula to him and placing him in position of showing his colors. Judging by my last talk with him I believe there is fair chance he would accept.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1058)McClintock also concurred with the proposed expanded agenda. In telegram 4577 from Beirut, June 10, he stated that he felt Chamoun would react favorably to the five-point proposal although he might be inclined to balk at offering the Prime Ministership again to Chehab. (Ibid.)

65. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, June 9, 1958, 3 p.m. 65. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, June 9, 1958, 3 p.m.1

Washington, June 9, 1958, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Situation in Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The President

The Secretary

Mr. Allen Dulles

Mr. Dillon

Mr. Reinhardt

Mr. Elbrick

Mr. Rountree

General Goodpaster

Mr. Dale

U.K. The Prime Minister

Ambassador Caccia

Sir Norman Brook

Sir Patrick Dean

Lord Hood

Mr. Willie Morris

Mr. Frederick Bishop

The Secretary pointed out that we have aid for Lebanon reasonably well in hand. Mr. Rountree confirmed this statement with regard to the present situation, but pointed out that just prior to the present hostilities Lebanon had announced the intention of asking for $170 million in aid over a period of six years. He said that we have recently offered Lebanon an attractive package composed of development loan fund help, technical assistance and aid under Public Law 480, designed to meet political as well as economic needs. He pointed out, however, that we can not progress much further with this until the present situation in Lebanon is clarified. As regards the immediate problem of help to the government in its crisis, Mr. Rountree believed that we were progressing well on the covert side where greater flexibility is required in the use of money.

The Secretary said that he does not believe Chamoun will hold on for a second term and hence will not be in power beyond September. In all probability we need now to find a vigorous successor to support who will be friendly to the West. The Prime Minister said that in his view the situation was very dangerous. There was already great strain upon the government and it might not be easy to find a successor to Chamoun who would work with us in the same way. The President commented that so many leaders in that area say they are friendly to the West but when confronted with anti-Western forces refuse to fight. However, he noted that General Chehab appeared somewhat more active in the last couple of days. Mr. Rountree added that General Chehab is using napalm bombs and is taking other forceful military measures which indicate that the government and army consider they are now playing for keeps. The Prime Minister expressed his belief that it would be very hard to keep Chamoun in power for a second term and the President agreed with him saying that if we should try, we would be asking for even more rebellion, since it was Chamoun who provided the spark in the present situation.

Mr. Rountree estimated that Chehab might be willing to succeed Chamoun and that he might be the best choice even though he has recently shown a lack of political astuteness. He pointed out that there really are very few suitable candidates from our point of view and of those who exist Chehab and the Edde brothers seem to have the strongest personalities. He noted that Chamoun himself had told our Ambassadors the question of a second term was no longer an issue.

The Prime Minister said that we will just have to keep watching the situation closely and maintain our plans in a state of readiness. The Secretary stated that while to send forces into Lebanon is the lesser of two evils even this course is still an evil. He believed that it would be difficult to get them out once they are in, since the government that invites them may very well fall with great violence once they depart.2

1 Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1022. Top Secret. Drafted by William N. Dale of EUR/BNA, cleared by Rountree and Reinhardt, and approved in the White House. British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan made an unofficial visit to the United States, June 7–11. The discussion of Middle East problems on June 9 also ranged over relations with Nasser, the situation in Iraq, and military aid to Iraq, Lebanon, and Jordan. Separate memoranda of these conversations are ibid. The memorandum on military aid to Lebanon is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

2 On June 10, Eisenhower and Macmillan discussed the Security Council aspect of the Lebanon problem and agreed that the United States and the United Kingdom should support a proposal for the dispatch of a U.N. observer group to Lebanon. (Telegram 893 to USUN, June 10; Department of State, Central Files, 330/6–1058)

II. The Decision to Introduce U.S. Forces Into Lebanon, June 10–July 17, 1958: Establishment of the U.N. Observation Group; Chamoun’s Rejection of Nasser’s Formula for Settlement; Lebanon’s Request for Military Intervention; The U.S.–U.K. Decision to Intervene; Introduction of U.S. ForcesII. The Decision to Introduce U.S. Forces Into Lebanon, June 10–July 17, 1958: Establishment of the U.N. Observation Group; Chamoun’s Rejection of Nasser’s Formula for Settlement; Lebanon’s Request for Military Intervention; The U.S.–U.K. Decision to Intervene; Introduction of U.S. Forces

66. Editorial Note

67. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, June 11, 1958—12:26 a.m.

source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1158. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted on June 10 by Rountree and cleared by Dulles. Repeated to Cairo. Dulles sent a copy of this telegram to President Eisenhower on June 11 with a covering note that indicated that he had worked out the text of the message with Macmillan. Dulles added that he felt the message reflected Eisenhower’s observations on a preliminary draft, “which was too long and somewhat ambiguous.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series) The initial draft cited by Dulles has not been found.

68. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Twining), Washington, June 11, 1958, 8:59 a.m.

Washington, June 11, 1958, 8:59 a.m.

69. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 11, 1958—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1158. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to Cairo.

70. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, June 12, 1958—4:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–758. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Dulles and cleared by Rockwell. Repeated to Beirut, London, Paris, and USUN.

71. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 13, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1358. Top Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Cairo.

72. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) and Foreign Minister Malik, Washington, June 14, 1958, Noon

Washington, June 14, 1958, Noon

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1458. Secret. Drafted by Rountree.

73. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, and the Secretary of State in Washington, June 14, 1958, 3:41 p.m.

Washington, June 14, 1958, 3:41 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Jane Morris. The call was in response to a call from the President a half hour earlier in which he indicated that he had just received a message from the White House concerning Lebanon and asked whether Dulles thought it was necessary for him to return to Washington. Dulles replied that he did not think it was necessary unless the Chamoun government made a formal request for support from U.S. troops. (Memorandum of a telephone conversation, June 14, 3:24 p.m.; ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

74. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Quarles), Washington, June 14, 1958, 4:50 p.m.

Washington, June 14, 1958, 4:50 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Jane Morris.

75. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, June 14, 1958—6:53 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Dulles.

76. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 14, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Rome, Cairo, Damascus, Paris, Baghdad, Amman, Tel Aviv, and USUN. Received at 7:04 p.m. A note on the source text indicates that Rountree was informed at 9:50 p.m.

77. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, June 14, 1958.

Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Top Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet, “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.” All members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in the estimate on June 14, except for the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside of their jurisdiction.

78. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) and Foreign Minister Malik, Washington, June 15, 1958, 8 a.m.

Washington, June 15, 1958, 8 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree on June 16.

79. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge), Washington, June 15, 1958, 9:35 a.m.

Washington, June 15, 1958, 9:35 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Top Secret. Drafted by Dulles.

80. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 15, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Top Secret; Niact. Received at 10:10 a.m.

81. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, June 15, 1958, 11:56 a.m.

Washington, June 15, 1958, 11:56 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Carolyn J. Proctor, with a notation that the conversation was “one-sided,” indicating that she heard only the Secretary’s side of the conversation.

82. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, June 15, 1958—12:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Top Secret; Niact; limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree and Dulles and approved by Dulles.

83. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, June 15, 1958, 4:30 p.m.

Washington, June 15, 1958, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree. The source text indicates that the meeting took place in the Secretary’s home.

84. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, June 15, 1958, 5:10–6:45 p.m.

Washington, June 15, 1958, 5:10–6:45 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted on June 17 by Hanes. Another memorandum of this conversation was prepared by Minnich. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 15, 1958—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London. Received at 6:24 p.m.

86. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 16, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1658. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Received at 10:19 a.m.

87. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, June 16, 1958—9:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1658. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Wilcox in draft and by Dulles. Repeated to London and USUN.

88. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 17, 1958—1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Repeated to London. Received at 8:01 p.m., June 16.

89. Telegram From the Chief of Naval Operations (Burke) to the Commander in Chief, United States Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (Holloway)

Washington, June 17, 1958—12:45 a.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 62 A 1698, 092 Lebanon TS Sensitive. Top Secret; Emergency. Drafted by Burke. Also sent to COMSIXFLT, COMDESRON 36. Repeated to Alusna Beirut, U.S.S. Rich, and U.S.S. New.

90. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, June 17, 1958—1:28 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree and cleared by Dulles in draft. The substance of paragraph 4 was cleared with Admiral Burke. Repeated to London and USUN for Lodge.

91. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 17, 1958—2 p.m.

source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and USUN.

92. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Greene)

Washington, June 17, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Secret. This memorandum records a meeting that took place in the Secretary’s office. Participants included Dulles, Herter, Rountree, Rockwell, Wilcox, Sisco, Macomber, and Greene from the Department of State; Allen Dulles and Norman Paul from CIA; and Quarles and Generals Twining and Picher from the Department of Defense.

93. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 17, 1958.

source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Top Secret; Limit Distribution; Eyes Only. Drafted on June 16 by Special Assistant Harrison M. Symmes. Sent to Dulles through Herter.

94. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1958

Washington, June 18, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1858. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell.

95. Editorial Note

96. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 19, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1858. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and USUN.

97. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, June 19, 1958—8:01 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1958. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree and Dulles and approved by Dulles. Repeated to London and USUN. Dulles discussed the proposed message with Ambassador Caccia and then called the President and explained that the cable was an attempt to clarify misconceptions on Chamoun’s part growing out of the President’s press conference. He added that it was also an effort to make Chamoun appreciate the gravity of sending Western forces into Lebanon. Eisenhower was not clear what it was he had said that could have produced misconceptions, but he approved the cable. He added that he hoped McClintock could get the message across. “Tell him,” Eisenhower said, “to read it slowly to get every word in it.” (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

98. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut June 20, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2058. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Repeated to London and USUN. Received at 10:44 a.m.

99. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of Central Intelligence (Dulles), Washington, June 20, 1958, 5:47 p.m.

Washington, June 20, 1958, 5:47 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

100. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell), Department of State, Washington, June 20, 1958

Washington, June 20, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2058. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell.

101. Telegram From the Mission at the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, June 20, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2058. Confidential. Repeated to Moscow, Cairo, and Beirut.

102. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, June 22, 1958, 5 p.m.

Washington, June 22, 1958, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2258. Top Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt, cleared by Rountree and Wilcox. The source text indicates the conversation took place in the Secretary’s residence on Sunday afternoon. The participants are listed at the end of the memorandum.

103. Letter From the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) to the Secretary of State

New York, June 23, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2358. Secret.

104. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1958

Washington, June 23, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2358. Top Secret. Drafted by Dorman.

105. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1958

Washington, June 23, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2358. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Macomber.

106. Memorandum From the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) to the Secretary of State

New York, June 26, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2658. Top Secret. Lodge sent the memorandum to the Department from USUN following his discussion with Hammarskjöld of the results of the Secretary-General’s trip to the Middle East. After meeting with Nasser and Fawzi in Cairo June 22–23, Hammarskjöld went back to Beirut on June 24 for a final discussion with Chamoun before returning to New York on June 26. For background information and public statements relating to Hammarskjöld’s trip, see Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations, Vol. 4: Dag Hammarskjöld, 1958–1960 (New York, 1974), pp. 106–120.

107. Editorial Note

108. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Department of State, Washington, June 27, 1958

Washington, June 27, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2758. Top Secret. Drafted by Rountree on June 28.

109. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 28, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2858. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

110. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, June 29, 1958—11:35 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2858. Top Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree, Deputy Assistant Secretary Frederick W. Jandrey in EUR, and Dulles. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN. When Rountree telephoned Dulles on the morning of June 28 to obtain his clearance for this telegram, Dulles instructed that the text be changed to solicit Chamoun’s opinion as to the most suitable candidate for the presidency rather than to make reference to U.S. efforts to help facilitate the election of a suitable candidate. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

111. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 30, 1958

Washington, June 30, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–3058. Top Secret. Drafted by Sisco on July 1. The conversation was summarized in telegram 5097 to Beirut, June 30. (Ibid.)

112. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 1, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–158. Top Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

113. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 2, 1958

Washington, July 2, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–258. Top Secret. Drafted on July 7 by Sisco. A summary of this conversation was sent to Beirut in telegram 31, July 2. (Ibid.)

114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 3, 1958—6:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–358. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted in NEA by H.M. Symmes. Cleared by Rockwell, Rountree, and Reinhardt, and in the JCS with General Twining. Repeated to Beirut.

115. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree), Department of State, Washington, July 3, 1958

Washington, July 3, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–358. Top Secret. Drafted by Dale.

116. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1958, 1:30 p.m.

Washington, July 7, 1958, 1:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199. Secret. Drafted by Dulles. The source text indicates that the conversation took place over lunch. Hammarskjöld was visiting Washington in connection with the release on July 3 of the first report of the U.N. Observation Group in Lebanon. The report established the problems for effective observation created by a difficult terrain, and by the fact that access to the border by U.N. observers was only established for the 18 miles of the border controlled by government forces. (UN doc. S/4040; printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 952–958) In commenting on the report, Hammarskjöld discounted allegations of massive infiltration of men and arms into Lebanon from Syria. (The New York Times, July 4, 1958)

117. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1958, 2:25 p.m.

Washington, July 7, 1958, 2:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.11–DU/7–758. Secret. Drafted by Rountree.

118. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, July 8, 1958—2:37 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–858. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and Dulles. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

119. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 10, 1958—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1058. Top Secret. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

120. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 12, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1258. Top Secret. Repeated to London, Paris, Cairo, and USUN.

121. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 14, 1958—noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, Cairo, Ankara, Baghdad, Amman, Tel Aviv, Jidda, Damascus, and USUN. Received at 8:35 a.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 9:30 a.m.

122. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 14, 1958, 8:29 a.m.

Washington, July 14, 1958, 8:29 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

123. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, Department of State, Washington, July 14, 1958, 9:30 a.m.

Washington, July 14, 1958, 9:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1458. Secret. Drafted by Greene. The meeting took place in advance of a 10:50 a.m. meeting at the White House with the President; see infra.

124. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 14, 1958, 10:50 a.m.

Washington, July 14, 1958, 10:50 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster. Another memorandum of this conversation was prepared by Rockwell. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458) Presidential Assistant Robert Cutler also prepared extensive notes on the meeting. (Ibid.) Both are included in the microfiche supplement.

125. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 14, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, Cairo, Ankara, Baghdad, Amman, Tel Aviv, Jidda, Damascus, and USUN. Received 11:23 a.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 11:30 a.m.

126. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Dulles in Washington and Secretary-General Hammarskjöld in New York, July 14, 1958, 1:26 p.m.

New York, July 14, 1958, 1:26 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Phyllis D. Bernau. A note on the source text indicates that Wilcox was with Dulles at the time of the call and Dulles reported to him Hammarskjöld’s response.

127. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 14, 1958, 2:35 p.m.

Washington, July 14, 1958, 2:35 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster on July 16. Another memorandum of this conversation was prepared by Bryce Harlow. (Ibid.,Bryce N. Harlow: Records, 1953–1961, Middle East; included in the microfiche supplement)

128. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 14, 1958

Washington, July 14, 1958

Source: Eisenhower library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster on July 15.

129. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 14, 1958

Washington, July 14, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1458. Secret. Drafted by Parker on July 16.

130. Telegram From the Chief of Naval Operations (Burke) to the Commander in Chief, United States Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (Holloway)

Washington, July 14, 1958—5:23 p.m.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 3. Top Secret; Emergency; Restricted Distribution. Drafted by Burke. Also sent to COMSIXTHFLT and repeated to CINCLANTFLT, CINCPACFLT, and USCINCEUR.

131. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between President Eisenhower in Washington and Prime Minister Macmillan in London, July 14, 1958, 5:43 p.m.

London, July 14, 1958, 5:43 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. According to a memorandum for the record prepared by Joseph Greene, Eisenhower placed the call to Macmillan. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458; included in the microfiche supplement)

132. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower

London, July 14, 1958.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series, Macmillan–President 6/58–9/30/58. Top Secret. The source text is the copy of the message as received by the British Embassy from the Foreign Office and conveyed to the White House on July 14. It included an instruction to the Embassy to convey the message as a personal message from the Prime Minister to the President, and to give a copy to the Secretary of State. On July 15, Minister Hood conveyed to the President a dated and more formal text of this message, and the accompanying message concerning Jordan, with signature lines bearing Macmillan’s name. (Ibid.)

133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations

Washington, July 14, 1958—9:22 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Elizabeth A. Brown, David Gamon, and Joseph J. Sisco in IO/UNP. Cleared with IO, L/UNA, EUR, NEA, C, and with Secretary Dulles. Repeated to London, Paris, Beirut, and Cairo.

134. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Washington, July 14, 1958

Washington, July 14, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Top Secret. Drafted by Greene on July 15. The source text indicates that the meeting took place in the evening at the Secretary’s residence. Dulles sent a copy of this memorandum of conversation, in the form of a letter, to the President on July 15. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles–Herter Series)

135. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, July 14, 1958—11:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Symmes and cleared by Rockwell, Rountree, Reinhardt, and with JCS. Also sent to London and repeated to CINCNELM, COMSIXTH FLEET, USUN, and Paris.

136. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 15, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN. Received at 6:55 a.m.

137. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 15, 1958, 8:40 a.m.

Washington, July 15, 1958, 8:40 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Another record of this conversation was prepared in the Secretary’s office. (Ibid., Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations)

138. Editorial Note

139. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Vice President (Nixon), White House, Washington, July 15, 1958, 9 a.m.

Washington, July 15, 1958, 9 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. The source text bears the heading “Staff Notes.” There is nothing to indicate who drafted the notes.

140. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 15, 1958, 11:25 a.m.

Washington, July 15, 1958, 11:25 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster.

141. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 15, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN. Received at 12:05 p.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 2 p.m.

142. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut July 15, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London. Received at 1:13 p.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 2 p.m.

143. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, July 15, 1958—2:27 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Top Secret. Drafted by Symmes and cleared with NEA, C, G, and JCS. Also sent to London. The text of this directive was also sent by the JCS to CINCSPECOMME, London, in JCS telegram 944787, July 15. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 3)

144. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 15, 1958, 5:55 p.m.

Washington, July 15, 1958, 5:55 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

145. Notes of a Telephone Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m.

Washington, July 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. The message was taken and the notes prepared by Amelia Kullman of the Secretary’s office.

146. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 16, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN. Received at 12:46 p.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force.

147. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 16, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658. Secret; Niact. Also sent to USUN. Repeated to Paris, Rome, and London. Received at 11:26 a.m. and passed on to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 12:30 p.m. Admiral Holloway reported to Admiral Burke on the incident described in this telegram in telegrams 161156Z and 162056Z from CINCSPECOMME to CNO, both July 16. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 3; included in the microfiche supplement) Ambassador McClintock subsequently published an account of the incident in United States Naval Institute Proceedings, October 1962, p. 71.

148. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Ambassador in Lebanon (McClintock) in Beirut, July 16, 1958, 3:20 p.m.

Beirut, July 16, 1958, 3:20 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau. A note on the source text indicates that Dulles reported to Eisenhower on the conversation after he completed the call to McClintock.

149. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State

Moscow, July 16, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Paris, London, Cairo, and Ankara. Received at 3:31 p.m.

150. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations

Washington, July 16, 1958—7:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320.5783A/7–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted in INR by Cumming and cleared with NEA, in substance with Wilcox in IO, and with the Secretary.

151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, July 17, 1958—1:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5411/7–1758. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Rountree and Dulles and approved by Dulles.

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 17, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1758. Top Secret. Repeated to London and Paris.

153. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 17, 1958, 2:30 p.m.

Washington, July 17, 1958, 2:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1050, Memoranda of Conversation, Lloyd’s Visit, July 17–20, 1958. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Newsom. Lloyd visited Washington July 17–20 to discuss the Middle East crisis. A number of the discussions between Dulles and Lloyd concerned the British intervention in Jordan on July 17, and are printed as Documents 186–188. The discussions also ranged over Kuwait, the Persian Gulf, the Baghdad Pact, Iraq, Turkey, French interests in the crisis, and the strategy to follow in the United Nations. Memoranda of these conversations are in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1050. A general discussion of the Middle East with Eisenhower at the White House at 3:30 p.m. on July 17 touched on most of the issues discussed by Dulles and Lloyd, but did not deal with Lebanon. The text of the memorandum of conversation among Eisenhower, Dulles, and Lloyd is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

154. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut July 17, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–1758. Secret; Niact. Received at 5 p.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. Murphy arrived in Beirut on July 17 and remained until July 30. He traveled thereafter throughout the Middle East and left Athens for Washington, via Paris and London, on August 10.

66. Editorial Note 66. Editorial Note

On June 10, Swedish Representative Gunnar V. Jarring submitted a draft resolution to the U.N. Security Council calling for the dispatch to Lebanon of an observation group “to ensure that there is no illegal infiltration of personnel or supply of arms or other material across the Lebanese borders.” (U.N. Doc. S/4022) U.S. Representative Henry Cabot Lodge supported the resolution as “a useful attempt to meet a pressing situation.” (USUN Press Release No. 2939, June 10, 1958) After extensive debate, the Security Council adopted the Swedish resolution on June 11, and authorized the Secretary-General to implement it. (U.N. Doc. S/4023)

Secretary of State Dulles subsequently discussed the resolution with Foreign Minister Charles Malik. Malik explained that his country would have preferred a stronger resolution condemning the United Arab Republic for interference in Lebanese affairs, but recognized that any resolution stronger than that proposed by Sweden would have been vetoed by the Soviet Union. (Memorandum of conversation, June 13; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1358; included in the microfiche supplement) Ambassador McClintock reported from Beirut that there was a general feeling of relief in the Lebanese Government over the U.N. resolution. President Chamoun was particularly elated. McClintock noted that the British and French Ambassadors concurred with him in the assessment that, with adequate forces, the U.N. observer team should be able to prevent further infiltration of partisans and arms from Syria. (Telegram 4653 from Beirut, June 12; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1258; included in the microfiche supplement)

On June 16, Secretary-General Hammarskjöld reported to the Security Council that an observation team consisting of Lasso Galo Plaza of Ecuador, Rajeshwar Dayal of India, and Major-General Odd

Bull of Norway had been established. By June 26, the team was supported by 94 military officers from 11 member nations, assigned to act in the capacity of observers. (U.N. Doc. S/4029)

67. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 67. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, June 11, 1958—12:26 a.m.

4710. Verbatim text.

FYI. Nasser formula has been subject consideration highest levels US and UK Governments. We are not willing to become accomplice with Nasser in any moves not desired by GOL, but if GOL wished we would follow up this opening. Following instructions are in this context. You should inform your UK colleague in strictest confidence of proposed approach to Chamoun. UK officials have undertaken to treat matter on Eyes Only basis. End FYI.

You should inform Chamoun orally that Nasser has indicated he might be willing to use his influence to try to end dissidence within Lebanon provided it was understood a) Chamoun would finish his term b) Chehab to become Prime Minister c) amnesty for opposition, who Nasser believes would otherwise be unwilling to come to terms.

We are conveying this information as matter loyalty to Lebanon and not because we endorse proposal which is for Lebanon to decide. Neither can we assume any responsibility for Nasser’s good faith.

In deciding what to do Chamoun should know that US and UK Governments adhere scrupulously to prior commitments. As Chamoun knows we have foreseen grave difficulties surrounding the introduction of foreign forces in Lebanon, and continue to hope that Lebanese independence can be effectively preserved without this measure of last resort.

You should emphasize to Chamoun that discussions with Nasser have been such that advantage cannot be taken of his possible willingness to seek solution by making this known publicly. We are convinced that any such public disclosure would in fact be extremely counterproductive for reasons that a) it would result in repudiation by Nasser, b) Nasser would increase attacks on GOL, c) it would be betrayal of Nasser’s confidence as far as we are concerned, and d) it would create impression US not firmly supporting GOL which would redound to grave disadvantage to both GOL and US. We therefore wish to discuss this matter with Chamoun on completely confidential and personal basis.

Dulles

1 source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1158. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted on June 10 by Rountree and cleared by Dulles. Repeated to Cairo. Dulles sent a copy of this telegram to President Eisenhower on June 11 with a covering note that indicated that he had worked out the text of the message with Macmillan. Dulles added that he felt the message reflected Eisenhower’s observations on a preliminary draft, “which was too long and somewhat ambiguous.” (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series) The initial draft cited by Dulles has not been found.

68. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Twining), Washington, June 11, 1958, 8:59 a.m. 68. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Twining), Washington, June 11, 1958, 8:59 a.m.1

Washington, June 11, 1958, 8:59 a.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO GENERAL TWINING

The Sec said the Pres, the PM and he had quite a talk at the WH re Lebanon. The Sec thought T should know it is tensing up quite considerably there and we sent a message to Chamoun on behalf of the Pres and PM which reaffirms assurances given.2 T wondered about extra measures—they are on a 48-hour basis. The Pres, said the Sec, said to raise with T whether it should be a 24-hour basis. T will look into it this a.m. It looks as though the Soviets will veto the res in the SC,3 said the Sec, and that may bring things to a head. We may follow up by calling in the GA.

1 Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 Supra.

3 See Document 66.

69. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 69. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 11, 1958—8 p.m.

4629. I saw Chamoun at 6 p.m. today and made representation authorized Deptel 4710.2 After reading verbatim text very carefully President said it would be a most dangerous principle for Lebanon to admit that Nasser should set out terms for settlement of its internal difficulties. He said, “My successor may not have as strong nerves as I—and who knows what future demands Nasser may make of him?”

President then described his complete distrust of Nasser saying that on numerous occasions Egyptian had made fair weather statements of respect for Lebanon’s integrity and independence but each time his deeds had belied his words.

I pointed out Department’s approach was in terms of third paragraph reference telegram and we had not indicated to Nasser we had even intended discuss his three points with Chamoun. In consequence I would at once inform my government that in Chamoun’s estimate Nasser’s suggested approach was not acceptable.

Re fourth paragraph reftel Chamoun in great earnestness said he wanted me to know Lebanon would not seek recourse to friendly intervention unless in “a case of extremity.” So far as he could judge military situation Lebanon had not yet reached this point. However, Chamoun was disturbed at loss of Chouf to Jumblat’s partisans and said he had appointment with Chehab later this evening to discuss military plans for averting interdiction by rebels of transit to Bekaa via Beirut–Damascus highway. Chamoun added that he knew his Druzes and now Jumblat’s forces had won a victory many tribesmen would pick up their guns and join Jumblat. He said, “They could attack Beirut in a force of between 4 and 5000 men in a few days”.

President then reverted to Nasser’s three points. It was clear he had no taste for Chehab as Prime Minister because opposition, as we have reported, is endeavoring to bring in Chehab as stalking horse and intermediary figure in preparation for some other chief of state or government who will be more pro-UAR. However, on amnesty President again repeated his previous assurances to me that he would be willing to leave door open for opposition leaders to escape. He said he had for past few days had under consideration a public announcement by himself providing for amnesty for any rebel who was not involved in direct personal crime on condition such persons laid down their arms. However, President said he could not very easily make such a declaration on eve of such setbacks as Jumblat’s victory in the Chouf. On contrary such a statement could only successfully be made after Lebanese armed forces had themselves gained a fairly significant victory over insurgents.3

Summary of interview: Chamoun is not willing to treat with Nasser.4

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1158. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to Cairo.

2 Document 67.

3 In telegram 3291 from Cairo, June 12, Hare noted that Chamoun’s reaction to the three-point proposal was exactly as foreseen by Nasser. He questioned whether Chamoun’s rejection was based on the substance of the proposal or on the fact that it was authored by Nasser. He concluded that, whatever the basis for Chamoun’s attitude, “we do have right to give constructive advice in order prevent development of situation where we will find ourselves obligated intervene as result, not so much of UAR interference, as of lack of political wisdom of Chamoun.” (Department of State, Central Files 783A.00/6–1258) McClintock commented from Beirut, in telegram 4685, June 13, that Chamoun’s rejection was based more on authorship than substance. He felt that Chamoun might be willing to consider a solution similar to that proposed by Nasser, but was “infuriated” at the thought that Nasser should give advice on the creation of a new Lebanese Government. (Ibid., 783A.00/6–1358) Both are included in the microfiche supplement.

4 Dulles called Eisenhower on the morning of June 12 and read from this cable from Beirut, concluding that “Chamoun said no.” He added that he was not sure if favorable action in the Security Council would calm the situation. Eisenhower said “we should make sure Chamoun has what he needs and can use.” Dulles replied that he felt Chamoun was satisfied. (Memorandum of telephone conversation; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

70. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt 70. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

Washington, June 12, 1958—4:56 p.m.

3367. Cairo’s 32412 and subsequent. Ambassador should seek earliest opportunity make following known to Nasser:

1) We have discussed with Chamoun possibility of amnesty for opposition leaders. We believe that if violence directed against GOL were promptly to cease and order were restored, GOL would not act in punitive spirit against opposition leaders and USG would be prepared strongly to counsel this.

2) Re proposal Chehab assume Prime Ministership; we do not believe it would be appropriate for any foreign government to press GOL regarding specific individual for public office. This question solely for Lebanese to decide. However, we note speaker Lebanese Chamber has summoned Parliament to convene July 24 to elect new President. When new President comes in, presumably changes in Lebanese Government will also occur.

3) In light of above considerations as well as arrival UN observers in Lebanon we believe new atmosphere can be established which gives hope for ending of crisis which otherwise might have broad ramifications. We urge that Nasser contribute to this possibility by using his influence with opposition on behalf restoration of tranquility. We believe that all of the governments of the Near East should make it clear, not only by word but by acts, that they do not countenance civil disturbance as a means to achieve political results. Otherwise we feel that the entire area of the Near East faces a prolonged period of great distress.3

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–758. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Dulles and cleared by Rockwell. Repeated to Beirut, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Document 63.

3 Hare responded on June 17, in telegram 3364 from Cairo, that he had attempted for 3 days to schedule a meeting with Nasser to convey the substance of telegram 3367. On June 16, having failed to secure an interview, Hare authorized an Embassy officer to convey the gist of the message to Haikal for transmission to Nasser. He also authorized the officer to add that Hare had reason to know that Nasser’s proposals had been given serious consideration. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758; included in the microfiche supplement)

71. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 71. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 13, 1958—6 p.m.

4689. My British colleague has kindly shown me extensive background telegraphic correspondence between London and Washington which has provided helpful perspective not only for instructions set out Deptel 47102 but also so to thinking of Selwyn Lloyd on what we should do next. I am impressed by Foreign Secretary’s hope that “the Americans” can be brought to agree that we ought now very firmly to know where we stand vis-à-vis Chamoun, his personal ambitions and his attitude toward the presidential succession which has been a basic cause of the civil war in Lebanon.

Although perhaps too early to take all the auspices following passage of SC resolution, it is fairly clear opposition ranks have been severely shaken. Conversely Chamoun’s own confidence will have increased by gaining of what he called in telegram to Malik a “victory” at the UN. Malik for his part will interpret Chamoun’s new position as having almost unqualified support from world community. This will harden Chamoun’s resolve preferably to succeed himself or failing that to handpick his successor. My telegram 46383 is pertinent in this regard.

It is in my judgment impossible for Chamoun to succeed himself. It is not however impossible for him to try, and this I fear may happen following passage of SC resolution and prospect that struggle in Lebanon, with opposition increasingly deprived of support from UAR but with government free to call on western powers for aid can be intensified to point of victory by Chamoun.

Even if President conceivably could beat opposition in battle (a dubious proposition with Army under General Chehab) he can hope at most to become President of half the country. At same time he should not be required to contemplate a presidential successor so identified with opposition that it would seem fruits of rebellion were reward of presidency. A compromise candidate is indicated.

The three western Ambassadors are being importuned by moderate elements to help negotiate a solution between intransigeance of Saeb Salaam on one side as illustrated by his defiant communiqué set out by Embtel 46644 and intransigeance of Chamoun who, as indicated Embtel 4638, told me he would insist on a successor who would carry out Chamoun policies.

Although I have noted from Department’s 4622 its view that now is not the time to express an opinion on who may next be president of Lebanon,5 I submit that if Lebanon cannot be aided immediately to reach a compromise on presidential succession this civil war will continue and its threat of international involvement will increase.

Accordingly I thoroughly endorse British suggestion that we have a frank talk with President and ascertain straight out where he stands on issue of presidential succession. I think we should be authorized to express honest doubts that after a month of civil war in a country so delicately balanced as Lebanon he can expect to return to office for another 6 years or that he can hope to rule through a stooge.

My British colleague agrees. Because of privileged nature UK–US consultation in Washington we have refrained from consulting our French colleague but have every reason to believe he would go along with this recommendation.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1358. Top Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and Cairo.

2 Document 67.

3 In telegram 4638 from Beirut, June 12, McClintock reported on a conversation with Chamoun in which Chamoun had indicated that he considered it essential that his successor be someone who would carry on his pro-Western foreign policy. Chamoun added that only if such a person could not be found would he consider succeeding himself. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.11/6–1258)

4 On June 12, the opposition “National Lebanese Front” issued a statement, signed by Saeb Salaam, which condemned the resolution adopted by the U.N. Security Council establishing an observation team for Lebanon as irrelevant and likely to aggravate the situation. (Telegram 4664 from Beirut, June 12; ibid., 783A.00/6–1258)

5 Dated June 4. (Ibid., 783A.00/6–358; included in the microfiche supplement)

72. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) and Foreign Minister Malik, Washington, June 14, 1958, Noon 72. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) and Foreign Minister Malik, Washington, June 14, 1958, Noon1

Washington, June 14, 1958, Noon

SUBJECT

Situation in Lebanon

Foreign Minister Malik telephoned me at 12 noon today, June 14, and said that he had just been on the telephone with President Chamoun in Beirut. The President had told him that since 11:00 this morning, Beirut time, the rebels had broken loose in Beirut and there were then various engagements throughout the city going on after seven hours of fighting. One of the largest engagements was in the immediate vicinity of his house. (Mr. Malik said that he could hear the firing on the phone.)2 The President had instructed Malik to inform the United States Government that he was calling an urgent Cabinet meeting this evening. The United States should know that in view of the worsening situation, if things are not in hand later this evening or tomorrow morning, the Lebanese Cabinet would in all probability take a decision to ask for the immediate intervention of United States, British and French forces.

Malik said that he had asked the President how he should respond if the United States officials should say that this was an internal problem, since the fighting was between the Lebanese. Chamoun replied that we should be told that in Beirut alone there were about 500 Palestinians, together with a number of Egyptians and Syrians. He said that in the Shuf area there was a great number of Syrian conscripts who had completed their military service as part of regular Syrian forces.

Dr. Malik said that he would be in touch with the President over the next several hours and would keep us informed.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1458. Secret. Drafted by Rountree.

2 Intelligence sources reported that the rebel attack was launched from a building approximately 220 yards from the Presidential Palace. The army responded with artillery and machine gun fire and demolished the building. The Prime Minister’s home was also reported under attack. The firing in Beirut ceased at 4:15 p.m. local time. (TDCS DB–3/636, 267, June 14; ibid., INR Files: Lot 59 D 600, E)

73. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, and the Secretary of State in Washington, June 14, 1958, 3:41 p.m. 73. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, and the Secretary of State in Washington, June 14, 1958, 3:41 p.m.1

Washington, June 14, 1958, 3:41 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT (Gettysburg)

Sec. told Pres. Rountree just talked to McClintock in Beirut. Connection was bad but the information he got was on the whole reassuring in sense that situation was serious, that fighting had not been on large scale—it had been rather sporadic and had died down. McClintock went on to say security forces had situation well in hand. Chamoun may still call on us but this indicates situation is not as bad as reported by Malik.

[Here follows discussion of the situation in Cyprus.]

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Jane Morris. The call was in response to a call from the President a half hour earlier in which he indicated that he had just received a message from the White House concerning Lebanon and asked whether Dulles thought it was necessary for him to return to Washington. Dulles replied that he did not think it was necessary unless the Chamoun government made a formal request for support from U.S. troops. (Memorandum of a telephone conversation, June 14, 3:24 p.m.; ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

74. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Quarles), Washington, June 14, 1958, 4:50 p.m. 74. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Quarles), Washington, June 14, 1958, 4:50 p.m.1

Washington, June 14, 1958, 4:50 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO SECRETARY QUARLES

The Sec. told Q. that he came back early because of Lebanon and that he had talked with the Pres.2 Sec. said he told the Pres. not to come back quite yet.

Sec. said we had talked on the telephone with our Ambassador there about an hour ago and he reported the situation as somewhat less disturbing than we had gotten through Malik and Chamoun. However, Sec. would estimate that there is a pretty fair chance that Chamoun may call on us to come in there, perhaps not because his own forces cannot hold the situation, but because they are not willing to try adequately. Q. said you mean Chamoun and the Cabinet. Sec. said yes. Sec. would like to have one of his people check up on what orders would be under the circumstances. Q. said they have certain part of forces that are nearby and available and are alerted to be ready to move in—there are other forces a bit more remote. Sec. asked Q. what they do when they get there. Q. said they move ashore, establish themselves (probably Beirut and Tripoli), and meet forces if attacked. Sec. would like to [have] someone from State check on what these orders really would be. Q. said fine. Sec. said political situation in Lebanon is not simple and we do not know what cooperation we can get. Sec. said he did not think Defense had political guidance they need and it is extremely confusing. Sec. said our original concept was that we would go in to help Army do its job and possibly hold positions in Beirut and Tripoli releasing their Army to take up problems elsewhere. The cooperation from the Army is not clear. President will have to make final decision. Sec. said it is one thing to go in as helpers of Lebanese Armies and another thing if they are hostile. Q. said we are wondering whether this indicates if we should have Task Force set up of joint staffs here and someone from State. Q. said they could have report tomorrow or Monday morning. Sec. said if Q. could set something up tonight or tomorrow morning it would be fine. Q. said he thought he better get hold of General Picher and have him at Pentagon or a satisfactory alternate. Sec. said he thought meeting should be held at Pentagon—State can only contribute political judgment. Q. asked for name. Sec. said either or both Bill Rountree and Stuart Rockwell. Sec. asked that Picher call Rountree. Q. said he would be available tomorrow should Sec. need him through White House phone.3

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Jane Morris.

2 See supra.

3 Dulles accepted a call from Twining after completing his conversation with Quarles. He told Twining that he had spoken with Quarles because Twining was not available. He outlined his conversation with Quarles. (Memorandum of a telephone conversation; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations)

75. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 75. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, June 14, 1958—6:53 p.m.

4779. Eyes only McClintock from Secretary. I am concerned that situation developing in a way which may pose for us a very awkward problem. You will recall that our 4271 and 4482 May 13 and May 23 respectively2 indicated that we would be prepared to intervene militarily “under most compelling necessity to meet a situation where integrity of Lebanon is genuinely threatened and where its own forces do not suffice for protection.” 4482 further requested you make clear to President our assumption that “Lebanese security forces would be exerting maximum effort to defend independence of Lebanon. He should be under no misapprehension that US forces can be counted upon to intervene in circumstances where Lebanese forces are unwilling to fight.”

It is our impression that the Lebanese forces are in fact adequate to deal with the situation particularly now that UN has intervened, but that they are not making a maximum effort to defend the independence of Lebanon because of internal factionalism. We also foresee danger that Chamoun and Government may call for our military assistance when in fact situation could be dealt with if the Lebanese forces under General Chehab were wholehearted in their effort to do so.

We believe that if there is any question of our being called upon we are entitled to get reassurances as to the attitude of the Lebanese forces as it would be one thing that we should move in militarily to cooperate and another thing to have to fight Lebanese forces or meet their opposition or lack of cooperation. Presumption of our 4271 and 4482 was that the Lebanese forces were doing their best and that we would be relieving them so that they could more effectively conduct the active fighting.

We do not want to be in a position of seeming to give General Chehab a veto over our action but we would think it indispensable in some way to get dependable reassurances as to the probable reaction of General Chehab and the forces under him.

I would appreciate any suggestions you may make as to how to deal with this problem and in the event that there is not time for a further exchange of views between us, you may feel that you have discretion to deal with it as you deem best.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Dulles.

2 Documents 31 and 49.

76. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 76. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 14, 1958—9 p.m.

4726. Rome pass information Niact COMSIXTHFLEET. London pass Niact CINCNELM. There has been fairly serious fighting in Beirut today. This originated in an attempt by opposition forces from Basta seeking to take Sablons prison, apparently seeking to liberate prisoners who otherwise might have furnished incriminating evidence to UN observers. Although one police post was taken, army action frustrated attack. Opposition then turned main effort on President’s palace where [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] had a very hot dish of tea. At one time during engagement Chamoun in yellow sports shirt engaged in rifle fire from roof of palace. Fighting still continues intermittently in this area; air strikes were made with rockets against the Basta (but with unknown results).

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified] informed by Chamoun at 1730 local time there it might be necessary to call for UK–US intervention; but he was by no means sure. At 19 hours [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] received message Prime Minister Solh indicating that either (a) SYG UN should immediately furnish “police forces” or (b) US might wish to despatch units of Sixth Fleet “strictly for protection of American lives and property” Prime Minister added he thought situation in Beirut was out of control and asked my intervention with President in respect of the two measures he advocated.

Summary: Situation in Beirut is undoubtedly grave and ability of security forces to contain Moslem mob is subject to doubt since General Chehab has deployed most of army outside Beirut. However his

disposition should be able to forestall a descent by Jumblat Druzes against Beirut; and he could probably redeploy sufficient forces to maintain control in capital. In consequence I do not believe Sixth Fleet should be more than placed on immediate alert. However I do urgently recommend that our two destroyers which I understand are within six hours steaming, stand-by at dawn tomorrow, June 15, 30 miles off Beirut. They should be capable of 30 knots on call. I am by separate channel requesting opening of Voice Radio communications with these ships.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Rome, Cairo, Damascus, Paris, Baghdad, Amman, Tel Aviv, and USUN. Received at 7:04 p.m. A note on the source text indicates that Rountree was informed at 9:50 p.m.

77. Special National Intelligence Estimate 77. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, June 14, 1958.

SNIE 36.4–1–58

THE LEBANESE CRISIS

1. The position of President Chamoun has substantially deteriorated during the past two weeks and Lebanon is in a state of civil war. Continuation of the crisis has not resulted in consolidation even of the Christian half of the country behind him. General Chehab is not calling on the Army to give the President all the support of which it is capable, partly because he fears a split between the Christian and Moslem elements in the Army, partly because he probably has ambitions of his own for the Presidency. There are reports of an impending Army coup designed to remove Chamoun from office and substitute Chehab. This move might not materialize without the sanction of the Western powers. We believe that Chamoun cannot survive much longer without all-out Army support, and possibly not even with it. In this situation he may call for Western intervention at almost any moment.

2. President Chamoun could probably get Cabinet approval for a request to the Western powers to intervene, in view of the recent elimination of several Cabinet members who were opposed to it. It is doubtful that he could get parliamentary approval for such a measure, and it is extremely unlikely that he would try to do so. The request would almost certainly not have wide political or popular support, whether or not it were supported by General Chehab. While General Chehab has not committed himself on the matter, the indications are that he would not favor such a request.

3. If the US were to intervene pursuant to a request supported only by Chamoun and his Cabinet, the intervention would almost certainly be regarded with hostility by a majority of Lebanese, including nearly all of the Moslems and perhaps as many as half of the Christians. The adverse reaction of the Lebanese (and of the Arabs) to intervention would be intensified if the UK participated, and very much more so if the French took part.

4. We do not believe that the consequences of intervention would be appreciably different if the measure were justified as one to protect US lives and property, unless it were limited to a rapid operation to effect the evacuation of US personnel. Evacuation of all US personnel from Lebanon would, however, have serious consequences, especially for various oil installations and pipeline operations, [3½ lines of source text not declassified].

5. In the complex Lebanese situation, one immediate problem confronting the intervening forces would be that they would probably find themselves in hostile contact not only with UAR-controlled subversive elements, but with a wide variety of local elements not presently hostile to the West but acting either in opposition to Chamoun or to foreign intervention in principle. Even if General Chehab were willing to cooperate fully, which, as we have suggested, is doubtful, some of the Moslem elements in the army might desert. The commitment of large Western forces might be required, and it would be extremely difficult to create a stable situation not clearly dependent on them. The US might find itself faced with the onerous choice between a prolonged stay in Lebanon or a withdrawal while the situation was still unstabilized.

6. It should also be observed that the sending of UN observers to Lebanon makes it more difficult, pending their report, to justify an intervention on the ground of countering UAR penetrations.

7. On the other hand, if President Chamoun were in present circumstances publicly to request US intervention and be refused, conservative and anti-Nasser elements in the Arab world, and the governments of Jordan and Iraq in particular, would probably conclude that they could not rely on US support in the future. It would be widely regarded as a victory for Nasser and a defeat for the West, and would be exploited as such by the USSR. A compromise between Chamoun and the opposition, possibly involving a transfer of the Presidency to General Chehab, would not produce such strong reactions as would either US intervention or US refusal to intervene.

8. The governments of Iraq and Jordan would approve US intervention in Lebanon, but would face a considerable increase of popular opposition at home and would be unable to render any substantial assistance in Lebanon. The governments of Turkey, Pakistan, and Iran would probably favor US intervention. Turkey, if the Cyprus situation permitted, might offer assistance. Soviet and UAR propaganda has already been stepped up in anticipation of US intervention and will make the most of opportunities to fix the label of imperialism on the US. Israel would probably avoid direct involvement in the situation as long as the conflict remained confined within Lebanon.

1 Source: Department of State, INR–NIE Files. Top Secret. According to a note on the cover sheet, “The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.” All members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in the estimate on June 14, except for the Atomic Energy Commission representative and the Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, who abstained because the subject was outside of their jurisdiction.

78. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) and Foreign Minister Malik, Washington, June 15, 1958, 8 a.m. 78. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) and Foreign Minister Malik, Washington, June 15, 1958, 8 a.m.1

Washington, June 15, 1958, 8 a.m.

SUBJECT

Situation in Lebanon

The Lebanese Ambassador telephoned me at 7:30 a.m. Sunday morning, June 15, to say that the Foreign Minister had been in telephonic communication with President Chamoun earlier that morning and wished to see me on a matter of great urgency. He had asked if I could come immediately to the Foreign Minister’s hotel room for breakfast.

Upon my arrival, Foreign Minister Malik said that President Chamoun had asked him to put a very serious question to the Department. While awaiting my arrival, he had written this out in long hand, as follows: “At 4:30 a.m. today, Sunday, June 15, 1958, I got in touch by telephone with President Chamoun in Beirut. He asked me to put the following question to the United States Government:

“Realizing that the radio and press campaigns of the United Arab Republic are becoming more and more vicious inciting the insurgents in Lebanon to overthrow the Government by resolution and violence;

“that the illegal smuggling of arms into Lebanon from Syria is increasing, as is evidenced by the fact that only yesterday, to cite one instance only, 23 cars were seen coming into Deir-El-Ashayir (at the frontiers between Lebanon and Syria) from Syria under the protection of Syrian army jeeps, where they unloaded huge quantities of arms which were distributed among the insurgents in Lebanon;

“that the illegal infiltration of men from Syria to take part in the rebellion continues unabated if it has not recently increased;

“that this morning, Beirut time, the President received official reports that parachutists were seen dropped from Syria on Lebanese territory;

“that it is estimated that 500 Palestinians are taking part in the insurrection in Beirut alone, so that the Government is dealing with an internal foreign fifth column; and

“that the decision of the Security Council was in our favor and the speeches made in the Council showed that there was a general belief that interference by the United Arab Republic was taking place in the affairs of Lebanon;

“the President appreciates knowing if in the light of these facts the United States Government, which has repeatedly expressed its support of the independence of Lebanon and its readiness to help Lebanon preserve its independence, by military means if necessary and if asked to do so by Lebanon, will intervene at once militarily to help Lebanon maintain its independence, if the President and the Government of Lebanon should ask it to do so, in order to report the answer of the United States Government to this question to the Cabinet immediately this afternoon.

“Charles Malik.”

I told Dr. Malik that I could not, of course, give him a reply to the message which would be susceptible to communication by open telephone. I thought that our reply to the question should be transmitted by telegram through Ambassador McClintock who was in any event fully informed regarding our attitude in this matter. Dr. Malik asked if a “brief” response might be given at the time he informed President Chamoun by phone that the full reply would be given through Ambassador McClintock. I reminded Dr. Malik that we had set forth a number of considerations with respect to any decision to put forces into Lebanon and I did not see how these considerations could be recapitulated in a few innocuous words. I told Dr. Malik that our basic position had not been altered. I would be in immediate communication with the Secretary and would be in touch with him later in the morning.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree on June 16.

2 Rountree saw Malik again at 11:30 a.m., after discussing Chamoun’s message with Dulles. He told Malik that a message was being dispatched to Ambassador McClintock instructing him to discuss the matter with President Chamoun. Rountree outlined the nature of the U.S. response with Malik, but when Malik asked if Rountree would authorize him to tell Chamoun to “Stand firmly, don’t yield,” Rountree replied that a cryptic comment of that sort was subject to various interpretations, and would not be advisable. (Memorandum of conversation, June 15; ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

79. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge), Washington, June 15, 1958, 9:35 a.m. 79. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge), Washington, June 15, 1958, 9:35 a.m.1

Washington, June 15, 1958, 9:35 a.m.

I called Ambassador Lodge and reported that we might be under immediate pressure to send forces into Lebanon and wondered what his reaction was as to the impact on the UN. He said he thought it would be very bad, particularly if it were done without giving the UN observers a fair opportunity to get going. I said that the ideal solution would be if the UN observer team or Hammarskjold should ask the US and other UN members to supply some forces. In that event we could respond very promptly. Ambassador Lodge said he expected to see tomorrow Gallo Plazo of Ecuador, one of the three, with Norway and India, designated by Hammarskjold to head the observer team. Ambassador Lodge said he would go to New York today if we thought this important. He said he would await my further telephone call to him.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Top Secret. Drafted by Dulles.

2 Dulles called Lodge again at noon, following his conversation with the President. Lodge indicated that he planned to return to New York that afternoon. Lodge added that Hammarskjöld told him that he was attempting to arrange for additional military support for the observation team from several non-Middle Eastern countries. (Memorandum of telephone conversation; ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

80. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 80. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 15, 1958—2 p.m.

4746. Eyes only for Secretary from McClintock. I appreciate discretion allowed me last paragraph Deptel 4779.2 Because of our previous conversations on contingency of allied military intervention I decided

to see General Chehab. Typically, he was at home some miles north of Beirut dressed in mufti, and greeted me with remark that the Sabbath was a day of rest.

General said he thought military situation in Beirut and elsewhere was under control. However he envisages a continuing downward spiral as he says Moslem insurgents have been worked to such a pitch of frenzy and hatred for Chamoun and Prime Minister Solh that they cannot be called off. Chehab minimizes extent of foreign participation. He says according to his intelligence there are not more than 300 Syrians operating with insurgents plus perhaps 500 Druzes from across the border who are assisting Jumblat not so much as Syrians but as Druze tribesmen. Chehab never heard of the 500 Palestinian-Egyptian commandos referred to by Chamoun (Deptel 4773).3 He fixes number of Syrian officers and non-coms who might be operating inside Lebanon as not more than a dozen.

I told General I had last night (Embtel 4726)4 received direct intimation from Chamoun US military intervention might be called for; and an even more urgent demand from Prime Minister. Under these circumstances we had to talk plainly as to capability of Lebanese Army to deal with situation and to have General’s military opinion on degree to which friendly forces, if landed, could enable Lebanese Army to go on with its job of putting down insurrection.

General said his army was still doggedly doing its duty but he frankly did not see a successful outcome. He thought situation would continue to deteriorate to point of hand-to-hand fighting but offered no conjecture as to how by his own military means he could quell what was in fact a civil war.

At same time General looked with obvious distaste on prospect of allied intervention. He repeated his previous prediction that army might commence to disintegrate if foreign forces were landed. He said in any case in that event he would resign as commander in chief. When I inquired as to assurances of cooperation on part of Lebanese military if our forces were debarked, General said of course his staff would cooperate—"If there still is a General Staff”. He said in making this estimate he was “speaking anonymously”.

On brass tacks of degree to which foreign intervention would relieve Lebanon Army for more effective operations, General said we could of course occupy Beirut for protection of American lives and property but this would have very slight effect upon his dispositions as army only has in Beirut a rag tail of artillerists, muleteers and drivers. He does not have even a company of infantry in capital at present

although he expects in next day or so to bring back one company presently engaged in Chouf against Jumblat. Where main effect of relief for Lebanese forces would be felt would be at Tripoli where Chehab has three infantry battalions. General said if Americans or British were landed north and south of Tripoli more or less sealing off that town he could probably pull out two battalions for use against insurgents in the Bekaa and elsewhere.

To sum up these are my conclusions: (1) Commander in chief sees no prospect of quelling insurrection by his own means although he is willing to continue to fight in a defensive manner. In fact he said explicitly Lebanese armed forces were on defensive, initiative having passed to rebels.

(2) Our own military experts do not concur with Chehab’s conclusion expressed preceding paragraph as they feel Lebanese armed forces if led with initiative and conviction could most certainly put down civil war although at a fairly high cost in casualties. This estimate is of course conditioned on no further increase outside intervention. Nevertheless fact remains that so long as Chehab is commander in chief Lebanese Army will probably not bring a military conclusion to hostilities.

(3) Chehab does not welcome prospect of allied military intervention but appears to believe it inevitable since he is convinced Chamoun and Solh will presently ask for our intervention.

(4) Lebanese armed forces will not oppose allied landings and will probably cooperate in a lukewarm way. Extent and vigor of Lebanese armed forces’ resistance would then depend upon new command of Lebanese Army and degree to which rank and file would remain loyal. Our estimate is less gloomy on this point than that of General Chehab.

(5) All this adds up in my opinion to need to get a new general before inexorable logic of events calls for allied landings in Lebanon. This I intend to urge upon Chamoun.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Top Secret; Niact. Received at 10:10 a.m.

2 Document 75.

3 Telegram 4773 to Beirut, June 14, summarized the telephone conversation between Rountree and Malik outlined in Document 72. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1458)

4 Document 76.

81. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, June 15, 1958, 11:56 a.m. 81. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, June 15, 1958, 11:56 a.m.1

Washington, June 15, 1958, 11:56 a.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT

Sec read him the draft cable to Beirut (attached).2 Sec said we know British are prepared to act. This is a request made to us. Sec said there were two aspects—one, British, the other, French. Sec said we would rather do it alone, certainly from a political standpoint. Sec said the French particularly are a great liability. Sec said we have told Chamoun we do not want French invited in, but yesterday there were some indications they would invite the French. Sec said we should perhaps mention that in this cable and also the fact we have agreed to work with the British. Sec asked if the cable seemed all right to the Pres. Sec said all right, we will get this right off. Sec said this is going to be bad any way.

[Sec subsequently reported to Messrs. Rountree and Rockwell who were in the room with him that this was all right with the President, but he had raised the question of the British and the French. Sec said the President’s reaction was perhaps just not to go into it in this cable. Sec said he, the Sec., saw no reason why we could not say, however, that “We assume you recall our 4390”.]3

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Carolyn J. Proctor, with a notation that the conversation was “one-sided,” indicating that she heard only the Secretary’s side of the conversation.

2 Not found attached, but printed infra.

3 Brackets in the source text. Telegram 4390 to Beirut, May 19, instructed the Embassy, in the event of a request by the Chamoun government for intervention by U.S. and U.K. troops, to make clear that the United States would object strongly to French participation in such an effort, and to request that Chamoun limit any approach to France to more limited forms of assistance. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1958; included in the microfiche supplement)

82. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 82. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, June 15, 1958—12:54 p.m.

4790. On basis telephonic instructions from Chamoun 10:30 a.m. this morning Beirut time, Malik has given Dept informal paper reciting claims UAR assistance to insurgents, including report that parachutists seen dropped from Syria on Lebanese territory, and asking whether US will intervene at once militarily to help Lebanon maintain its independence, if President and GOL ask it to do so.2 He states reply will be reported to Cabinet this afternoon.

Rountree told Malik US position this regard unchanged and stated hope Chamoun is in touch with you on question since you fully and currently informed. He stated he did not see how we could give to Malik answer susceptible transmission by open telephone, particularly since as Malik knew our willingness to intervene would be based upon certain assumptions which had been discussed with President Chamoun. Malik agreed and suggested that he inform Chamoun that reply will be given through you.

You may inform Chamoun that our position regarding military assistance in Lebanon has not changed. Certain facts, however, should be recalled.

One, the primary purpose would be to protect American life and property while at the same time assisting the GOL in its military program for the preservation of the independence and integrity of Lebanon. We believe that any request from Lebanon should be couched in terms of the inability of Lebanon to perform both the function of preserving its own independence and of protecting foreign life and property; including several thousand Americans, and therefore the US is requested to perform the latter function. You will recall that our 42713 stated that any “request should be couched in the terms indicated”. We went on to say that once the troops are there they would in fact serve to help to protect the independence of Lebanon.

A second factor is as pointed out in our 4482,4 namely, that we must be able to count upon the Lebanese security forces themselves exerting maximum effort to defend the independence of Lebanon and that there would be friendly cooperation between its forces and any US forces there.

A third element is the fact that the GOL has just sought and obtained a UN Security Council Resolution to station observers in Lebanon. This is in the process of being carried out and the US would find it very awkward to act while it was still uncertain that this UN action would be inadequate and where the responsibility for collapse of UN effort would be generally attributed to US.

Before we can make a definitive response we shall need Chamoun’s assurances and observations on these points and also we shall seek a Baghdad and Amman answer as to their reactions, as indicated para. 3 our 4271. In the meantime our forces are held in a state of instant readiness.

There is no disposition on our part to retreat in any way from the position set forth in 4271. It is necessary to verify some of the assumptions of that cable and to pay some respect to the UN effort which Lebanon itself invoked and with the results of which it professed to be satisfied.

With respect to this last matter, we suggest that minimum would be the convocation of Security Council again in emergency session with a GOL report that an obvious effort is being made to thwart UN action by stepped-up campaign to destroy Lebanon independence before UN can properly organize its observation teams and that in consequence situation has so deteriorated that Lebanon is unable to discharge its dual responsibility to protect its own independence and to protect foreign life and property. It is therefore inviting certain countries whose nationals have important life and property in Lebanon requiring protection to assume this responsibility so that the forces of Lebanon can concentrate with the help of the UN observation team on preserving Lebanon’s independence. There might also be need for emergency GA action.

We assume you recall our 4390.5

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Top Secret; Niact; limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree and Dulles and approved by Dulles.

2 See Document 78.

3 Document 31.

4 Document 49.

5 See footnote 3, supra.

83. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, June 15, 1958, 4:30 p.m. 83. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, June 15, 1958, 4:30 p.m.1

Washington, June 15, 1958, 4:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Situation in Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Charles Malik, Lebanese Foreign Minister

Dr. Nadim Dimechkie, Lebanese Ambassador

The Secretary

NEA—William M. Rountree

The Secretary had only a few minutes for a meeting with Dr. Malik. Knowing this, Dr. Malik had prepared an outline of what he would like to say, in order to save time.

Dr. Malik said that the fury of Nasserism and Communism was utterly unleashed upon Lebanon. The Government of Lebanon did not mind that, but considered it an honor that it had been singled out as the unique object of that fury, because Lebanon knew what was at stake. It felt that its battle was a battle for the Middle East, and in a sense a battle on behalf of the entire free world. The fury of Nasserism and Communism expressed itself through radio and press propaganda of a character heretofore unheard of as being directed against a country with which those attacking theoretically maintained friendly relations; through smear, vilification, incitement to murder and rebellion, and the use of unbelievable names which must be repugnant to the entire free world; by putting into Lebanon limitless money for bribery and corruption; through large-scale smuggling of arms and equipment; through infiltration of agents and fighters from outside Lebanese territory, especially from Syria.

Lebanon was now the main target of this “infernal” work. It was not so strong as to be beyond the possibility of being disintegrated under the combined fury of Nasserism and Communism. It was small, relatively isolated, weak militarily, divided in itself, and unprotected by treaties except for the Charter of the United Nations. The forces opposing Lebanon could easily destroy it. It was a wonder, Dr. Malik said, that Lebanon already had resisted for thirty-five days. The choice now was either to yield, compromising in such a manner as would gain for the enemies of freedom a victory, or to continue to resist and fight until exhausted. Dr. Malik felt that the latter was the only course to follow, since if they yielded their conscience would plague them all the rest of their days. However, if they were not to lose the battle, they needed psychological, material and military help beyond their own means.

If it should become necessary for Lebanon to ask for the introduction of foreign forces to assist it, this would be a decision with implications in the Arab world of great and lasting importance. There would be placed upon Lebanon “shame and reproach” which he felt must be shared by others, particularly by other Arab states. He thought, therefore, that three things were necessary in connection with any such request: first, it should be clear that the help was asked in extremis, as a last resort when nothing else would meet the situation; second, the request must have some concerted Arab and Arab state support, open support which the whole world could see; and third, the request must have legal and moral sanction of the United Nations.

Dr. Malik emphasized the importance of Iraq and Jordan joining in assistance to Lebanon. He thought we should exert immediate pressures to have them move to come to Lebanon’s aid before Western military forces were introduced. There should be careful synchronization of efforts between Lebanon, the United States, the United Kingdom and Turkey to persuade Iraq and Jordan to come in. This, he thought, would share the “shame and reproach” of seeking outside assistance. If the action of Lebanon in resisting Communism and Nasserism was serving the cause of freedom, then the action of Iraq and Jordan would be serving the same cause as would the action of the other countries in asking them to assist.

Dr. Malik concluded by saying that the aim was not only to achieve the independence of Lebanon; there were different kinds of independence. The aim was to emerge from the ordeal so as not to give Communism and Nasserism the comfort of having achieved a victory in the area. Not only must Lebanon safeguard its independence, but we must all work together so that the forces of freedom will not appear to have retreated under the onslaught of Communism and Nasserism.

The Secretary responded that he was greatly impressed with Dr. Malik’s statesmanlike presentation. He said he would not conceal his concern lest a military response by the West would have the effect not of checking Nasserism but of strengthening it, of giving it a new charter. He was thus impressed with the danger, set forth by Dr. Malik, of Lebanon being reproached for having invited the Western nations to assist militarily, in consequence of which Lebanon’s friends in the Middle East also would be weakened by such a request. He was happy that Dr. Malik had such broad vision to see the problem in proper perspective. He believed that we should attempt to get the support of Iraq and Jordan, and also a larger measure of support of the United Nations. He understood that Mr. Rountree had told Dr. Malik earlier that the Secretary was concerned lest, having created the United Nations observer group and Cordier having arrived with several hundred personnel on the way, action might be taken which would place upon Lebanon and its Western friends the onus of responsibility for any failure of this U.N. action. If we were to act in any way seeming to cut across the United Nations, the results would be bad. He thought another round in the Security Council would be essential before introducing any foreign forces. There should be some basis, by consensus procedure or otherwise, of getting approval of such a Lebanese request. He asked that Dr. Malik give further thought to the U.N. aspects of this matter. He said that we were already in touch with Iraq and Jordan and should soon be receiving an indication of their attitude.2

Dr. Malik thanked the Secretary. He said that in the event external forces appeared to be the solution, it would be preferable for Jordan and Iraq alone to provide such forces, with the Western powers giving full support short of actual introduction of their own forces. In any event, he hoped that Iraq and Jordanian forces could be moved in, to be supplemented in stages by other forces.

The Ambassador agreed with this, saying that if the Iraqi and Jordanians moved in even token forces, the United States could help greatly by moving the Sixth Fleet off the coast of Lebanon as a direct warning. The Turks might also contribute to pacification of the situation in Lebanon by massing forces on the Syrian border. By these actions it would probably be unnecessary for the non-Arab forces actually to land in Lebanon.

The Secretary excused himself since he had to leave at once for a meeting with the President on this subject.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree. The source text indicates that the meeting took place in the Secretary’s home.

2 Telegrams 2755 to Amman and 3254 to Baghdad, both June 15, instructed those Embassies to provide assessments of whether Jordan and Iraq could be counted upon to support Lebanon in further recourse to the United Nations or in a request for Western military assistance. (Both ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

84. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, June 15, 1958, 5:10–6:45 p.m. 84. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, June 15, 1958, 5:10–6:45 p.m.1

Washington, June 15, 1958, 5:10–6:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Department of State: The Secretary, the Under Secretary, Mr. Rountree, Mr. Macomber, Mr. Hanes

Department of Defense: Deputy Secretary Quarles, General Twining

CIA: Mr. Allen Dulles

USIA: Mr. George Allen

White House: Mr. Arthur Minnich

The Secretary and Mr. Rountree first outlined the situation, which the Secretary noted had been clarified somewhat as a result of his talk with Malik about fifteen minutes previously.2 Mr. Rountree recalled that Malik called him about noon Saturday, June 14, saying he had heard from Chamoun that the situation was critical with fighting around the palace, and was close to being out of hand. Malik did not request United States intervention, but put us on notice that such a request might be imminent. Later Saturday, our own information from Beirut indicated that the immediate situation was somewhat improved, but the long-term prospects remained gloomy.

Sunday morning at 7:30 o’clock, Washington time, Malik again called Rountree and asked for an urgent meeting. At this meeting he said that he had heard from Chamoun that the situation had again worsened, with parachutists from Syria being reported in Lebanon, some 500 Egyptian-trained Palestinians fighting in Beirut, etc. Chamoun wished to have an immediate answer, to give to the Cabinet Sunday afternoon, to the question whether the U.S. would intervene militarily at once if asked.

Mr. Rountree had replied that he could not give any answer which would be suitable to transmit to Chamoun by telephone, but that we would give our answer through our Ambassador.

Mr. Rountree said Malik asked later Sunday if he could call Chamoun with our approval and merely say “hold firm—do not yield”. Mr. Rountree had replied that he could not, since this was subject to various interpretations. For example, we would agree that he should not yield on any matter fundamental to the independence of Lebanon, but we would not agree that any reasonable compromise should be excluded.

The Secretary then read cable No. 47903 from the Department to McClintock giving our answer to Chamoun’s request. He also read cable No. 47104 from McClintock reporting his latest talk with Chehab.

Mr. Allen Dulles then handed an intelligence estimate5 to the President, and also referred to a telegram [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that Chamoun had prepared a memorandum containing a 24-hour ultimatum to Chehab to take effective command of the Lebanese forces or relinquish his command. Chamoun presumably intended to discuss this with his Cabinet Sunday afternoon.

The Secretary remarked that there was much plotting going on in Lebanon, and probably there were well-advanced plans for a military coup to place Chehab in the Presidency. This effort by Chamoun to replace Chehab as army commander might bring such plans to a head.

The Secretary also noted that the U.N. is moving rapidly and vigorously to implement the Security Council resolution. Cordier is already in Beirut, and the Secretary read from USUN’s 14906 containing Cordier’s report. The Secretary noted that the Secretary General plans rapidly to recruit several hundred observers from Italy, the Netherlands, Ceylon, and Burma.

The Secretary then reported on Malik’s call at 4:30 Sunday afternoon at which time (speaking from an outline) Malik had said that any Middle East country inviting armed intervention by Western Powers would be the subject of “shame and reproach" for generations. Therefore, three prerequisities to such a request were essential: 1. That the request be made only “in extremis”,

2. That there be some Arab participation in, or support of, the intervention, even if token. In this regard, he was thinking particularly of Iraq and Jordan.

3. The action must have the moral support of some organ of the U.N., either the Security Council or the General Assembly.

The Secretary had told Malik this was a statesmanlike approach, and coincided with our own thinking. If we were to intervene without such conditions being met, the intervention would not succeed and actually would not help the government that had called on us for help.

The Secretary then pointed out to the President that this latest statement represented a considerable reversal of Malik’s thinking, and probably was strictly his own thinking, not shared by Chamoun or the rest of the Lebanese Government. Nonetheless, the Secretary felt that the thinking was sound, and corresponded substantially to our own original conditions for intervention, possibly somewhat up-dated. The Secretary pointed out that any intervention at this moment would be looked upon as undermining and causing to fail what some might feel is a vigorous and promising U.N. initiative, which in itself had been taken at Lebanon’s request and with which Lebanon had professed satisfaction. The Secretary felt it would be catastrophic to lay ourselves open to such a charge. Therefore, he felt that we probably ought not to make an immediate military response before exploring further with Iraq and Jordan what they were willing to do, and before taking certain further actions in the U.N. In this connection he mentioned a cable which Lord Hood of the British Embassy had just read to him from Selwyn Lloyd saying that we ought not to act until there had been at least one more round at the U.N. 7

Mr. Rountree then reported that the French Charge had told the Department a few hours earlier this afternoon that a French warship was moving to the area solely for the purpose of protecting French lives in the area. The French had stressed that this action was not being taken under the Tripartite (1950) Declaration, since French help had not been requested, but was solely to protect French interests. The Admiral in command had been ordered to get in touch with U.S. and U.K. commanders in the area upon arrival in the area. The Secretary commented that the French will undoubtedly intervene if we and the British do.

There was some general discussion about the internal effect in Lebanon of intervention, and Chehab’s gloomy predictions of the response of the Lebanese army; and our own intelligence estimates of the army’s reaction, which were not quite so gloomy. Nonetheless, it was apparent that a substantial part of the population would undoubtedly oppose our intervention, actively or passively.

The President then asked a rhetorical question: How can you save a country from its own leaders? Chamoun, for example, has not yet fired Chehab, despite more than ample cause.

The President said he also took account of the possibility of a concurrent French intervention; and the fact that we would be in a bad spot if we intervened without the U.N. having first reported that the U.N. action was ineffective. To be legal, any intervention must be in response to a request by Chamoun in the U.N. context. The President was also reminded of the situation in the early 1950’s when the British were trying to hold a base in Suez with the entire population against them, and the impossible situation that resulted. He also recalled that our Middle East doctrine had been directed only against external aggression. The President wondered, therefore, what possible future there would be if we intervened except to remain indefinitely. He felt, in this regard, that the arguments which we had advanced to the British and French against their intervention in Suez might be pertinent also in this instance—particularly the question: Where would it lead; where would it end?

The Secretary commented that Turkey, Iran and Iraq would undoubtedly favor our intervening.

Mr. Allen Dulles commented that Chehab probably wants Chamoun to fail, since he probably wants his job.

The President commented that Chehab was symptomatic of the whole situation. There seemed nobody on whom we could pin our hopes. The President said he had little, if any, enthusiasm for our intervening at this time.

The President commented that what was really needed in Lebanon was a strong leader whom we could back strongly. Otherwise we would be intervening to save a nation; and yet the nation is the people, and the people don’t want our intervention.

The Secretary noted that if there were a “Korea-type” intervention involving many countries under the U.N. aegis, it would be a quite different situation, and probably all right. There seemed, however, little likelihood of this.

At this point, the Secretary noted the unstable and weak situation in Iraq, and Nuri’s recent intemperate statements to the U.S. and U.K. Ambassadors about the poor condition of the Arab Union.

The Secretary noted that this general weakness of pro-Western governments in the area must be considered in any action we take— we must have the proper conditions before we can take any action.

The Secretary said that Chamoun has a good case about UAR intervention, and Malik made it quite well in the Security Council. However, Chamoun has not made it well publicly. He has not appealed to his own people, or to his parliament, or made a loud and effective public case.

Mr. Allen Dulles commented that the Soviets have not entered the Lebanese situation at all except by radio.

The Secretary then pointed out that if Chamoun calls on us and we do not respond, that will be the end of every pro-Western government in the area. This leaves us with little or no choice, even though every alternative is “wrong”. The President agreed, and noted that in such circumstances we would have to fulfill our commitments.

Mr. Rountree said we should have no illusions that if we move in militarily we must move firmly and promptly to help establish a regime which could survive our withdrawal. This would mean in all probability a pro-Western dictatorship, since there is not sufficient popular support in Lebanon for Western intervention.

The President commented that if we are forced to intervene, we should do everything possible to intervene under the most favorable auspices and circumstances, and also attempt to bolster the Lebanese army as soon as possible, so that our forces could withdraw quickly. The President directed General Twining to have the Chiefs of Staff study the military possibilities and problems involved.

The President also felt that we should examine the possibility of putting in massive military support, possibly accompanied by numbers of technicians, as the Soviets did in Syria, as an alternative to military intervention.

Mr. Rountree pointed out that the critical time for the Lebanese Government would be after it had requested outside assistance and had so reported to the Security Council, and before the military assistance arrived. Internal discontent with this move would then place the government in great jeopardy. Therefore, we must be prepared to move most promptly when the request became public.

The Secretary said that it would be unthinkable to move until some U.N. action had taken place, even though this might mean a certain delay and danger. It was agreed that the possible U.N. actions should be urgently studied.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted on June 17 by Hanes. Another memorandum of this conversation was prepared by Minnich. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

2 See supra.

3 Document 82.

4 In telegram 4710 from Beirut, June 14, McClintock reported that he had found Chehab deeply pessimistic that morning. The General described the military situation as neither good nor bad, and added that he foresaw an indefinite struggle in which neither side could gain ascendancy. Chehab stated that it was essential for a neutral government to be formed, and said that, in his opinion, the only chance of ending the downward spiral in Lebanon was for the three Western ambassadors to impose a decision as to who the next president of Lebanon should be. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/ 6–1458; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 Reference is to SNIE 36.4–1–58, Document 77.

6 In telegram 1490, June 13, Andrew W. Cordier, Executive Assistant to the Secretary-General, reported from Beirut that only a small portion of Lebanon’s frontier was under government control and accessible to U.N. observers. (Department of State, Central Files, 330/6–1358)

7 The cable was summarized in a memorandum of conversation between Under Secretary Herter and Ambassador Caccia, June 15. (Ibid., 783A.00/6–1558; included in the microfiche supplement)

85. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 85. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 15, 1958—8 p.m.

4756. Re last sentence Embtel 47462 I saw Chamoun this afternoon. Although our conversation was punctuated by near-by sniper fire, President was calm and resolute. Before I had opportunity to describe my views on General Chehab, President told me he had reached conclusion it was clearly impossible for Lebanese armed forces to re-establish security under Chehab’s command. He said “I know our army can do it, but not with a General like that”.

I then reported impressions derived from my interview with Chehab this morning and asked if it might not be possible to get a new General under whose leadership Lebanese armed forces could put down revolt.

President said this might be possible but he feared army would be demoralized for first 24 hours after dismissal of Chehab. In that 24 hours mob might gain ascendancy in Beirut and elsewhere.

On balance, although he was determined to remove General, it seemed safer for this to be done after an allied landing as Chehab could be counted upon at least not to oppose and perhaps to assist UK and US contingents to establish themselves in Lebanon while if he were removed before landing, our forces might find themselves coming ashore to confront a state of anarchy.

I asked President if we might not take a limited chance by having friendly forces within very few hours hailing of Beirut. Then, when Chehab and his top officers were dismissed, there would be some assurance of ready support if things would commence to go wrong; while it was just possible army would be able maintain order for that vital 24 hours and then go ahead under new leadership against the insurrectionists. I told President I still hoped against hope Lebanon could settle its problem without western military intervention.

For first time Chamoun asked me straight out how many forces we contemplated using. I gave him figure authorized Deptel 4401.3 He thought 5, 000 might be too few. I said in view of modern fire power and air strength in Sixth Fleet, I had every reason to be confident our forces would be sufficient to do the job.

Turning to political aspects of intervention, I said we had to think of reaction elsewhere in world to allied forces landing in Lebanon. Our enemies would instantly portray such action as armed intervention by “imperialists" to maintain regime of Camille Chamoun “against will of people”.

Given this situation I asked President if it might not put a better face on things if he should convene Parliament in extraordinary session. Government could point to undoubted outside intervention in Lebanese internal affairs from UAR; cite SC decision to send observers to prevent infiltration of illegal arms and partisans; and call upon opposition in name of National Union and need to preserve independence of Lebanon at once to stop fighting. Question of domestic political differences could be dealt with very simply by stating President and government commended call by Speaker of Parliament for session July 24th to elect a new president other than Chamoun. If, as was probable, opposition failed to respond or its deputies boycotted Parliamentary session, government could then declare that since active infiltration of arms and men from UAR was continuing and tempo of fighting was increasing throughout Lebanon, it had no recourse but to ask friendly powers for assistance in maintaining independence of the state. A vote of confidence could then be taken (I assumed Chamoun still had a working majority) and it would be against this background that government’s appeal for US–UK assistance would be presented to the world.

President said he would “wrinkle his brow" tonight on these suggestions which he thought had merit.

Conclusions: 1. Chamoun is determined to liquidate Chehab.

2. President feels this operation cannot be carried out without prior allied intervention but has still not made up his mind to call for that intervention.

3. He will probably give some consideration to casting best political light on appeal for intervention since he recognizes we are dealing with a case of civil war.

4. I believe we should take risk of changing Chehab before allied intervention but that we should be prepared for instant action if army commences to disintegrate.

Action requested: Prompt indication of how soon ready forces can land in Lebanon after President has indicated timing of his decision to remove General Chehab, or request by GOL for allied intervention.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1558. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London. Received at 6:24 p.m.

2 Document 80.

3 Telegram 4401 to Beirut, May 19, authorized McClintock to convey to Chamoun, if he asked, information concerning the size of the U.S.–U.K. force which could be made available in the event of a decision to provide military assistance to the Lebanese Government. The force contemplated was 5, 000 troops, broken down as 3, 000 U.S. troops and 2, 000 U.K. troops. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/5–1958; included in the microfiche supplement)

86. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 86. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 16, 1958—2 p.m.

4774. As indicated Embtel 4767,2 I left a letter3 with Chamoun this morning embodying substance Deptel 47904 making a fourth point embodying Department’s suggestions on convocation of SC. President read letter very carefully and said he agreed with all four points. I had hastened to see him this morning because of knowledge that Cabinet was meeting at noon and I feared a decision might have been taken to ask for intervention before Department’s views reached President.

Chamoun said he had summoned General this morning and had told him Colonels Salem and Adel Kadar Chehab must be dismissed. General complained Colonel Salem had worked with him for 15 years and despite his lack of resolution and timidity was an officer he was used to. General then tendered his resignation which Chamoun refused to accept. In typical Lebanese fashion interview ended indecisively, President apparently not insisting on dismissal of two officers by accepting Chehab’s statement he would “reflect” on Chamoun’s demand. I offered free advice that in a question of military discipline no time was to be lost and if Chamoun wanted these two officers ousted, he should move resolutely and at once. I suggested from my Latin American experience that the two officers be despatched on a military mission abroad.

At least, Chamoun has started to move in on General and without asking foreign intervention as a condition precedent. Chamoun found Chehab in a more constructive mood this morning. Although General expects further trouble in Beirut, he is removing one company from Tripoli and feels this reinforcement should enable security forces to deal with further outbreaks. Chamoun begged General to mount at least one successful offensive and once more indicated the Chouf as a field of operation.

I told Chamoun evidence reaching Embassy, and also British Ambassador, indicated opposition is by no means as strong or resolute as Chehab supposed. In fact we thought opposition was about on its last legs. If, as Chamoun hoped, Army could achieve some sort of victory, however small, it might be sufficient to break back of revolution. I said all three ambassadors strongly felt it would likewise help if Chamoun himself would speak to Lebanese people. Middleton, who had seen me earlier this morning, said he felt vehemently Chamoun should straight out tell nation that issue of presidency should be decided by Parliament on July 24th than that he, Chamoun, would not be a candidate. I offered this personal suggestion as coming from myself and added that Chamoun might at the same time make statement of amnesty which he contemplated as reported Embtel 4629.5 President nodded and said he thought both suggestions were good; but he did not indicate he would act on them. I made clear my own personal strong conviction that some sort of statement along these lines by Chamoun should precede any announcement of a Lebanese appeal for western intervention.

President said he had reflected on my suggestion (Embtel 4756)6 re calling special session of Parliament precedent to any request for intervention. Chamoun said he felt this would not be feasible “because too many speeches would be made against intervention” by members of Opposition. I had distinct impression he did not feel Parliament would sufficiently support concept foreign military intervention. Chamoun likewise laid great stress on advantage of secrecy and surprise.

Conclusion: Both Chehab and Chamoun this morning see situation less darkly than yesterday. I believe presentation of Department’s views in writing will have salutary effect on Cabinet consideration of appeal for our military intervention and that prospect of Lebanon making such an appeal in next few days had distinctly receded. When I remarked to Chamoun that the three western ambassadors all felt Lebanon might still win its own way unaided and that intervention must be only a desperate last resort, Chamoun said “why say all three of you? It is all four of us.”

Suggest Department pass London.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1658. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Received at 10:19 a.m.

2 In telegram 4767 from Beirut, June 16, McClintock reported that he had an appointment with Chamoun that morning to convey the substance of telegram 4790 to Beirut. He also noted that he had discussed the Department’s concern about the impact of French intervention in Lebanon with the French Ambassador, who had responded that under De Gaulle, it was practically certain that France would insist on at least token participation in any joint Western intervention. (Ibid.)

3 A copy of this letter is in Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Beirut Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, June 16, 1958–June 20, 1958.

4 Document 82.

5 Document 69.

6 Supra.

87. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 87. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, June 16, 1958—9:02 p.m.

4814. We are disturbed at tenor of Embtel 4756.2 We do not intend allied forces be used in Lebanon unless factors specified Deptel 42713 are present. You should certainly disabuse Chamoun of thought that allied landings would be for purpose of facilitating removal of General Chehab. We have come to believe it is almost a sine qua non that Lebanon have had full recourse to orderly processes of UN before finally requesting and receiving friendly assistance (Deptel 4790).4 This process would naturally take several days once decision have further recourse to UN taken. If Lebanese security requirements demand removal of Chehab at once this obviously cannot be done within context prior allied landing which, if it took place, would be aftermath of further UN consideration of matter at Lebanese initiative.

FYI. First contingent of US forces, around 1, 600 men, could arrive within 8–12 hours if US should decide to provide assistance to GOL. Remainder of US forces could arrive within 24 hours of same decision. You should not convey this information to Chamoun at this time.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1658. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Wilcox in draft and by Dulles. Repeated to London and USUN.

2 Document 85.

3 Document 31.

4 Document 82.

88. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 88. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 17, 1958—1 a.m.

4795. Conclusion last paragraph my telegram 47742 today was too optimistic.

Chamoun [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] at 2115 tonight and handed him handwritten Arabic text of letter addressed to President signed by each member of Cabinet authorizing Chamoun to call for friendly military intervention. At this hour (2330) it is not possible to translate Cabinet authorization but will forward as soon as possible.3 Evidence of Chamoun’s present feeling of desperation is fact he entrusted this unique copy to [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] event Chamoun would not last the night.

In definite Gotterdammerung mood, President handed [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] his wife’s jewels and discussed plans for safety their grandson. Chamoun said he had intelligence indicating there might be a final attack on Palace tonight, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]

Chamoun went over problem of General in terms similar to those reported Embtel 4774 and revealed characteristic incapacity to bring himself to sticking point of firing Chehab forthwith. President retraced argument he had advanced with me (Embtel 4756)4 over danger period of complete collapse of security forces following General’s dismissal and indicated he would prefer assurances of intervention before reaching this point.

Using discretion given me by Secretary in Deptel 4779,5 I intend, if Chamoun or government request our military intervention, to say that I will not transmit that request unless I have assurances that Chamoun and government will publicly state to Lebanese people that: 1. Independence of Lebanon is paramount.

2. This independence is threatened by exterior aggression and by internal insurrection.

3. UN is counted upon to deal with external aggression; it is incumbent on Lebanese people to settle their own domestic difficulties.

4. In consequence President and government call upon all Lebanese to unite; reaffirm decision of government not to amend constitution and, as far as Chamoun is concerned, clearly state question of his succession to office has not been and will not in future be a matter for debate. Chamoun will explicitly renounce any intent to succeed himself but will explicitly proclaim his constitutional right to guide the destiny of Lebanon until end of his constitutional term.

5. Because of continued external aggression and internal insurrection President and government of Lebanon in order to maintain independence and integrity of the republic have called upon the US and UK Governments for temporary aid in maintaining that integrity and independence.

Events are, however, moving very fast. If President is physically threatened and by telephone requests execution of Cabinet’s appeal for outside intervention I recommend token appearance of our two destroyers and am prepared to summon them by voice radio if Department concurs. Their appearance off Beirut might be decisive and could easily be explained as being necessitated by need to protect American lives and property.

I have also given thought to personal welfare of Chamoun and have suggested [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] it would be politically much better for him to seek safety in some hideout in Lebanon than to flee country.

My own personal feeling is that President and Council of Ministers are in a state of flap so far as he is concerned and funk so far as they are concerned.

I continue to believe extreme measure of our intervention may be averted but, in Lebanon, anything can happen6

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Repeated to London. Received at 8:01 p.m., June 16.

2 Document 86.

3 A copy of the handwritten original of this letter, with a covering translation, is in Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Beirut Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, June 16, 1958–June 20, 1958.

4 Document 85.

5 Document 75.

6 Dulles was informed of this telegram by Rountree at 1 a.m., June 17. Dulles called Eisenhower at 8:30 a.m. and repeated the information, indicating that he might have to call the President out of a morning meeting to make some decisions. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

89. Telegram From the Chief of Naval Operations (Burke) to the Commander in Chief, United States Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (Holloway) 89. Telegram From the Chief of Naval Operations (Burke) to the Commander in Chief, United States Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (Holloway)1

Washington, June 17, 1958—12:45 a.m.

170545Z. Lebanon situation deteriorating. State has received dispatch2 from American Ambassador Beirut request from Chamoun for assistance.

Keep 2 DD within 25 miles but over horizon and out of sight from Beirut. These 2 DD be prepared enter Beirut harbor and land small landing force to evacuate American citizens or furnish assistance when requested by American Ambassador by radio direct to destroyers.

Beirut dispatch and State’s reply on the way.

Burke

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 62 A 1698, 092 Lebanon TS Sensitive. Top Secret; Emergency. Drafted by Burke. Also sent to COMSIXFLT, COMDESRON 36. Repeated to Alusna Beirut, U.S.S. Rich, and U.S.S. New.

2 Supra.

90. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 90. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, June 17, 1958—1:28 a.m.

4821. 1. While it is of course necessary for you to exercise large measure discretion in fast moving situation, last para Deptel 47792 related solely to problem of obtaining probable reaction of General Chehab and forces under him, in event government formally requested US military assistance.

2. We do not believe it wise for you to inform Chamoun that you will not transmit his request until assurances set forth Embtel 47953 received. We would not in fact contemplate that Chamoun would make public announcement that request had been made until certain preparations completed, notably coordination with other interested states including Jordan and Iraq, initiation appropriate action in Security Council, and indication our willingness to respond.

Question of content of Chamoun’s public statement when made, although extremely important, does not override in importance completion preparations mentioned above. As to substance of statement, your numbered para 5 does not take into account instructions contained Deptel 42714 and fourth para 47785 which set forth terms in which request should be couched. Must emphasize necessity adhering to wording specified, and if present letter from GOL does not do so, it would be necessary to obtain another before we could act.

3. Regarding the possibility of your calling two destroyers into Beirut, the explanation suggested by you “need to protect American lives and property” would be primary stated mission of any US forces sent to Lebanon in response GOL request. Only stated purpose for which vessels can without further specific authority be called into Beirut would be for possible use in evacuating American citizens. If in your judgment presence of destroyers is needed and wise for psychological purposes or for actual evacuation, reason for their arrival in either case must be declared to be for possible evacuation of American nationals. Purpose would not be for protection American property nor would forces on these ships be landed without further authority except for strictly evacuation purposes in emergency. No statement could be made contrary to this principle.

4. We have [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] report plans for imminent coup to replace Chamoun with Chehab. What is your estimate of possibility Chamoun deep concern is based more on intelligence info re this possibility than upon possible insurgent attack?6

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree and cleared by Dulles in draft. The substance of paragraph 4 was cleared with Admiral Burke. Repeated to London and USUN for Lodge.

2 Document 75.

3 Document 88.

4 Document 31.

5 The reference is in error; it should be to telegram 4790 to Beirut; Document 82.

6 The Embassy responded, in telegram 4813 from Beirut, June 17, that it did not feel that Chamoun’s concern was based more on the possibility of a coup than on the likelihood of an insurgent attack. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758; included in the microfiche supplement)

91. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 91. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 17, 1958—2 p.m.

4812. I saw President Chamoun this morning at ten. He was very calm and inclined to be apologetic over last night’s excitement saying he had received intelligence from telephone monitoring reports that insurgents might launch an attack on Palace despite considerable military reinforcement which had been placed in vicinity of his residence. Matter now seemed well in hand. General Chehab, with whom he had conferred immediately before receiving me, was bringing a company of reinforcements to Beirut by sea from Halba using three landing craft which our navy had so promptly provided off Tripoli yesterday. Chamoun was deeply impressed by efficiency this operation.

President said Chehab had now agreed to press more strongly in the Chouf. An operation would be mounted today against Beit Eddine and if all went well, this objective might be captured before day was out. Chamoun was likewise determined to order General to undertake offensive in Beirut against certain known rebel strongholds which he said were manned largely by Palestinian-Egyptian-Syrian commandos. There would be considerable loss of life but he felt energetic action essential.

On question of Chehab’s dismissal, Chamoun confirmed Prime Minister Solh had been particularly restive at concept of continuing General in command (cf. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] 7505 and 7480).2 However, Chamoun was not yet ready to dismiss General and preferred by system of daily pep talks to try to keep Chehab moving. He appeared to base considerable hope on expectation of an imminent success in the Chouf with some increased activity against rebels in Beirut itself. Re question of dismissing the two colonels, Salem and Chehab, President said General was more “edrenle” this morning and had promised to consider a dossier of alleged treasonable activity which President would furnish him.

I then made essential points in Deptel 48143 re allied landings to facilitate removal of Chehab and sine qua non Lebanon have had full recourse to orderly processes of UN before finally requesting and receiving friendly assistance. I recalled in detail our original four points as set out Deptel 42714 and went over once more points made Deptel 4790.5

Chamoun showed some petulance when I summarized fourth point Deptel 4271, exclaiming that he hoped US Government could be convinced once and for all that he had no intention to succeed himself in office. He said “I should long ago have left this country and taken a vacation were it not for fact that Nasser and his supporters attacked me because of my pro-western policy.”

Although I had not at time of interview received Deptel 4821,6 I went over once more letter handed President yesterday which paraphrased Deptel 4790 and said in addition it seemed to me President might wish to give thought to need for making some public statement to Lebanese people and the world before requesting friendly intervention. I then went over five points in Embtel 4795.7 Chamoun said he agreed with each of them and would be willing to make a public statement if necessity arose. However, like me, he very much hoped that with new offensive plans of Chehab, Lebanese security forces would be able to gain the upper hand. He was likewise somewhat more hopeful of efficacious aid from UN observers particularly since two Syrian military captured yesterday had given full and damning confessions which would presently be given to UN observer group.

President at my request translated into French narrative paragraph of formal authorization to him to call for foreign intervention cited second paragraph Embtel 4795. In effect it stresses need for preserving independence and integrity of Lebanon, for protection of foreign lives and property, and authorizes President to call on “friendly powers” who had offered guarantees of Lebanon’s independence for “temporary assistance.”

President once more emphasized this paper was for stand-by use and he had no intention of calling for any outside assistance except in extremis.

McClintock

1 source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and USUN.

2 Neither found.

3 Document 87.

4 Document 31.

5 Document 82.

6 Supra.

7 Document 88.

92. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Greene) 92. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Greene)1

Washington, June 17, 1958.

There was considerable discussion of the political and military consequences of U.S. intervention in Lebanon and of U.S. nonintervention if the Government of Lebanon requests it. The military orders are three: to protect U.S. property, to assist the Lebanese authorities in maintaining their position, and to restore those authorities if they are overthrown. The first of these may in large part provide a U.S. constitutional basis for intervention but it involves the dilemma that intervention for this purpose smacks of imperialism.

The Secretary noted that the internal situation is highly confused and that there are two and perhaps three political forces at work each trying to get Lebanese military support. Whatever these facts, however, if we temporize when confronted by a request by the Government for military assistance, the almost immediate result will be erosion of confidence in us in other countries in the area and indeed in the world. We cannot take refuge in the “internal affairs” explanation because the Communists are using internal subversion throughout the area. At the same time, if we do go in even with Arab, e.g. Iraq and Jordan, participation, the governments of those countries will immediately be subjected from within to Communist inspired “anti-imperialist” pressure and will probably eventually fold up. Thus it can be argued that the present governments of the other Arab States will go down the drain whether we go in or not; it would just be a matter of timing.

Mr. Rountree and General Twining noted that we would probably then be confronted with spreading of the fighting; would we or should we be prepared to intervene elsewhere? Query: Should we thus get trapped into fighting the UAR and Nasser outside of UAR territory?

On Congressional consultation there is still another dilemma. If we consult the Leadership before receiving a request, the consultation will leak back to Lebanon and provoke the request. Mr. Macomber thought the top four leaders could safely be taken into confidence and would probably approve intervention. Intervention in support of the United Nations will be more palatable in the Congress.

What to do and how to do it in the United Nations was left to further discussion. The Secretary thought it better, given our constitutional problem and the dilemma that poses, to pitch our intervention in terms of support of the United Nations. He asked that further study be given the attacked draft of a statement2 in conjunction with further study of strategy in the United Nations.3

JG

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Secret. This memorandum records a meeting that took place in the Secretary’s office. Participants included Dulles, Herter, Rountree, Rockwell, Wilcox, Sisco, Macomber, and Greene from the Department of State; Allen Dulles and Norman Paul from CIA; and Quarles and Generals Twining and Picher from the Department of Defense.

2 The attached draft statement, prepared by Dulles, announced the introduction of U.S. Marines into Lebanon to protect foreign lives and property, and to enable the Government of Lebanon to preserve its independence and integrity. The statement indicated that the U.S. move would be closely coordinated with the United Nations, and that U.S. forces would be removed from Lebanon as soon as the reasons for their introduction had been corrected.

3 Shortly after this meeting, the same people reconvened in Herter’s office to consider the possibility of action in conjunction with the United Nations. The consensus of the second meeting was that military intervention should not take place until a Security Council resolution calling for the establishment of a U.N. armed force was introduced and predictably vetoed by the Soviet Union, and preferably not until the General Assembly, convoked under the Uniting for Peace provisions, had made a recommendation to send such an armed force to Lebanon. (Memorandum for the record, June 17; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758; included in the microfiche supplement)

93. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) to the Secretary of State 93. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, June 17, 1958.

SUBJECT

Directive for American Commander in Charge of Combined U.S./U.K. Military Operations in Lebanon

Discussion:

We have obtained from J.C.S. an excerpt covering “Mission” and “Execution" from the plans for the combined U.S./U.K. military operations in Lebanon (Tab A).2 It is our understanding that these plans have been drawn up by U.S. and U.K. military planners in London and that as they stand they have “British agreement.” It is not clear if the Foreign Office has seen or approved the plans.

The “Mission” stated in the military plans in several respects goes beyond the political objectives envisaged in the themes you approved on May 15 as our public position in the event of military intervention in Lebanon (Tab B),3 which the British subsequently agreed to with the single reservation noted. The “Mission” also goes beyond our draft Political Directive to the Military Commanders (Tab C),4 which was based on the approved themes and a British draft political directive. The “Mission” of the military plans explicitly includes the following as objectives of the operations: (A) to support local friendly government, or,

(B) if required, to re-establish the authority of a local friendly government, and

(C) to assist in the maintenance of order.

In addition, under “Concept of Operations”, the last sentence of paragraph (5) contains the essentially political determination that “U.S.-British operations will continue until stability within Lebanon is established under a viable pro-Western government.”

Because of circumstances that might exist at the time the operation is mounted, the “Execution” section of the military plans gives the commander considerable flexibility in carrying out his orders. Upon the entry into Lebanon at Beirut, his forces are to be prepared to cope with organized resistance, and if fired upon would return fire. The plans provide that subsequently operations are to be expanded to other essential areas and facilities beyond Beirut. Air surveillance of the Lebanese frontiers will be conducted on both the UAR and Israeli borders. The plans call attention to the fact that subsequent developments might require our commitment of additional forces to accomplish the mission. (For example, this could result if there were widespread Moslem defections in the Lebanese Army or if it lacked the will to carry operations into opposition strongholds in the interior.)

From the foregoing it is clear that these plans contain objectives much more explicit than our stated second objective in the themes: “to assist the Government of Lebanon in its military program for the preservation of the independence and integrity of Lebanon.” It is apparently the military view that the more explicit objectives stated in the plans are necessarily implied once a request for intervention has been accepted. In order for the military to achieve the objectives and in order to protect themselves, they must be in a position to pursue a vigorous course against any opposition—even if it comes from some segments of the Lebanese security forces. In that connection, there are sufficient unpredictable factors involved (such as whether General Chehab would be willing to act decisively against his compatriots among the opposition forces or the possibility of Moslem defections in the Lebanese security forces in the event of intervention) that it is probably militarily unrealistic for plans to be based on the thought that our forces could land and remain within the Beirut area, thus theoretically releasing the Lebanese forces to deal expeditiously with the opposition outside of the Beirut area and thereupon permitting the timely withdrawal of our military forces. It would appear that once having entered at Beirut our forces might well find it necessary to take action outside of the capital. We understand informally from the military that much larger forces would have to be called in if it should become necessary to expand the operations into the interior.

Conclusions:

(1) Though the objectives stated in the military plans go beyond those stated in the approved themes, they seem to be necessarily implied in the situation as it might develop once intervention took place.

(2) There should be closer coordination between the Department and the military planners on detailed instructions relating to political aspects of the contingency planning. In this connection it might be desirable to detail a Departmental representative to maintain close liaison with the U.S./U.K military planners in London on this matter.

Recommendations:5

(1) that you take note of the excerpt from the military plans (Tab A).

(2) that you approve our taking the necessary action to arrange for a Departmental representative to be placed in effective contact with the military planners in London to permit closer coordination on political aspects of the military planning.

Tab B

CONTINGENCY STATEMENT OF THEMES APPROVED BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE AS OUR PUBLIC POSITION IN THE EVENT OF INTERVENTION IN LEBANON6

A. Lebanese Government has complained to/notified United Nations Security Council of large-scale militaristic interference from outside Lebanon which has disrupted peace and security of Lebanon and which gravely threatens independence of that country.

B. Both the United States and United Kingdom have received requests for aid from the President and (legitimate) government of Lebanon within the context of the Lebanese Government’s complaint to the Security Council regarding the threat to its integrity and independence.

C. The United States Government, in response to the Lebanese request and in the light of the situation in Lebanon, has agreed to send certain combat forces to Lebanon in order to protect American life and property and to assist the Lebanese Government in its military program for the preservation of the independence and integrity of Lebanon. The United Kingdom has also agreed to send military units to Lebanon for similar purposes.

D. This action is consonant with the provisions of the United Nations Charter. It relates to the need to preserve the independence of Lebanon against aggression, and has no purpose connected with the Lebanese internal political situation.7

E. As soon as the purposes for which these military units have been dispatched to the Lebanon are accomplished, the units will be immediately withdrawn.

F. It is noted that the Lebanese Government has received declarations of sympathy and support from other states in the area.

1 source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758. Top Secret; Limit Distribution; Eyes Only. Drafted on June 16 by Special Assistant Harrison M. Symmes. Sent to Dulles through Herter.

2 Included in the microfiche supplement.

3 Printed below.

4 Telegram 4741 to Beirut, June 12, was attached at Tab C. It is included in the microfiche supplement.

5 Secretary Dulles initialed his approval of the recommendations.

6 Top Secret; Limit Distribution; Eyes Only.

7 British reserve position on this point. [Footnote in the source text.]

94. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1958 94. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 18, 19581

Washington, June 18, 1958

SUBJECT

Lebanese Situation

PARTICIPANTS

Sir Harold Caccia, British Ambassador

Lord Hood, Minister, British Embassy

The Secretary

NEA—Mr. William M. Rountree

NE—Stuart W. Rockwell

The Ambassador said that Charles Malik two days ago had told Sir Pierson Dixon that it would be a great tragedy if the effort now being made to solve the Lebanese crisis were restricted to that problem alone. An attempt should be made to resolve the underlying problems such as that of Syria. Dr. Malik said that what was going on was a contest between Chamoun and the West versus Nasser and the East. The underlying problems might be solved if the Lebanese crisis should spread or even if Chamoun manages to win out. By so doing he would set Nasser back and permit the beginning of the gradual weakening of Syria. In Malik’s view, Chamoun should remain beyond his present Presidential term.

The British Ambassador commented that there might be a successful pro-Nasser coup against Chamoun which would present us with a terrible problem. Sir Harold expressed great concern over the fact that we seemed to have no choice but to watch events in Lebanon deteriorate.

The Secretary commented that he saw no satisfactory solution to the Lebanese problem except through the lawful government’s working one out with all possible assistance except armed intervention. If the Lebanese called for the latter, and if we responded, there would be a wave of anti-Western sentiment which would sweep away our friends in Jordan, Iraq and Saudi Arabia and turn the Lebanese against us. If we did not respond, we would get the same results less abruptly in the Arab countries. However, if we failed to respond the effect on our friends in the countries peripheral to the Arab world would be very bad, while these friends would be encouraged if we went into Lebanon. The Secretary concluded that we must put every possible pressure on the Lebanese to solve this matter themselves.

Mr. Rountree commented that the possibilities for solving the Lebanese crisis, as he saw them were two. One was that the Lebanese would stand firm and put down the insurrection by military means. The prospects were dim but by such steps as making political changes or firing General Chehab, the government’s position might be improved and that of the opposition weakened. Mr. Rountree felt that there must be some kind of compromise on the part of the government. The second solution would be for Chamoun to be replaced by a coup d’etat. The danger here was that we could not be certain who would come in. Mr. Rountree thought we should concentrate on the first approach and get Chamoun to make concessions which would not affect the basic issue of Lebanese sovereignty.

The Secretary believed it would be dangerous for us to tell Chamoun that he should make concessions. He might be a better judge of his interests than we are. We should, however, disabuse him of any thought that he has a blank check from us with regard to military intervention. He should also be under no illusion that by calling us in he can win the battle against Nasser. On the contrary, he would lose it. The Secretary thought our Ambassadors should summarize to Chamoun our thinking as follows: There can be no satisfactory solution of the crisis other than one carried out by the Government of Lebanon itself. We are helping as much as possible. If we should be called on to intervene militarily, this would not contribute to the defeat of Nasser but would give him an opportunity to increase his attacks on the Lebanese Government, to undermine Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Jordan, and to increase the strength of the opposition in Lebanon. Of course we could hold on wherever our troops were, but a happy and prosperous Lebanon would not result from foreign military intervention. The Secretary also thought that we should not press Chamoun concerning specific political sources of action or even with regard to his future status. We should tell him that we are not concerned with constitutional factors and would not object if, after this crisis is solved, he wished to stay on as President. We should not destroy Chamoun’s heart or courage by pressing him to compromise with the opposition.

It was commented to the Secretary that a basic assumption in the above approach was that Chamoun could in reality, with his own resources and aided by foreign help short of intervention, win out. Doubt was expressed that this was so and indeed it was felt that the government’s military position was bound to get progressively weaker and that the day when Chamoun would feel forced to request foreign intervention was inexorably growing closer. Thus, in effect, a solution of the problem by the Lebanese themselves might, for one reason or another, turn out to be impossible.

It was agreed that this problem would be further discussed after London had had a chance to comment on the considerations put forward during the meeting.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1858. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell.

2 Caccia returned to the Department the next day and informed Dulles that he had called Selwyn Lloyd to get his reaction to the conversation of the previous afternoon concerning Lebanon. Lloyd agreed that it would be desirable to emphasize to Chamoun the unfavorable consequences of Western intervention, and to stress the necessity of full recourse to U.N. processes. Lloyd felt, however, that if faced with a Lebanese request for military intervention, it would be necessary to respond positively. (Memorandum of conversation, June 19; ibid., 783A.00/6–1958; included in the microfiche supplement)

95. Editorial Note 95. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on June 19 on significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Allen Dulles offered the following assessment of the situation in Lebanon: “Turning to the situation in Lebanon, Mr. Allen Dulles said that Beirut was quiet last night after a day of sporadic fighting. President Chamoun had apparently panicked on the night of June 16 and had secured from his cabinet written permission to call for the intervention of U.S. and U.K. troops if he thought such intervention necessary. Recovering his poise, President Chamoun had since decided not to make use of the permission given him by the cabinet. However, Chamoun still feels that the Chief of Staff, General Chehab, could break the back of the rebel resistance if he would move vigorously. He is not moving very vigorously, continued Mr. Dulles, and it now appears that a group of army officers is engaged in a plot directed against both General Chehab and the rebels. This officer group had planned a coup to occur on the night of June 17. The coup had not come off and might not come off. Such a coup would not be anti-western in its results and might indeed actually be pro-Western because it was the objective of this military group to get rid of General Chehab and to institute a stronger military leadership for the Lebanese armed forces. Meanwhile, the Iraqi and Jordanian authorities feel that our intervention will prove necessary. Indeed, they themselves may intervene.

“Mr. Dulles went on to say that the Damascus radio was very active in behalf of the rebels in Lebanon and that there was strong evidence of a highly confidential nature that the United Arab Republic was providing tactical direction to the rebel forces in Lebanon. Mr. Allen Dulles concluded his comments on this subject by prophesying a series of difficult days ahead for the U.S. There seemed to be some evidence that Hammerskjold had been in touch with Nasser which could prove to be a serious matter if true.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 369th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason on June 20; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

96. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 96. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 19, 1958—2 p.m.

4895. I called this morning on President. He said he had been working as I came in on text of written appeal for allied intervention to use in case of necessity. I had previously [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] indicated that in a matter of such grave importance which affected interest of world community in preservation of peace, we could not act on an oral message passed at midnight through an intermediary however reliable the messenger might be.

President expressed skepticism whether Hammerskjold in two-day visit2 could reach any educated conclusion as to danger to Lebanon’s integrity and independence which was now present and real. Chamoun said since passage of June eleventh resolution3 there had been a much accelerated build-up of arms and infiltration of partisan bands from Syria. He said “Our defense forces are in static positions. They are stuck everywhere—in Beirut, in Tripoli, in The Bekaa. Against them the enemy is increasing his potential.” Chamoun went on to say that in his judgment the crisis was upon him. He asked “Must I wait until catastrophe bursts on my head or should I not take action to try to avert catastrophe?”

I had at commencement of interview given President wireless file text of President Eisenhower’s press conference yesterday4 insofar as it bore on Lebanese situation as well as text of Secretary’s press conference preceding day re Lebanon.5 Throughout interview Chamoun kept reading and re-reading statement on need to await recommendations of Hammerskjold before deciding what action US might be able to take.

I then said I had received visit early this morning from Minister Finance who described three-hour talk he had yesterday with General Chehab. According to Pierre Edde, Chehab had stated it was necessary to find a political truce. General was quoted as saying he was certain he could negotiate an armistice with opposition but was not sure what attitude would be taken by Chamoun. I then read out to President excerpts from paragraphs four and seven of Lodge’s 1516 to the Secretary6 in which Ambassador Lodge twice emphasizes need for political action in Lebanon including political compromise to find a solution which might save us all from grave consequences of military intervention. I asked straight out if President could not bring himself to contemplate some sort of a political and military cease-fire without prejudice to his position along lines suggested to Minister of Finance by General Chehab.

President muttered that he did not know what Chehab had in mind. General was taking the day off in Junieh, apparently “confined to his bed.” I suggested it would be a matter of utmost urgency to ascertain if General could in fact negotiate a truce. I thought if this could be done and with presence of Hammerskjold and UN observers, it might then be possible to compel Nasser to cease further infiltration and permit Lebanon to work out its own political problems free of any foreign intervention.

President was entering increasingly upon a black mood as conversation continued and finally with a show of resignation tapped wireless bulletin bearing report of President Eisenhower’s press conference and exclaimed “With this I cannot now lodge any request for aid; I must ask you clearly to find out where I stand.” I said I would immediately report our conversation and endeavor to secure elucidation.

My overall impression was that Chamoun feels cornered and desperate. He does not believe UN observers or SYG will be able to help him quickly enough; he thinks forces of opposition are growing stronger and intend to reach a military decision before UN can act; and he now doubts US readiness to intervene before UN action, which he is convinced will be inadequate and too late. At the same time, saddled with incubus of General Chehab as if he were the Old Man of the Sea, Chamoun is stubbornly unwilling to take those last measures of personal sacrifice which might assure a political compromise averting his own defeat.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1858. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London and USUN.

2 Secretary-General Hammarskjöld visited Beirut June 19–20 to participate in the first formal meetings of the U.N. Observation Group. While in Beirut, he discussed the Lebanon crisis with President Chamoun and Prime Minister Solh. After returning to New York, he reported on June 28 to the Security Council on the establishment and initial efforts of the Observation Group. The report, which is U.N. doc. S/4038, is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 949–951.

3 See Document 66.

4 In his press conference on June 18, President Eisenhower was asked to comment on the conditions under which the United States might be prepared to take military action in the Lebanese crisis. He responded, in part: “Now we do know that the United Nations group has gone out there, and that [Secretary] General Hammarskjöld is taking this whole matter under his earnest and personal view. I should say that it would be dependent somewhat upon the judgments of the armistice team and the Secretary General as to what we might have to do.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, p. 141)

5 Secretary Dulles suggested in a press conference on June 17 that the U.N. force established to monitor the Lebanese crisis might have to be expanded. He indicated that the United States would support such an expansion. (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 948-949)

6 Telegram 1516 from USUN, June 17, was repeated for information to Beirut. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1758) Dulles called Lodge on June 20 and instructed him not to send his advice directly to Beirut. Dulles said that McClintock had been indiscreet in reading sections of Lodge’s cable to Chamoun, and he suggested that Lodge did not understand the international implications of failing to respond to a call from Chamoun for military assistance. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations) The telegram and the transcript of the telephone conversation are included in the microfiche supplement.

97. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 97. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, June 19, 1958—8:01 p.m.

4890. For Ambassador from Secretary. Embtel 4895.2 Please seek urgent meeting with Chamoun and inform him that I have asked you to pass to him following information and views to which I hope he will give most serious consideration. Presentation should be oral but slowly and carefully made. (Inform your British colleague.)

President Eisenhower’s remarks at Press Conference June 18 should be regarded within context statements we have already made to Chamoun re UN role in this matter, namely that since GOL has itself invoked and received support from UNSC US would find it very awkward to act militarily while it was still uncertain UN action would be inadequate and where responsibility of collapse of UN effort would be generally attributed to US. We have as Chamoun knows come to believe that it is almost a sine qua non that Lebanon have full recourse to orderly processes of UN before finally requesting or receiving friendly military forces. Minimum action would seem to be convocation of SC again in emergency session.

President’s words should in no way be interpreted as meaning that we would require the concurrence or recommendation of UNSYG prior to military assistance to GOL but some further reference to UN is necessary, and undoubtedly SYG’s views would carry weight with other UN members. We continue ready to take exceptional measures on behalf of Lebanon if such measures are absolutely essential and factors set forth in Deptels 4271, 4482, 4790 and 48143 are present. We retain this determination despite apprehension which possibility of such action has aroused in UN and among friendly countries in western Europe and Latin America.

Chamoun should be reassured of our full confidence in him personally. Tell him that we realize that he is the symbol of Lebanon’s determination to defend its independence and integrity and the extensive support we have provided to the government over which he presides should convince him of our determination to stand by him in his efforts to resolve this crisis. We realize that we cannot and should not offer him specific advice with regard to political moves which he might make within Lebanon. He is the best judge of the action in this field which may be in the best interests of Lebanese independence.

We also believe that Lebanon has the capacity to solve this crisis without use of foreign military forces, and we are prepared to give all appropriate assistance to this end. While perhaps it would be better in some situation to request forces than not to, we do not consider that the introduction of Western forces into Lebanon would either solve the present crisis or enhance Lebanon’s long term position in the area. We believe that intervention would have the opposite effect since intervention in circumstances as they have been developing could well bring about serious confessional strife in Lebanon and set into train indigenous trends toward Lebanon’s ultimate territorial partition or truncation. Lebanon’s integrity would be assured only as long as foreign forces remained on Lebanese soil. Moreover, intervention could and probably would lead to solidification of opposition throughout Moslem world not only to Christians in Lebanon but to the West in general. We have also noted growing indication that allied military intervention would be viewed with repugnance even by many Lebanese Christians.

In these circumstances, there is a grave danger if not certainty that reaction in the Near Eastern area to intervention would represent a victory for Nasser in that there would be aroused strong popular feeling which could well sweep away regimes of pro-Western Arab leaders in other countries. In this event the prospects of diminishing Western position in the Arab world, which is one of Nasser’s prime objectives, would be greatly furthered.

For these reasons we take this occasion to urge Chamoun to do everything in his power to avoid a situation in which a request for intervention might be required. He should know that he will have our full backing in his efforts to safeguard Lebanese independence and integrity by other means.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1958. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree and Dulles and approved by Dulles. Repeated to London and USUN. Dulles discussed the proposed message with Ambassador Caccia and then called the President and explained that the cable was an attempt to clarify misconceptions on Chamoun’s part growing out of the President’s press conference. He added that it was also an effort to make Chamoun appreciate the gravity of sending Western forces into Lebanon. Eisenhower was not clear what it was he had said that could have produced misconceptions, but he approved the cable. He added that he hoped McClintock could get the message across. “Tell him,” Eisenhower said, “to read it slowly to get every word in it.” (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

2 Supra.

3 Documents 31, 49, 82, and 87.

98. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 98. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut June 20, 1958—2 p.m.

4938. For Secretary from Ambassador.

1. I saw Chamoun at 11:30 this morning and made representation contained Deptel 4890.2 President understood every word of your message but said because of its vital importance he would be grateful for a paraphrase. In view of requirement for oral presentation set out first paragraph reference telegram, request immediate permission convey paraphrase to President.3

2. Chamoun made following comments: (A) He could most earnestly assure the Secretary that he would not request US intervention “unless the knife is at my throat.” Under these circumstances he thought our intervention would seem quite logical and responsive to a truly emergency need.

(B) Chamoun said wryly he was in paradoxical position of being the Arab leader who resisted allied intervention at same time other Arab leaders were pressing him to call for intervention. He said he had received urgent advice from governments of Iraq, Jordan, Turkey and Iran to request allied military assistance immediately in Lebanon.

(C) President said he must express a dissent to conclusion in last sentence fifth paragraph reference telegram that allied military intervention would be viewed with repugnance even by many Lebanese Christians. President said he thought 99 percent of Christians in this country would welcome such intervention. He said there were certain Christian elements, such as Henri Pharaon, who might make verbal protests but at same time would be secretly delighted that their wealth would be protected by foreign troops. As for Moslems, although here Chamoun hesitated, he said perhaps 25 percent (largely the commercial and land-owning classes) would welcome intervention.

(D) Re final paragraph reference telegram I asked President what “other means” he might use to safeguard Lebanese independence and integrity with assurance of our full backing. He replied he did not at moment see any possibility of a move in political field because direction of the revolution had now passed out of hands of local leaders and was in hands of Nasser in Cairo. (See Embtel 49374 for my suggestions to Chamoun re possible agenda for a Hammarskjold–Nasser interview.) He was convinced Nasser intends to go all out to defeat him with Jordan next on the list. To my inquiry as to possibility of Lebanese themselves being able to negotiate a cease-fire and some sort of political armistice, Chamoun merely shook his head.

Re military means of safeguarding Lebanese independence and integrity, Chamoun said he needed some sort of military victory. Once more he had demanded of General Chehab preparation of an operational plan for an attack on the Chouf. He had insisted this plan be ready by 9:15 tomorrow morning. With the company and a half which Lebanese Army has in the Chouf plus artillery, heavy mortars and air striking power he was convinced a victory could be won over Jumblat Druzes. If he has some sort of victory, President was then willing to consider what steps he might take along lines of those urged by Middleton as reported Embtel 4862.5 British Ambassador tells me Chamoun passed similar word to him through his oriental counselor this morning.

As a third measure which might be taken within framework of last paragraph reference telegram, Chamoun said he thought presence here as soon as possible of our six Hawker Hunters would have a valuable psychological effect. I said British RAF training mission had expressed grave misgivings on this point since it would mean in order to utilize these aircraft taking out of active service Lebanon’s six best pilots at a time they were needed most. British also had misgivings on leaving highly expensive aircraft in Lebanon without pilots to fly them. Nevertheless I said I would pass on Chamoun’s request for expediting delivery of Hawker Hunters.6

(E) On security situation generally I told President General Chehab last night had seemed more confident and in particular had described to me his dispositions for defense of Beirut. It seemed to me Chehab now had sufficient strength (element constituting almost a battalion) and had so disposed firepower that he could control any mob emerging from the Basta. I also thought Chehab’s provisions for defense of Palace were much improved. Chamoun said he had personally gone over defense plans and completely shared this view. He said however there was bitter fighting last night in Tripoli with heavy loss of life when army opened up with artillery against unremitting fire.

3. Conclusion: Chamoun was on upswing of his diurnal shift in mood. Long visit [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] made with him last night at my request had done much to calm his nerves and net effect of Secretary’s message was to buoy him up. However we must not be blind to fact he is still repeating endless operation of demanding from General Chehab another battle plan “within 24 hours" none of which has yet been executed; and he is making no attempt either to detach elements of opposition, to reach a cease-fire and political armistice, or to find that political formula which Lodge (USUN’s 1516)7 correctly points out is an essential element to a solution without great power intervention. (Regrettably on other hand diehard opposition also is not seeking a solution which would be acceptable to Chamoun’s or our interest.)

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2058. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Repeated to London and USUN. Received at 10:44 a.m.

2 Supra.

3 The Department responded, in telegram 4918 to Beirut, June 20, that if Chamoun repeated the request for a paraphrase, McClintock should respond that, in view of the delicate nature of the matters discussed, it would be preferable that the message remain oral. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2058)

4 After Hammarskjöld left Lebanon on June 20, he visited Amman, Jerusalem, and Cairo to discuss a possible solution to the Middle East crisis. In telegram 4937 from Beirut, June 20, McClintock reported that he had outlined to Chamoun the line which he felt Hammarskjöld should take in his discussions with Nasser in Cairo. He felt that Hammarskjöld ask Nasser for assurances that the UAR would comply with the Security Council resolution of June 11, and should indicate that he was setting up a set of indicators against which he would publicly measure compliance. (Ibid.)

5 According to telegram 4862 from Beirut, June 18, Ambassador Middleton, on instructions from London, had urged Chamoun to make a nationwide radio broadcast calling on all citizens to lay down their arms within 24 hours, and offering a general amnesty to all who had not committed personal crimes. If, within 24 hours of this appeal, hostilities had not ceased, Middleton advised Chamoun to order General Chehab to deal with utmost severity with any dissident elements. If Chehab demurred or delayed, Middleton advised that he should be replaced by a more energetic commander. And if, after having recourse to these measures, the crisis still continued, Middleton concluded that it would then be possible to contemplate allied intervention as a last recourse. (Ibid., 783A.00/6–1858; included in the microfiche supplement)

6 In telegram 4918 to Beirut, the Department responded that British suppliers had expressed some hope of delivering the new aircraft within 3–4 weeks. The Department added, however, that the misgivings of the RAF training mission seemed well-founded.

7 See footnote 6, Document 96.

99. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of Central Intelligence (Dulles), Washington, June 20, 1958, 5:47 p.m. 99. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of Central Intelligence (Dulles), Washington, June 20, 1958, 5:47 p.m.1

Washington, June 20, 1958, 5:47 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM ALLEN DULLES

A is going back to Quantico and has been looking over the Lebanon situation. The military reports are not particularly good but are not dramatic. Re North Syria2 —A does not think the individuals mentioned have the potential to do this. The Sec said our people have the impression this has not much solid foundation. The Sec is worried about it—he thinks it is slowly disintegrating. A agreed and also they agreed Hammarskjold is not bucking it up very much. A said he is just stopping the fighting while there and he may have taken some of the morale away from our side. The Sec said they fear he is going to produce a Munich and the Sec thinks the fear is not without justification. The Sec referred to Ben Gurion’s anxiety and read from the paper.3 They agreed the situation is slipping down the drain and the Sec does not see any point where we can grab it and stop it. By the time Chamoun asks, if he does, for armed intervention the situation would have deteriorated to the point where it will be difficult to do it. It will take time to clear with the SC and then he probably will have gone. The interval between the request and going to the UN—during this he will have made himself quite a target. The Sec said we have a secret message to which he thinks we are making no reply.4 A knew about it. They talked with him. It is difficult and extremely dangerous to reply. A agreed with that and said we should keep in touch. He does not know the potential these people have. It looks as though the General turned them down. He takes a dim view of it but does not say he won’t go along if they succeeded. That is not very much. It is puzzling and at the request of Quarles he and Chris gave an innocuous briefing this a.m. A can come back at any moment and will be in touch with the office. He will be at the Sec’s with Lodge 5 p.m. Sunday.

A mentioned seeing reports of the possibility of a truce and an election. A thinks there might be something in that. There would be a truce until a new man is elected and then … .5 Neither knows whom you would elect. The Sec said it might be a possibility. A saw that in the press as coming from there. He will check. The Sec indicated looking into it.6

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 The reference is unclear.

3 Israeli Ambassador Abba Eban conveyed this anxiety in a conversation with Rountree on June 19. Eban referred to a report received by his government to the effect that U.N. observers in Lebanon were seeking to act as mediators. Israel felt that it was critical that the United Nations should not confer any status on the rebels in Lebanon. Under the Charter, the United Nations was only authorized to treat with governments. To do otherwise, Eban emphasized, would compromise the entire affair. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1958)

4 In a June 20 memorandum to the Ambassador, an Embassy official reported on a June 19 meeting with Colonel Adel Chehab in which Chehab discussed plans for a coup d’etat against President Chamoun. Chehab spoke for a group of military officers who, he said, had a pledge from General Chehab not to oppose the coup. According to Colonel Chehab, the General said that if there was a 1 per cent chance of such a coup succeeding, he would have directed it himself, but he was convinced that the western powers would prevent Chamoun from being deposed. Accordingly, Colonel Chehab approached the Embassy with the question: “Will there or will there not be intervention if their coup against President Chamoun takes place, and/or if it succeeds?” (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Beirut Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, June 16, 1958–June 20, 1958)

5 Ellipsis in the source text.

6 A marginal notation next to this paragraph, in an unknown hand, reads: “Rockwell does not believe this needs to be followed up.”

100. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell), Department of State, Washington, June 20, 1958 100. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell), Department of State, Washington, June 20, 19581

Washington, June 20, 1958

SUBJECT

Lebanon

Lord Hood this morning brought over a message from Selwyn Lloyd in which the Foreign Secretary suggested that the US and UK urgently recommend to President Chamoun that he request of Mr. Hammarskjold that a UN force for Lebanon be established. If Mr. Hammarskjold were to recommend such action to the Security Council, Mr. Lloyd believed there would be a much better chance of getting a favorable SC attitude. The UN force would not have any representatives of the major powers but would be utilized to carry out police action. This procedure would eliminate the need for US and UK intervention. Mr. Lloyd requested the Secretary’s urgent reaction.

The Secretary was consulted and believed that this step would be unwise. He felt that it might give President Chamoun the idea that we were trying to evade our commitments or possibly that this was merely a prior formality which he would have to undergo in advance of requesting our intervention. The Secretary also said that he did not want to approach Chamoun without first discussing the matter with the Secretary General and he believed the Secretary General had this type of idea very much in mind already.

I later conveyed the above conversation with the Secretary to Mr. Weir of the British Embassy, Lord Hood being absent in New York.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2058. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell.

101. Telegram From the Mission at the United Nations to the Department of State 101. Telegram From the Mission at the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, June 20, 1958—6 p.m.

1540. Re: Lebanon. In discussing situation in Lebanon with Mission officer today, Chechetkin (UN) said Soviets had strong fear that, under UK pressure, US would land Marines in Lebanon. He stated that, if this occurred, Soviets would immediately send “volunteers" to oppose such action.

Chechetkin, now Chief UN Commercial Management Services, was formerly Counselor Soviet UNDel and worked closely with Zarubin during GA sessions. We believe Soviet Delegation continues use him as channel for conveying Soviet views to US.

Barco

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2058. Confidential. Repeated to Moscow, Cairo, and Beirut.

102. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, June 22, 1958, 5 p.m. 102. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, June 22, 1958, 5 p.m.1

Washington, June 22, 1958, 5 p.m.

SUBJECT

Lebanon

The Secretary observed that the fact of outside intervention in the Lebanese crisis was demonstrable and recalled that the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in its consideration of the Atlantic Treaty had stated insurrection stimulated from without was aggression. The Secretary said that if there were no protection against this kind of thing the Communists would indeed have developed a technique which was invincible. The question of our possible intervention posed a difficult problem from a juridical standpoint and would be difficult in the United Nations. Yet the only thing worse than intervening if requested to do so by the Lebanese Government would be not to go in. Our intervention would probably result in the Governments of Jordan and Iraq being swept away and the Lebanese Government itself probably would not survive our withdrawal. The situation would of course be better if we went in under United Nations auspices. On the other hand if we were called upon and did not respond, the Governments of Jordan and Iraq would also be overthrown. In this respect there was little difference either way. The real difference lay with the peripheral countries. If we did not respond, it would gravely shake the confidence of the peripheral countries and in that case the consequences of our failure to act would not be limited to the Arab countries alone but would undermine the Northern Tier, Sudan and Libya. Obviously the best thing would be for Chamoun to work out a solution himself. Accordingly, our first priority should be to step up United Nations help but the United Nations should not get in a position between the government and the rebels. The eventual government which would emerge from such a resolution of the problem would not be a Chamoun government since its term was ending and he had privately said he would not run again for office. The new government would not be as pro-Western as Chamoun but might hold the balance between the West on the one hand and Nasser and Soviet influence on the other.

With reference to the language of the Middle East resolution, Mr. Quarles asked what was meant by the “independence” of Lebanon, to which the Secretary replied it meant independence from the United Arab Republic and the Soviet Union.

Mr. Lodge commented that our intervention would have very serious consequences and he wondered whether we had been sufficiently ruthless in our efforts to get a political compromise or to get Nasser to call this thing off. He noted that “fomenting civil strife” was part of the Essentials of Peace Resolution2 but he thought that sending in troops was not the way to deal with this problem. We should rather seek to outmaneuver and outsubvert the other side. However, if this matter should be raised in the United Nations, it would require very vigorous action. He would have to have all useful intelligence bearing on the case declassified so that he could undertake a comprehensive recitation of all the facts which might take up a whole afternoon session. This was a case in which we would have to speak to the smaller nations and endeavor to make this ambiguous Communist challenge appear unambiguous. Mr. Lodge stressed the importance of his having hard facts. At this point the available intelligence material was examined and it was agreed that as much as possible should be declassified and provided Mr. Lodge as a matter of urgency.

The Secretary observed that what was at stake here was the whole periphery of the Soviet Union. Our failure to respond to the Lebanese request for intervention might be technically justified since the conditions we attached to such intervention have not and will not be met. Yet the basic fact is that Lebanon is the most pro-Western Arab government in the area. It accepted the Eisenhower Doctrine. Our failure to respond would destroy the confidence in us of all the countries on the Soviet periphery throughout the Middle and Far East.

Mr. Quarles observed that Nasser and his associates were clearly offenders against international law in this case and that we were in the position of having to take the law into our own hands. What was needed was to create a situation in the United Nations in which action could be taken in the name of international law. Mr. Quarles also pointed out that in the meeting presided over by Governor Herter a few days earlier general agreement had been reached that full recourse to the United Nations should be had, including both the Security Council and the General Assembly.

The Secretary observed that as far as the United Nations was concerned, a great deal would depend on the evidence which the United Nations observers would send back and finally he stressed the importance in any intervention of having the participation of such non-European powers as Jordan, Iraq, Turkey and Pakistan.

The meeting was attended by the Secretary, Mr. Allen Dulles, Mr. Quarles, Mr. Rountree, Mr. Wilcox, Mr. Reinhardt, [Mr. Lodge].

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2258. Top Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt, cleared by Rountree and Wilcox. The source text indicates the conversation took place in the Secretary’s residence on Sunday afternoon. The participants are listed at the end of the memorandum.

2 U.N. doc. A/RES/290(IV), December 1, 1949.

103. Letter From the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) to the Secretary of State 103. Letter From the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) to the Secretary of State1

New York, June 23, 1958.

Dear Foster: I write this letter because I did not have time at the conference at your house yesterday2 to express all my thoughts about the use of troops in Lebanon.

Over much of my life I have given a lot of thought to this subject and while troops are absolutely indispensable under certain conditions, they are, under certain others, a method which has tremendous limitations. In fact, under certain conditions, for every problem that you solve with troops, you create ten others.

I suggest, therefore, that we have very definite ideas on the following:

How are we going to get our troops out once we have got them in?

How long shall they remain?

What will the formula be for getting them out?

What will the formula be for holding elections in Lebanon while our troops are there?

What happens if the elections should go definitely against us?

If no elections occur for a long time, what will the policy be concerning meetings of the Parliament and votes in Parliament?

And what if the votes in Parliament turn strongly against the United States troops?

You remember that we got our troops into Korea and we were unable to get them out until we had held a national election in this country, even though it was perfectly obvious that they should have come out long before they did.

Here is another question to which we should have a pretty clear answer in our own minds:

What do we do about the Iraqi and Jordanian governments? Under the present policy, I suppose that they would be just as much entitled to our assistance as Lebanon—if they decided to ask for it. Are we prepared to go into those countries too?

If intervention in Lebanon by U.S. troops becomes unavoidable it would be very much better for U.S. troops to go in alone. The world sees us in an entirely different light than it sees the U.K. and France.

If we go in alone the contrast with Suez would be brought out.

In the long run the decision might save American lives because passions might not be so bitter.

I have just sent you a wire telling you of Hammarskjold’s latest dispatch to the United Nations about his conversation with Nasser.3 This conversation, plus the efforts at compromise being made at Beirut, indicate a better chance for some political compromise than there has been for some time. Let’s hope something can be worked out which will prevent us from facing the horrible alternatives which you so eloquently described! I hope that the next few days show us some daylight at the end of the tunnel.

If do it we must, let us leave no stone unturned to present it properly.4

Faithfully yours,

Cabot L.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2358. Secret.

2 See supra.

3 Reference is to telegram 1547 from USUN, for the Secretary from Lodge, June 23, in which Lodge reported that Bunche had just telephoned to convey a message from Hammarskjöld in Cairo. Hammarskjöld said he was “most satisfied” with last night’s “operation.” He urged everyone to give the “operation” a chance, and “give time for the bandages to be removed from the patient.” (Department of State, Central Files, 320.5783A/6–2358)

4 Dulles responded on June 25 with a letter in which he assured Lodge that the “hard questions” posed by Lodge were being given a great deal of thought. He added: “The big question to my mind is must we reconcile ourselves to a world in which the independence of small nations can be effectively destroyed by means of armed insurrection fomented, directed, and augmented from without. If so, we are in a period reminiscent of Manchuria, Abyssinia, and Czechoslovakia. The technique is slightly different, but the substance is the same.” He concluded that the solution to the Lebanon crisis “must, I think, be something other than a Munich which will in fact end the independence of Lebanon and make it, in fact if not in form, a dependency of the UAR and perhaps, realistically, of the USSR.” (Ibid., 783A.00/6–2558; included in the microfiche supplement)

104. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1958 104. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 23, 19581

Washington, June 23, 1958

SUBJECT

Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Charles Lucet, Minister, French Embassy

Mr. Guy Toffin, First Secretary, French Embassy

NEA—Mr. William M. Rountree

NE—John Dorman

Mr. Lucet said he was calling on urgent instructions from the Foreign Office.

Mr. Lucet recalled that in a meeting with the French Ambassador last Friday, the Secretary had described the complications which might arise if French troops were to participate in a US–UK military intervention in Lebanon.2 The Foreign Office had now instructed the French Ambassador to inform the Department on an urgent basis that (1) it would, in the opinion of the Foreign Office, be far better if military intervention in Lebanon could be avoided altogether, and (2) if Western military intervention were decided upon it would be necessary for the French to participate in it. As the Department was aware, a French cruiser and patrol boat were now off the shores of Lebanon. If a request from President Chamoun for military intervention were received, the ships would be obliged to enter the port of Beirut. France has 4000 nationals in Lebanon as well as important economic and cultural interests which it must protect. If military intervention is undertaken by the West, even without a request from Chamoun, either inside or outside the UN, the French would wish to participate.

Mr. Rountree said he appreciated the promptness of the French Embassy in bringing this to our attention since it would be an important consideration in any decision we might take. The complications involved in French participation in military intervention in Lebanon had already been explained to Ambassador Alphand by the Secretary. At best a response to a call for military intervention would present many complications. The problem was to incur as little unfavorable reaction as possible not only in Lebanon but in other Arab countries. These considerations had no doubt been taken into account by the Foreign Office prior to the despatch of its message.

Mr. Lucet said that on May 16 President Chamoun had asked the French Government to be ready to intervene should the need arise. More recently, the Ambassador had talked with Prime Minister Malik, who had stated that it would be absolutely necessary for the French to participate in any western military action in Lebanon. The Lebanese, Mr. Lucet added, would be pleased to have the French participating.

Mr. Rountree pointed out the necessity for evaluating the effects of intervention not only on the Lebanese but also on the Iraqis and Jordanians and, to a lesser extent, on the Saudis and the Sudanese. In concluding that French participation would complicate military intervention, we were primarily concerned with the adverse reaction not so much in Lebanon as in the other Arab countries.

Mr. Lucet reiterated that he was acting on instructions from Paris. He must, he said, insist on the first of the two points, i.e., that military intervention in Lebanon should be avoided if it were at all possible. He requested on behalf of the Ambassador that this information be passed to the Secretary.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2358. Top Secret. Drafted by Dorman.

2 According to a summary of the June 20 meeting, transmitted to Paris in telegram 4828, June 20, Dulles emphasized to Ambassador Alphand that French participation in a military intervention in Lebanon would prejudice the effort because of opposition to France in the Arab world arising out of the Algerian problem and because of close French ties with Israel. (Ibid., 783A.00/6–2058; included in the microfiche supplement)

105. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1958 105. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 23, 19581

Washington, June 23, 1958

SUBJECT

The Situation in Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

Senator Green

Senator Fulbright

Senator Sparkman

Senator Wiley

Senator Hickenlooper

Mr. Carl Marcy

Secretary Dulles

Mr. Macomber

Mr. Farley (first part)

The Secretary led off the conversation by mentioning that the Euratom agreements had been sent to the Congress this morning by the President and stressed the importance he attached to their receiving prompt attention and action by the Congress.

The Secretary said that he wished to discuss the situation in Lebanon. He recalled the meeting which he had had with this group (and others) at the Capitol last May 15 and indicated that he wished to bring them up to date on developments which had taken place in the intervening period. The Secretary explained that the threat to the integrity of Lebanon continued but that the situation had become somewhat more complicated since his earlier meeting with the group. There was no question but what there had been considerable infiltration of personnel and equipment into Lebanon across the border from Syria and that this outside help had made a marked contribution to the disorders which have taken place in the country. The major source of outside agitation, however, was by radio broadcasts calculated to arouse the dissident elements against the government. The UN observers could be helpful in deterring further arms and personnel from coming across the border but this would not in itself solve the situation because of the personnel and arms which were already in place within the country.

The Secretary said that up to now we had difficulty in getting the government to move effectively against the dissident forces within their country. He then described the internal political situation among the pro-Western elements in Lebanon and discussed, in particular, the relationship between President Chamoun and General Chehab. He mentioned the possibility of the situation deteriorating into what is known in the area as a “confessional war.” He added that there were beginning to be some desertions of Moslems from the Army.

The Secretary said that as he had indicated at the earlier meeting, we had, some five weeks ago, given assurances to Chamoun that under certain conditions we would be prepared to send troops to Lebanon. These conditions included, among others, that there would be an official request by the Lebanese government for us to do so and that the government of Lebanon would have taken their case to the United Nations.

The Secretary said that if we should be called upon to send troops to Lebanon, we would be faced with a very serious dilemma. If we did send troops, the repercussions elsewhere in the Arab world would be extremely serious and the position of our friends in other countries in the Middle East would be jeopardized. Our move would be supported by a number of the governments of these states but it would not be popular with large portions of their populations. In addition, he pointed out that once we went in, we would probably have to stay in the Middle East until Nasserism had run its course. On the other hand, if we did not send troops and Lebanon was taken over by the UAR, the position of other friendly governments in the Middle East would also be in great danger and it probably would only be a matter of time before they, too, would be taken over by the UAR. In addition, if we failed to take action when one of our friends in the world was jeopardized, it would have a very serious effect on certain of our allies around the Soviet-Sino periphery. In this connection, he mentioned Iran, Turkey, Pakistan, Thailand, Viet-Nam, and the Republic of China, who would all view our failure to act as an indication of lack of willingness to support our friends when they are in trouble. The overall consequences of not going in if asked would therefore be extremely damaging—probably more so than if we did go in.

But the Secretary went on to say that it was clear that difficult consequences would follow regardless of which course we chose in the face of a request by Lebanon for American troops. For this reason, we were at the present time devoting our efforts to trying to prevent the situation from developing to the point where such a request would be forthcoming. In this connection, we were supporting the present United Nations effort and doing what we could to strengthen the effectiveness of the Lebanese government in dealing with the disorders. We are hoping that a combined United Nations effort on the borders and the government effort within the country can bring the situation under control.

The Secretary mentioned that the strongest card we have to play with Nasser in the present situation is the fact that if he does not discontinue UAR efforts to take over Lebanon, President Chamoun may cash the check which we gave him five weeks ago. The Secretary said that if we do have to send troops to Lebanon, we would not do so under the Middle East Resolution but on the grounds of protecting our interests in the area. (In this connection, however, the Secretary referred to the language in the Middle East Resolution which declared that the “United States regards as vital to the national interest and world peace the preservation of the independence and integrity of the nations of the Middle East.”)

The Secretary then talked generally about Nasser’s tactics and objectives in the Middle East. He likened Nasser’s Pan Arabism to Hitler’s Pan Germanism. Nasser is a demagogue who can stir up the crowds with his speeches but he has not demonstrated, and probably does not have, any capacity to consolidate the gains he has made. The Secretary cited the fact that he had succeeded in taking over Syria but instead of going to work on the legal, administrative, and economic problems involved in consolidating this accomplishment, he had directed his attention to taking over another country. The Secretary felt that in the end Nasser would become over extended and he would be brought down by the problems which he had created for himself. In response to a question, the Secretary said that he thought that the Russians probably had made a similar assessment of Nasser’s future. He thought the Russians were quite willing to use Nasser to displace the pro-Western elements in the Middle East and then plan on moving in on the heels of his downfall and taking over the area for themselves.

The question was asked why Syria seemed to go into the Nasser camp so easily. The Secretary said that he thought this has been the result of fear on the part of many Syrians that if they did not go over to Nasser, they would be taken over by the Communists.

The question was asked that if we sent troops into Lebanon would we not eventually have to send them into other countries in the Middle East such as Jordan and Iraq. The Secretary said that this was a possibility and was another reason why we hoped we would not have to go into Lebanon.

The Secretary was asked whether we had any ability through CIA to organize our own indigenous forces which could be used to combat the insurrectionists. It was suggested that many Turks and others from the area looked like Lebanese and could perhaps be infiltrated as counter forces. The Secretary did not give a direct answer to this question, although he did mention that consideration had been given sometime ago to the formation of a freedom corps made up of nationalities which could be used for occasions such as this. He also made reference to the difficulties of this kind of covert activity, citing the humiliating experience which King Saud had recently undergone when an operation of his backfired.

The Secretary was asked whether DeGaulle was making progress and he replied that the French Premier was making considerable progress. The Secretary paid a tribute to the work done by Mr. Murphy during the Beeley–Murphy good offices and pointed out that the recent Tunisian-French settlement was along the lines worked out by the good offices mission. With regard to Algeria, Senator Fulbright made the suggestion that the French ought to send Governor Munoz-Marin to Algeria to convince the Algerians of the advantages of a Puerto Rican type of solution to their situation.

The question was asked whether Ambassador Malik had been active in the Lebanese situation and the Secretary said that Malik was in constant touch with the Department and was spending his time shuttling back and forth between New York and Washington. In response to another question, the Secretary indicated that the size of the Lebanese army was between 5, 000 and 6, 000 men.

The question of President Chamoun’s running again was raised. The Secretary said that it was out of the question and this was generally understood in Lebanon. However, Chamoun was reluctant to make any formal announcement to this effect as he felt it would completely undercut his influence during the remaining period of his term. The question was asked whether there was any suitable successor to Chamoun and the Secretary replied in the negative. He said there were a number of educated and intelligent people in Lebanon who could take over under normal circumstances but he did not see any leader who was up to the extraordinary requirements of the present situation. The Secretary explained that the Parliament was scheduled to elect a new president in July and that Chamoun’s term ran out in September.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2358. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Macomber.

106. Memorandum From the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) to the Secretary of State 106. Memorandum From the Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) to the Secretary of State1

New York, June 26, 1958.

Following is substance of what Hammarskjold said to Lodge: 1. The situation can perhaps best be summed up by the statement of Gallo Plaza that “the world is being taken for a ride”.

2. In essence, it is a squabble which revolves around Chamoun, who has not been a clever politician and has prevented people accustomed to sharing in the spoils of office from getting their share. This has made enemies out of them and is the basis of the opposition. There appears to be no other common bond between the members of the opposition—certainly not a desire to throw in their fortunes with Nasser.

3. Chamoun has not during this entire period spoken to the people or the opposition.

4. No definite orders have ever been issued to the Army concerning the rebels. As far as the Army is concerned, Chamoun adopts a “Gandhi-esque” attitude.

5. It took the Lebanese authorities six days to produce for interrogation by the UN group the two so-called Syrian staff officers about whom Malik spoke to me almost a week ago. Both of them turned out to be minors, both illiterate, and both said the testimony that they gave was given under duress. They are not Syrian staff officers.

6. The only non-individual weapon which the UN Observer Group has found is one 120 mm. mortar.

7. If the UN Observer Group were to report today its report would explode the whole government case—which the SYG thinks would be a very poor thing to do.

8. While there is “the most solid collusion” between the rebels and Syria, no one produces any evidence which the UN group can report.

9. Ben Gurion calls the Lebanese crisis a “bad melodrama”, the Jerusalem Post entitles it “the phoney war in Lebanon”.

10. On Monday Fawzi told him Nasser had called Prime Minister of Syria and given categorical instructions that as of Tuesday morning, June 24, no further supply of men or material should be made or permitted to be given to the Lebanese rebels. These instructions were given after the SYG’s five hour meeting with Nasser on Sunday during which the SYG says he “pulled no punches”, used “no anesthetics”, and had “never gone so far”. SYG said Fawzi had never lied to him before. The SYG said that he had not the slightest doubt such orders had been given.

11. SYG was certain that information on these orders had gotten straight through to opposition leaders in Lebanon. His reason for this was that they had had a very important meeting Monday night which he understood to have been stormy. In any case, he said it would seem that information would inevitably soon get through when Syrian army received orders in accordance with Nasser’s instructions.

12. The SYG said Fawzi had asked him whether he intended to tell the Lebanese about these orders. Hammarskjold said he would not, because he did not want to be in the middle-man position, and understood why Nasser would not like publicity which created impression that SYG, in one visit, had talked Nasser into changing his policy. Fawzi said this was good, because if there was no amnesty for the rebels, it would be difficult for the SYG to imagine what kind of position he (Fawzi) would be in. The SYG told Fawzi he did not think it was likely, in light of Lebanese psychology, that rebel leaders would be punished.

13. The SYG started his conversation with Nasser by reviewing the Security Council resolution.2 He told him he believed it was strongly in Nasser’s interest that the resolution succeed. He told Nasser he did not think the Russians wanted to intervene in the Middle East, but if the UAR got heavily involved, it might, and the whole area would become an area of Western-Soviet conflict. The SYG said he thought Nasser was very much afraid of the Middle East becoming such an area.

14. The SYG said Malik had told him that Nasser had greatly stepped up UAR intervention in Lebanon when Lebanon made the complaint to the Arab League and the Security Council. Nasser told him that all he had done at that time was to lift the ban previously placed against Syrian activities. SYG told Nasser he was not interested in whether the UAR was committing sins of omission or commission. Either was bad. The SYG told Nasser that if he could assume the role of UAR Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, he would tell Nasser that he had overplayed his hand very badly and that the best thing for him to do would be to get out and get out quick. Nasser made no comment. The SYG told Nasser that he did not want promises from him but wanted him to consider the situation and act upon it in light of these conclusions. Nasser’s call to Syria and Fawzi’s report to the SYG followed this meeting.

15. He showed us letter he had just written for transmittal to Fawzi. The letter referred to conversations he had had with Nasser and information Fawzi had given him about Nasser’s orders to Syria. The SYG had also spoken to Nasser in very blunt terms about Cairo Radio propaganda and the letter strongly urged that propaganda be stopped immediately. He did not give us a copy of the letter, which he is presumably sending today. The letter also included a statement that the SYG thought that if the UAR carried through with its plans, all foreign intervention would be avoided in Lebanon.

16. The SYG did not reveal to Chamoun this interview and Nasser’s instructions. He told Chamoun only that he was optimistic with “strong sense of responsibility and full integrity” and that he did not think any further UN steps needed to be taken at this time. Contrary to newspaper reports, the SYG said Chamoun had not given him any request for UN police force or asked him for any further action at this time.

17. In his conversation with Chamoun after returning from Cairo, Chamoun asked whether authority of the observers could be strengthened without a new SC decision. The SYG replied that it would not because to strengthen UN position would require it to be able to use force. The SYG thought effects of Chamoun calling on UN to assume this authority would be very bad internally and Chamoun agreed. SYG said SC decisions to give UN observers authority to use force required a decision that aggression had been committed, which he was doubtful could be sustained. He also said he did not feel the SC could delegate its authority under Chapter 73 to the SYG, i.e., that decision to use force had to be clearly made by the SC.

18. Chamoun asked whether the UN could put a UNEF on the border. The SYG said he could not really judge this question because the big powers would have to make up their minds in light of their own interests. However, he questioned whether there was need for such action, pointing out again that it would mean use of force under Chapter 7. In order to carry out such an operation effectively one to two divisions of troops would be required or the operation would not be worthwhile. It would only be possible to get that many troops from the big powers, which in itself raised many political questions. He also pointed out that the number of troops would be two to three times the size of the Lebanese Government forces, with obvious political overtones. Such force would be bound to run into clashes with unorganized elements of Syrian frontier. He thought this would be opposed by communist agents who he was sure were in Syria and that it might ultimately end in “communist volunteers” arriving.

19. He told Chamoun he thought Chamoun should be very sure about imperative need before he asked for such help. He said Chamoun agreed. Chamoun had commented that he could, of course, ask for help under Article 51 of the Charter.4 SYG agreed that he could, but pointed out that this also had major political repercussions, and that it would exclude progress which he had reason to expect. Chamoun then said he was not asking SYG for anything at the moment. Gora (?), an assistant to Chamoun, said at the airfield that “if there is no more infiltration we are out of it.”

20. The SYG told Chamoun that if he wanted to wreck everything he felt he had accomplished, best way to do this would be to have newspapers start speculating that Nasser was backing down as a result of the SYG’s visit to Cairo. Fawzi had mentioned this problem to him before he left. Just before SYG’s departure Wednesday, Lebanese Government official had come to him and asked him whether he did not think that they had handled the press situation well. This was obviously a reference to the fact that the press was continuing to treat SYG’s trip to Cairo with great skepticism.

21. SYG said that his plan for settlement of the Lebanese situation included three elements: (a) Lock internal Lebanese situation into stalemate by fact of the presence of UN observers throughout the country;

(b) Get to Egyptians and tell them that they had to get out quick, including radio propaganda and including actions of both commission and omission, and

(c) Get situation into position where the opposition cannot count on UAR backing and Chamoun could not expect to receive outside aid by simply pressing button. He thought under these circumstances Lebanese would resolve situation themselves.

22. He hoped that the situation could be played out for another week while we watch the results of his Cairo visit. The situation should then settle down considerably, although some shooting would continue until the elections were held on July 24.

23. Lodge referred to the opinion of Plaza that Chamoun apparently hoped to use the trump of Western intervention to maintain himself as President for another term. SYG said he hoped, in view of the results he looks for from his talk to Nasser, if such request for external assistance came, that we would give Chamoun a conditional answer which would not result in immediate intervention. The answer could point out that Chamoun had not made a public statement of his intention not to run, that Army was not vigorously defending the government, that he had not even ordered the Army to do so, etc.

24. SYG regarded the present political situation in Lebanon as an absolute stalemate. He said the Army could not be trusted to support the government. The rebels were not united in action or ideas except in opposition to Chamoun. Both the government and the opposition had about equal strength. Everyone was thinking about what the situation would be tomorrow and were therefore sitting back. No one wanted to do anything irrevocable. The opposition and the government were also keeping in touch with each other through many subtle ways. If foreign influences could be eliminated—if the Lebanese were alone “in one goldfish bowl”—he thought there was a very good chance that a satisfactory political compromise could be achieved.

25. SYG said the main mood of the rebels was anti-Chamoun, whom he described as a very inept politician. While it probably included some strong Arab nationalist elements, the mood was not anti-Western. He could not say the revolt had been “staged” by UAR. Probably both sides were taking a stronger position than they would otherwise because of expectations of outside backing. Neither had revolt been “spontaneous”. It was brought about by cliques of important Lebanese leaders whom Chamoun had removed from office. Cliques had gone to “street” while Nasser was in Moscow. Probably there had been Syrian participation at the outset, but he did not seem to think Nasser had actively condoned intervention until Lebanon had complained to the Arab League and the SC.

26. He thought Druzes were getting some supplies from within Syria by mules over old hashish routes. In north of Lebanon there is also some movement back and forth across borders. He also thought some supplies were coming directly from Damascus. As far as Cairo was concerned he thought it was more situation of letting a situation go on than starting it.

27. UN observers had received practically no concrete evidence of UAR involvement. Chamoun proudly told SYG that Lebanese Army had destroyed two 81 mm mortars with its first salvo in position near Baalbek. SYG asked whether this had been reported to UN observers and commented that two days later (now) Lebanon still had made no report on it.

28. On his general attitude toward situation, SYG said that although he was used to Arab world, he would have to say that he was “shocked”. SYG pointed out extraordinary approach of Chamoun. He told others he would not run for President again but had not told this to Lebanese people. He had not tried to reach opposition leaders to arrange settlement. Opposition leaders were given safe conduct passes through army lines, and were allowed to contact each other by telephone. The Government had not even shut off electricity to rebel centers in Beirut. Chamoun has not made any direct appeal or speech to Lebanese people and he had not taken firm hand within the government. SYG had impression Samei el-Solh was fully loyal to Chamoun. He also was staying on as Prime Minister in order to prevent situation from becoming Christian–Moslem conflict. SYG said all three of the UN Observer Groups and Labouisse concurred in his analysis of the situation.

29. SYG said he was not going to tell this story fully to others (presumably he meant primarily UK and that he does not intend to tell them full story of Nasser’s orders or possibly also his completely frank estimate of the situation. He was very anxious that information about his conversation with Nasser not be revealed).

30. SYG recommends earnestly that we give a chance for the progress he had made with Nasser and Chamoun to produce results.

31. At the conclusion of the SYG’s statement I said that I was astounded at his picture of the situation, which conflicted in so many ways with what we understood to be the case. For example, I said that I was preparing a speech of several hours’ duration consisting of what we believe to be hard facts showing massive infiltration and attempts by Nasser to take over the state.

32. The SYG’s answer was that none of these facts which I had were being given to the UN group and that all that Loutfi, the Egyptian representative, would have to do would be to ask why these facts had not been made available to the group.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2658. Top Secret. Lodge sent the memorandum to the Department from USUN following his discussion with Hammarskjöld of the results of the Secretary-General’s trip to the Middle East. After meeting with Nasser and Fawzi in Cairo June 22–23, Hammarskjöld went back to Beirut on June 24 for a final discussion with Chamoun before returning to New York on June 26. For background information and public statements relating to Hammarskjöld’s trip, see Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations, Vol. 4: Dag Hammarskjöld, 1958–1960 (New York, 1974), pp. 106–120.

2 Reference is to the Security Council resolution of June 11; see Document 66.

3 Chapter 7 of the U.N. Charter is entitled “Action With Respect to Threats to the Peace, Breaches of the Peace, and Acts of Aggression”. For text of the Charter, see A Decade of American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1941–1949, pp. 95–110.

4 Article 51 of the U.N. Charter preserves the “inherent right of individual or collective self-defense if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the United Nations, until the Security Council has taken the measures necessary to maintain international peace and security.”

107. Editorial Note 107. Editorial Note

In his June 26 briefing of the National Security Council on significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Allen Dulles offered the following assessment of developments in Lebanon: “Turning to the situation in Lebanon, Mr. Allen Dulles said there had been no significant change overnight. However, the truce, which had been observed during the visit of the Secretary General of the United Nations, was now over. From Hammarskjöld himself we have learned that he is opposed to the intervention of foreign troops in Lebanon, whether UN forces or other forces. He believes that a force adequate to police the border could not be formed from the armies of the smaller countries, and he does not wish to risk the prestige of the UN by a failure to provide an adequate force. While he thinks that there has been a considerable infiltration of Syrians into Lebanon, he is also convinced that the hostilities in Lebanon are largely internal. He seems to be impressed with the views of President Nasser.

“Meanwhile, there had been a good many reports that rebel forces in and around Beirut are soon going to make a large-scale attack on the city. There is continued clear evidence of UAR financial and other support to the rebel forces. Meanwhile also, there are clear indications that General Chehab is continuing his equivocal policy. Accordingly, the situation drags on without any dramatics, although the tempo of military operations will soon be stepped up.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 370th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason on June 27; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

108. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Department of State, Washington, June 27, 1958 108. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Department of State, Washington, June 27, 19581

Washington, June 27, 1958

SUBJECT

Lebanon

Lord Hood said that Mr. Dixon had seen Mr. Hammarskjold last night and had been filled in on his Middle East mission. He assumed that Mr. Hammarskjold had also informed Ambassador Lodge. It seemed clear that what Mr. Hammarskjold envisaged was a short respite in order to provide time for political solutions in Lebanon. Mr. Selwyn Lloyd now felt that the United States, the United Kingdom and France should urge such a solution.

Although we had been reluctant in the past to inform Chamoun that he should step down, it now seemed necessary to advise him on the political future. Chamoun had stated privately that he would not expect to seek reelection, but there still was widespread doubt as to his intentions in this regard. Until these doubts were resolved, it appeared unlikely that progress could be made in selecting and obtaining support for his successor. If the present situation should continue, there was a grave danger that Chamoun himself might be thrown out by the rebels, leading to chaos in Lebanon with the likelihood of an ultimate takeover by the UAR. On the other hand, if Chamoun should declare his intention not to seek reelection, it might be possible to rally moderate elements in support of a satisfactory alternate.

Lord Hood said that Mr. Selwyn Lloyd, therefore, proposed that the three Ambassadors should make a formal demarche advising Chamoun to make a public statement on the election. They would say that we envisaged his role to use his influence in the background rather than in the office of President itself. The first step should be for Chamoun and ourselves to agree upon a successor whom we would all support.

In addition to this political move, Mr. Selwyn Lloyd thought that we should support to the maximum U.N. action in the Lebanon for the purpose of reducing the rebels’ effectiveness while working to strengthen the Government.

Lord Hood said that Mr. Lloyd planned to be in Paris on Sunday and would like to discuss this approach with the French if the Secretary agreed.

The Secretary commented upon the order in which the various matters might best be considered with Chamoun. He thought it important that a decision be made as to the best candidate in lieu of Chamoun, before Chamoun is asked to make a public statement that he would not stand for reelection. The discussion of the successor could be based on Chamoun’s statement to us that he would not seek reelection. The Secretary instructed Mr. Rountree to draft a possible communication which would provide the basis for instructions to Ambassador McClintock. This draft should then be discussed with the British. He said that until we had had further discussions between the U.S. and the U.K., it was difficult to comment upon the wisdom of taking the matter up with the French at this juncture. We should have a better idea on this before Mr. Selwyn Lloyd’s proposed visit to Paris.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2758. Top Secret. Drafted by Rountree on June 28.

109. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 109. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 28, 1958—5 p.m.

5194. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] called at noon today on President to deliver message from Malik indicating he expected little or nothing from UN “and therefore our being able to ask for foreign aid.” Chamoun put very dark interpretation on this message and told [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] it seemed to confirm his suspicion US was wavering in its resolve to give assistance, ([less than 1 line of source text not declassified] full account of interview separately.)2 President went on to say refusal of Secretary to permit him paraphrase of oral message set out Deptel 48903 corroborated his suspicion as he “could not even read to his Cabinet message from the Secretary of State.”

General tenor of interview was Chamoun’s conviction matters are rapidly reaching a head in Lebanon. He described intensive night fighting in Tripoli yesterday and several times during interview spoke of an “impending massacre.” However he said he would be steadfast not to ask our intervention unless all his resources had been expended and the “massacre” was upon him.

President revealed complete distrust of Hammarskjold saying he was either “the most conceited man in the world or the most deceitful.” On suggestion GOL should make utmost effort to provide immediate evidence to UN observers he dismissed this as useless.

Minister Finance Edde told me last night Chamoun informed him he was certain of British intervention.

Reasoning set out in Embtel 51804 is, I believe, still valid; but tempo is increasing. We have now established a confidential voice radio link between Chamoun [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and myself. Although I do not expect an oral request for intervention this weekend as Chamoun underlined his forces were still fighting, we do conclude he has given up hope of successfully resorting to UN and that Malik’s message has caused him to doubt bona fides of our offer of military intervention.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2858. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Memorandum to the Ambassador, June 30. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Beirut Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, June 21, 1958–June 30, 1958; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Document 97.

4 In telegram 5180 from Beirut, June 28, McClintock indicated that he had learned from Ambassador Middleton that London intended to recommend a joint démarche to Chamoun on the part of the three Western Ambassadors suggesting a political settlement of the crisis. He noted that all three Ambassadors concurred that under existing circumstances, Chamoun was not inclined to move toward a compromise settlement. McClintock recommended waiting an additional week to determine the success of the Hammarskjöld initiative in reducing UAR intervention in Lebanon. If it succeeded, the three Ambassadors could then build upon that success with a joint approach to Chamoun to propose a political solution. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/ 6–2858; included in the microfiche supplement)

110. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 110. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, June 29, 1958—11:35 a.m.

5080. View fact that date approaching when under Lebanese constitution election of new President can be held, and of need for US, UK and France know Chamoun’s thinking as far in advance of election as possible what candidate would be most suitable in current circumstances, we believe that, either jointly or separately, you and your British colleague, and your French colleague if Paris has instructed him, should seek early opportunity to discuss this problem with President Chamoun.

In conversation with Chamoun you should refer to fact that he has on several occasions stated clearly to us that he does not plan to seek reelection. You should state that in these circumstances it seems to us most desirable that his great influence in Lebanon be used to insure the greatest possibilities for the election of a person in whom he has confidence and who shares his determination to defend independence and integrity of Lebanon. Accordingly and in view of our desire to be helpful to Lebanon in this matter we would appreciate receiving his views as to who might be desirable candidate. We will naturally hold these views in strictest confidence.

These instructions coordinated with UK. French Embassy informed.

UK and French Ambassadors Beirut presumably will receive similar instructions for coordination with you.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2858. Top Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree, Deputy Assistant Secretary Frederick W. Jandrey in EUR, and Dulles. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN. When Rountree telephoned Dulles on the morning of June 28 to obtain his clearance for this telegram, Dulles instructed that the text be changed to solicit Chamoun’s opinion as to the most suitable candidate for the presidency rather than to make reference to U.S. efforts to help facilitate the election of a suitable candidate. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

111. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 30, 1958 111. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, June 30, 19581

Washington, June 30, 1958

SUBJECT

The Lebanese Situation

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Charles Malik, Foreign Minister of Lebanon

Mr. Nadim Dimechkié, Ambassador of Lebanon

The Secretary

Mr. Stuart Rockwell, NE

Mr. Joseph J. Sisco, UNP

Reading from notes, Foreign Minister Malik conveyed to the Secretary the substance of a telephone conversation Malik had had with Chamoun this morning. Malik reported that Chamoun said the following.

Illegal infiltrations were going on undiminished; they were taking place at night, and UN observers were not able to confirm infiltrations because they did not operate at night and because they do not reach points on the frontier where the infiltrators go. The observers spend their time in social clubs at night and some of them spend their days at the seaside. The situation in Tripoli is very serious and the insurgents used bazookas and mortars. The amount of fire was so great that it suggests that the insurgents may have considerably more ammunition than the governmental forces. Syrian officers are commanding movements of the insurgents in the Shouf area, and the situation in Beirut is somewhat serious. The army is working hard and doing its best. He did not know what the Secretary General’s optimism was based on. If Hammarskjold’s optimism is based on Nasser’s promise, the Americans know how much Nasser’s and Syria’s promises are worth. Will they keep such promises? Is it conceivable that Nasser has given up the idea of destroying Lebanese independence? Hammarskjold has not been given a promise not to destroy the pro-Western orientation of Lebanon, and even if Nasser has given such a promise, the facts are to the contrary since infiltrations and the radio and press campaign continue undiminished. It is not a question of Hammarskjold or the observers since there are inherent limitations in both. It is the question of the clear pledge of the US. What has brought the present fury of Sovietism and Nasserism to Lebanon? It was Lebanon’s adherence to the Eisenhower Doctrine which has brought about Lebanon’s present difficulties. Two questions evolve from these difficulties. First, will the US come to the assistance of Lebanon within or without the UN? Second, will US aid be directed against aggression, direct or indirect? He had heard conflicting statements by the US. (At this point Malik said he responded to Chamoun that neither President Eisenhower nor Secretary Dulles has made any statements which indicated a change of US policy.) We certainly will and must exhaust every possibility before asking for direct aid. This matter affects Lebanon, her children and her children’s children. Lebanon does not approach this question in a frivolous way or light-heartedly. We will pick the right moment for intervention. A number of countries in the area know the importance of the battle. If Lebanese independence is compromised, other friendly countries in the area will go. Lebanon is holding the dike and this is a battle not for Lebanon alone but it is a battle of the West. If Lebanon goes, the West will go down too. All members of the Cabinet and the Prime Minister agree with the above.

After reporting the foregoing as Chamoun’s words, Malik turned to a special message which he said he had received from Chamoun a few days ago. He reported that Chamoun is not prepared to accept any compromise. There were three reasons: First, that as a matter of principle Nasser should not have any voice in the external or internal affairs of Lebanon; second, that any compromise would be detrimental to Lebanon’s foreign policy, would weaken the legal authority, and help the insurgents; and third, that he is opposed to any negotiations with the opposition group as long as there are Egyptians and Syrians on Lebanese soil. Any stopping of the fighting would help the rebels. Chamoun recognized the limitations of the observers. While Chamoun agreed that the army could do better, it was nevertheless not idle. They have killed two thousand which is equivalent to four hundred thousand killed in the US. It must not be forgotten that 40 percent of the army is Moslem and therefore the army must be handled carefully. Chamoun will fight this battle until he wins or collapses because this is a battle for freedom and for stability and peace in the Middle East. It transcends Lebanese interests.

Malik then said he would now like to make a statement of his own. He thought Lebanon was involved in a struggle concerning whose outcome the US cannot be indifferent. It was not an internal problem alone; it far transcended Lebanon. He said that “Chamoun may be this or that, Chehab may be this or that, Malik may be this or that, various politicians in Lebanon may be this or that, internal problems in Lebanon may be this or that; but allowing that there is something rotten in the kingdom of Denmark, must we allow the kingdom of Denmark to go to pieces?”

Malik then raised two questions: “First, is the total international situation at present such that it cannot be helped that friendship with the West, and in particular with the US, puts governments and individuals in the Middle East at a decided disadvantage? Secondly, is the international situation such that it cannot be helped that Nasser and the communists must score yet another advance in the Middle East?" Malik said individuals were unimportant except insofar as they are called upon to play an important role. Individuals were fully expendable. “If there is any hitch as to individuals as obstacles to the useful course of history, such a situation should be discussed frankly.”

The Secretary said he was starting from the premise that we are agreed that every practical measure should be taken to prevent a victory for Nasser and communism and that we should act in such a way as to make it clear that friendship with the West is an asset and not a liability. The Secretary said the practical question is what we do in present circumstances. The Secretary recalled that we had done quite a bit, including military equipment, strong support of Lebanon in the UN, and our assistance in bringing about the adoption of a resolution in the Security Council.

The Secretary then said that on one important point our information did not agree with that of the Lebanese. Our intelligence sources indicated that there has been a considerable reduction or termination of infiltrations across the border. We have good independent intelligence sources and much concrete evidence regarding operations in Lebanon. The activities of the UN and Hammarskjold have brought about a large cessation of infiltration. The Secretary did not know how long it would last for the rebels may already have received great quantities of assistance. But we could not honestly say today on the basis of our own intelligence that the UN operation had failed.

The Secretary then turned to the practical question of what to do. He said we both agreed that sending Western troops is disastrous. While military intervention by the US might be the lesser of two evils, it would touch off anti-Westernism and rally a bigger percentage of the Lebanese people against the Lebanese Government. Moreover, it might jeopardize other friendly governments such as Iraq and Jordan. The governments of the West would not be united because some are strongly opposed to intervention. Moreover, most UN members would oppose such intervention in view of Hammarskjold’s belief that UNoperations are having a desirable effect. The Secretary emphasized that on the basis of our information we could not dispute Secretary General Hammarskjold’s view in this regard.

The Secretary continued that we therefore come back to the proposition that the Lebanese matter should be resolved without the use of troops from the outside, particularly forces from the big powers. We are not deterred by nor do we fear the USSR. Our military experts feel that we are stronger vis-à-vis the USSR today than we may be in the future since the Soviets for the purposes of economy have skipped the long-range bomber stage and have gone directly into missiles development.

The Secretary said there is concern about the innumerable difficulties and issues which intervention would precipitate. The Secretary recalled how the US opposed the intervention of the UK and France and Israel in 1956. While the Lebanese situation is no parallel, the man in the street sees no real difference and intervention would undoubtedly be misrepresented in the Middle East. It is easy to get into Lebanon but it is hard to get out without promoting strong anti-Western feeling and anti-Americanism. A government sustained by bayonets is not a good situation. While intervention may be a lesser of two great evils, the Secretary thought we must use all our resources and imagination to avoid it. The Secretary also made it clear that he considered the greater evil to be that the appeal of a small country go unheeded and Lebanon thereby lose its independence.

The Secretary then referred to Malik’s comments regarding individuals and their expendability. The Secretary said that Ambassador McClintock had been instructed to raise with Chamoun the question of Chamoun’s purposes and plans. The Secretary asked: If Chamoun decides not to run, as he had indicated to us previously, who is going to take over? What is the political future in Lebanon? The Secretary said it ought to be possible to find an individual oriented to the West. Surely, if there were only one or two individuals oriented to the West, the situation was very bad. The Secretary said we need to think together on how to prepare the situation if Chamoun is not running. Economic support would be important to Lebanon and helpful to the individual who is to succeed Chamoun. The election could be only about four weeks hence and therefore careful plans have to be made. The US was not trying to play politics in Lebanon or prescribe what should be done in the situation, but this was a problem which had to be explored. At this point the Secretary elaborated on the French attitude indicating their insistence on participation if the US and the UK intervene. The Secretary said this would bring all of the problems of North Africa to the Lebanese situation and make it more difficult.

The Secretary said that the use of naked force represented in a sense a failure of statesmanship. On the other hand, there has to be a willingness to use force in the last resort, otherwise diplomacy will not be able to do its job. If hostile forces believe that you are afraid to use force, they will pressure you into making concessions. It was necessary to be willing to fight.

The Secretary said he did not exclude the possibility that the evidence of cessation of outside assistance may lead to diminishing efforts on the part of the rebels. Perhaps the rebels have already been so considerably supplied that diminished efforts on their part will not follow. Nevertheless, it was important that preparations be made for handling the political situation in Lebanon. If Chamoun were to run again there would be considerable disadvantage since it would look as if the US policy was directed to supporting one individual. It would be a great sign of weakness if there were only one person who could carry forward the pro-Western orientation of Lebanon. Plans should be made to select someone in whom Chamoun has confidence; this man should not represent a compromise with Nasser. The Secretary said he opposed a deal with Nasser, and he did not favor the election of someone who could be expected to adopt a policy of Nasser pan-Arabism. The Secretary said it was essential that someone be selected who is acceptable to Chamoun and Malik and who reflects the Lebanese spirit of independence.

Malik agreed on the necessity of going ahead and making plans for a political change. He said that Chamoun has been so harassed that he has not had time to think about these matters. Moreover, in the mechanism of the transfer of power it should be possible to arrange the transfer in such a manner that it will not reduce the power to be transferred. It would be particularly important that the authority and political power of the Government not be diminished in relationship to the rebels.

The Secretary said that we were concerned with this latter point. He said that we could be of help to a prospective successor, particularly with respect to certain measures of economic support. A period of weakness might therefore be avoided. The Secretary once again emphasized that plans must be carefully prepared. Malik said that if this issue can be cleared up, a move could be made to the next stage. He said that what the Secretary seemed to be saying was a condition precedent to the next stage. The Secretary said that the question of Chamoun’s political successor had become a more pressing issue since the elections were only four weeks away. Mr. Rockwell added that this would be particularly the case if there should be a lessening of pressure from the insurgents against the Government.

The Secretary said that Hammarskjold was convinced that a good start had been made in accomplishing his mission. He may be right or he may be wrong. Nevertheless, as long as Hammarskjold is convinced of this fact, it would be extremely difficult to get further UN action. The Secretary said there would not seem to be any advantage in pressing now for further UN action. Moreover, he did not believe it would be possible to get seven votes in the Security Council as long as Hammarskjold is satisfied that the UN effort has not failed.

The conversation closed with Malik referring to his own personal plans. Malik felt that there was no longer any necessity for him to stay on since he did not expect any Security Council action in the near future. Nevertheless, he said he might be useful if Chamoun indicated to him his thoughts regarding the political issue, and he could then be of some service here in discussing the issue with the Secretary. The Secretary concluded by emphasizing once again the importance of making plans so that a prospective successor could be assured of appropriate assistance, resources, and support.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–3058. Top Secret. Drafted by Sisco on July 1. The conversation was summarized in telegram 5097 to Beirut, June 30. (Ibid.)

112. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 112. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 1, 1958—4 p.m.

14. Three Ambassadors met with President Chamoun this morning to make tripartite demarche authorized Deptel 50802 with modifications worked out in Paris between British and French Foreign Ministers reflected Paris telegrams 6278 and 6279.3

1. Interview opened with an account by Chamoun of present military situation. He was pleased at yesterday’s action in the Chouf in which Jumblat’s Druzes had suffered losses and had been repelled from vicinity of Chemlan. Army and Air Force with gendarmérie were continuing offensive operations against Jumblat today. Chamoundwelt at length on strategic importance of the Chouf where he said all Lebanon’s decisive battles for past 400 years had been fought. He pointed out control of Chouf permitted domination of access to Beirut, to the Bekaa from the coast and coastal communications with Sadon. Beirut was quiet although Basta might erupt at any time. Fighting in Tripoli had been very severe with estimated casualties on rebel side between two and three hundred in each of the two preceding nights. Insurgent military command in Tripoli was now in Syrian hands, said Chamoun, there having been violent differences between Rashid Karame and the Baathist leader Rafi which had been compromised by giving military direction to a Syrian officer. However, Army was reacting energetically in Tripoli and its defensive lines seemed well held. (This point is corroborated by ARMA.) Intelligence indicated rebels were bringing in 120 millimeter mortars at Minia north of Tripoli for attack tonight against army lines. Situation around Baalbek and the Bekaa generally was quiet. In response to our question President said he thought military balance was leaning lightly in favor of government.

2. Ambassadors then pointed out that despite this light balance in government’s favor, it looked like a long drawn-out insurrection unless there could be some sort of political solution. By previous arrangement French Ambassador made his representation first. It included reference to advisability of a statement by Chamoun to his own people of intent not seek re-election; and of need for consideration of forming a government with as wide a possible base of national union to facilitate an eventual compromise. Chamoun listened to this representation with obvious distaste.

3. I followed, limiting my intervention to terms of paragraph 2, Deptel 5080 which I presented orally. This was the only element of tripartite representation made in English as French was language of our conversation.

4. Middleton then associated himself with French démarche indicating with my complete agreement that all three Ambassadors had a friendly concern as to how political future of Lebanon would shape up, pointing out need to look beyond fixed dates such as July 24 and September 23.

5. Chamoun made his reply in mounting choler. He said “if I am in the situation you find me in today, it is precisely because I have been a friend of the west. If I had wished an easy life or to be reelected for a second term by a unanimous vote, all I had to do was follow a policy of positive neutrality. Instead of that in 1956 I refused to break relations with you—England and France—and this was the start of my troubles. It is because of my pro-western policy that you find me fighting today.”

He said he had noticed many signs which seemed to indicate our three governments were having second thoughts on guarantees given for Lebanon’s integrity and independence. He did not at all relish political advice he was now being given. With flushed face and rising inflection he said all he wished to know was where he stood in respect to guarantees given by three western powers. He would await a response from our respective governments.

6. I said so far as US was concerned I could give him a straight answer now. I said our readiness to intervene to assist Lebanon to maintain its integrity and independence has not changed but remained as defined to him in my interviews of May 14, May 24, June 16 (when I left a letter) and my oral presentation of a message from the Secretary of State on June 20 (Deptel 4890).4 Matter we had come to discuss was not reaffirmation of guarantees but in all sincerity and friendship to inquire his views on political succession in Lebanon since he himself had told us all he had no intention of seeking a second term. Since Parliament had been convoked for July 24th to elect a new President, it seemed reasonable that Lebanon’s friends should ascertain from Lebanon’s President what he thought about these new elections.

7. Chamoun had meanwhile been fighting to get a grip on his temper and began to calm down. He did somewhat resentfully mutter that he could not be charged with thinking up a presidential slate while at same time fighting for his life. Eventually however, and in a much calmer mood he ticked off the fairly unresplendent list of candidates both in and out of Parliament, concluding, “as you see it is no easy task to find a man who can govern Lebanon and carry out my policies.” However he said he would give problem further reflection although he did not rise to my remark that possibly we could meet again to discuss candidate. When he asked us if we had any names in mind, we said we had come to him to find his views, not to advance our own.

8. Several times during conversation which lasted an hour and a half Chamoun said he could if he wished be re-elected again since he had a “crushing majority” of Christian population behind him. He said “if I wished to, by choosing my own time and in my own way, I could be president of this country again.” Although throughout interview he accepted proposition that issue of non-renewal had been decided, he was clearly furious at suggestion he make a public statement to Lebanese people to this effect. I had overall impression that Chamoun could easily persuade himself, given a slight upturn in his military fortunes, that he is the indispensable man who must remain in office to carry out his policies and vindicate his position.

9. President said several times during conversation he had no belief efforts of Hammarskjold would be successful in preventing infiltration against Lebanon. He denied local press reports Malik had been instructed to request another session of Security Council.

10. Interview closed on a note of strained cordiality. Chamoun said we should mark well fact that Lebanon commanded position of Jordan and Iraq. If forces of Nasser should triumph here, he predicted masses of population in AU would give their governments short shrift.

11. As we left Chamoun inquired if our three governments still intended to give him aid in form of weapons and matériel. We said yes. Chamoun reaffirmed once more that he would not ask for our military intervention “unless the knife is at my throat.” When I pointed to a combination clock–barometer–compass on his desk and expressed hope the weather would be better he laughed and said “ I still have not lost my compass.”5

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–158. Top Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

2 Document 110.

3 Telegrams 6278 and 6279 from Paris, June 30, summarized discussions in Paris that day between the British and French Foreign Ministers on a variety of subjects. On the question of the course to take with regard to Lebanon, they agreed that Chamoun should be urged to make a public declaration that he did not intend to try to succeed himself, but they did not think it was wise to ask Chamoun to identify the successor he would prefer for fear that it might prove difficult not to support Chamoun’s selection. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–3058)

4 Document 97.

5 This telegram was discussed at the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting on July 2. Rountree indicated dissatisfaction that the result of British-French coordination had been an approach to Chamoun based upon a position which the United Kingdom favored but the United States did not. He said that McClintock had gone along with the British and French Ambassadors in making this approach, and the result was that Chamoun had reacted violently and the situation had become even more delicate. He felt that it would be necessary to call Lord Hood in to express U.S. displeasure. (Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75)

Dulles saw Hood later in the day and raised the issue. Dulles said that rather than urging President Chamoun to make a categoric statement immediately as to his intention not to run again for office, it seemed to him more important to have Chamoun concentrate first on getting a suitable successor. Hood agreed, but said that the French felt that this might eventually lead to the necessity of supporting whomever Chamoun chose. (Ibid., Central Files, 783A.00/7–258)

113. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 2, 1958 113. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 2, 19581

Washington, July 2, 1958

SUBJECT

The Lebanese Situation

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Charles Malik, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Lebanon

Mr. Nadim Dimechkie, Ambassador of Lebanon

The Secretary

Mr. Rockwell, NE

Mr. Sisco, UNP

The Under Secretary

Foreign Minister Malik said he was inspired by the statement made by the Secretary to him in their last conversation that intervention spelled bankruptcy of diplomacy. Malik said he agreed with this statement and for the record he wished to say that he never contemplated the possibility of armed intervention lightly, but certainly as a last resort and not without explicit support of Arab friends and, if possible, with their active participation. He, therefore, had considered what measures could be taken short of a last resort. He said that the measures he was suggesting have not been fully tried and if fully tried had an excellent chance of resolving the Lebanese crisis without having to proceed to the last resort and without either giving Nasserism or communism a victory or causing further retreat of the West in the Middle East.

Foreign Minister Malik said that his suggested measures were based on four fundamental assumptions: (a) that it is the United States policy that Lebanon’s independence be maintained; (b) that it is United States policy that Nasserism and communism should not be allowed to score a victory; (c) that assumptions (a) and (b) above should be conceived as independent, if possible, of persons or regimes in Lebanon; (d) that the rebellion in Lebanon to overthrow the Government would continue with active and decisive assistance coming to it from the UAR.

Dr. Malik left with the Department an informal note containing the following 18 suggestions: 1. Strong and repeated declarations of support of Lebanon by leaders of the West.

2. Intensive diplomatic activity in support of Lebanon throughout the world.

3. Direct strong representations to Nasser against interference in Lebanon’s internal affairs.

4. Much more vigorous campaign in the press, on the radio, television and through other media in support of the independence and integrity of Lebanon.

5. Liberal economic and financial assistance to Lebanon from the West.

6. More military assistance immediately sent according as the Army of Lebanon asks for it.

7. Arming of paramilitary groups (partisans) in Lebanon to support the regular Army.

8. Military and other technical advisers from the West, similar to the case of Greece.

9. Promote a less strict interpretation of the Security Council resolution by sending more observers and, if necessary, troops to aid them as the Secretary General had at first planned.

10. Bring the matter again to the Security Council with very strong speeches in support of Lebanon and with a strong resolution that will almost certainly be vetoed.

11. Transfer matter to the General Assembly and have strong speeches made there with a resolution seeking diplomatic and economic sanctions only.

12. Much more attention paid to the press of Lebanon.

13. As many governments of the Middle East as possible to come out boldly and publicly in support of Lebanon.

14. Have a firm understanding, and if necessary a showdown, with Chehab.

15. Try to win as many people of the Opposition in Lebanon as possible by political and all sorts of other means.

16. Prudent Iraqi and Turkish troop movements to give Nasser cause for worry.

17. Promote closer relations between Lebanon and the Arab Union.

18. Exploit internal situation in Syria.

The Secretary agreed with Malik’s approach and recalled his view that when governments turned over problems to fighting men diplomacy had failed. The Secretary said that if we are resourceful, we can find a solution short of intervention. The Secretary agreed generally that we and the Lebanese could do more short of intervention. He emphasized that the Lebanese had not made as effective a public case as desirable. He felt if the Lebanese dramatized the case more, it might create a greater deterrent. He expressed his feeling that civil war would dry up if outside assistance could be deterred. Without accepting any of the suggestions contained in the informal note left by Malik, the Secretary said we would give them careful study. He emphasized that the Lebanese should get more support from the Arabs and mentioned Tunisia specifically as a possibility. If a chorus could be developed in support of the Lebanese case, it would be helpful in the circumstances.

Dr. Malik said the above were only suggestions. He stressed point 15 above as of particular importance. The Secretary noted omission of the question of a political program for Lebanon. Dr. Malik said this could be added to the list as No. 19 with the phrasing something along these lines: “Greater constructive clarity as to the political future of Lebanon.”

The Secretary noted McClintock’s discussion with Chamoun regarding the political issue in Lebanon did not quite follow the line we had intended since it appeared to Chamoun as an attempt to try to get Chamoun to step down rather than a question of who is to step in. The Secretary again noted there were some good ideas in the above list and stressed the importance of being concrete on some of these things. Malik responded that the question of political settlement is a delicate issue and the limits of concessions should be drawn in advance. Malik said there was a field for greater precision between the United States and Lebanon on this question in particular even though it is internal. He felt it important to be precise as to the limits of concessions. The Secretary said there should not be concessions in the sense that someone is selected who is not an adherent of Chamoun’s policy. He was against a political deal with Nasser. Malik responded that we cannot think of political changes unless there is a healthy atmosphere brought about by a victory over the rebels. With a victory over the rebels, the mood of everybody in Lebanon would change and the Lebanese would see that it was silly to go on with the fighting. He stressed that the rebellion must not be given a feeling of success. In response to Governor Herter’s query as to how Malik visualizes the progression of events assuming victory over the rebels, Malik said this depended on events. If the rebels were given a serious blow, Parliament could meet; if a stalemate continues, it would be difficult for such a meeting to take place.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–258. Top Secret. Drafted on July 7 by Sisco. A summary of this conversation was sent to Beirut in telegram 31, July 2. (Ibid.)

114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 114. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, July 3, 1958—6:13 p.m.

95. For Barbour. In discussion British proposal extend guidelines Lebanese operation, Dept informed by JCS on July 2 that Admiral Holloway as CINCSPECOMME has reacted negatively to proposed extension. JCS supports Holloway’s view that US/UK forces available are sufficient only for initial landing Beirut and should not be split to effect landing at Tripoli or elsewhere. JCS has informed British military reps here of foregoing.

JCS would not object if British insist on conducting Tripoli operation themselves but would expect details would be worked out with Holloway.

On June 30 British Minister handed Rountree paper2 outlining current Fonoff thinking re general policy US and UK should follow if military intervention becomes necessary. Inter alia this paper specifically included occupation of airfield at Rayak in addition to Beirut and Tripoli. Dept queried JCS about Rayak. JCS commented that Rayak is obviously strategic location but JCS not aware that it had been included in any plans discussed so far. JCS opinion is that Holloway’s objections to extending operations include Tripoli would apply with much greater force to attempting initial landing at Rayak.

In discussing foregoing with Fonoff and CINCSPECOMME, Dept desires you ascertain (1) if British interest in Tripoli landing such that they plan make additional forces available carry it out and (2) if British thinking in regard to Rayak operation is for landing there in early stages or in subsequent expansion.

You should inform Fonoff that Dept is aware that some assumptions underlying present plans land only at Beirut may no longer stand and that it might be found necessary extend operations in early stages to include landings at Tripoli and perhaps elsewhere. As they stand plans recognize that developments after initial landing may require commitment of additional forces. If it appears that situation would require expansion of intervention then planning must comprehend forces necessary for achieving this.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–358. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted in NEA by H.M. Symmes. Cleared by Rockwell, Rountree, and Reinhardt, and in the JCS with General Twining. Repeated to Beirut.

2 Not found.

115. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree), Department of State, Washington, July 3, 1958 115. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree), Department of State, Washington, July 3, 19581

Washington, July 3, 1958

SUBJECT

Anglo-French Approach to President Chamoun

Mr. Rountree told Lord Hood that we were concerned regarding two aspects of the demarche made by the UK, French and US Ambassadors to President Chamoun early this week.2 First our Ambassador had been associated by his presence with the Anglo-French statements which went further than we thought useful at this stage. Second, despite the discussion and agreement with the British upon the line to be followed, we find ourselves at cross purposes. Mr. Rountree explained we had thought that an Anglo-American position had been worked out and were surprised that Foreign Secretary Lloyd’s conversations in Paris had resulted in new instructions to the British Ambassador with which we did not, and still do not, agree.

Lord Hood agreed that this was an unfortunate incident. He explained that the Foreign Secretary was in Paris and that the Embassy telegram had come too late to affect the instructions to the UK Ambassador in Beirut. He enumerated the French points which the British had found persuasive in planning their approach to Chamoun. Mr. Rountree then commented that we had wanted only to let Chamoun know discreetly that we had taken him seriously when he had told us he did not seek reelection, and that we were interested in learning who he thought should be his successor. We did not favor asking Chamoun to make a public announcement at this time that he would stand down in September. Due to this slip-up, Mr. Rountree feared that Chamoun has been greatly demoralized.

Lord Hood said that Lloyd was equally as unhappy over developments in Lebanon. In the first place, he was disturbed over the lack of concrete evidence of UAR interference in Lebanon. In this connection, he hoped that we both would persuade Chamoun to publish all the evidence available as to UAR involvement in the revolution. He added that it is now clear the UN observers are not genuinely sympathetic to Chamoun and for that matter, neither is Hammarskjold. The latter, according to Mr. Rountree, seems to think that the revolution is primarily due to internal dissension which Chamoun is using as an excuse to bring in outside forces to help him maintain power.

Lord Hood said that Selwyn Lloyd is also worried because he does not believe that the UN observers are sufficient in numbers and that they do not take their job seriously enough. Lloyd proposes that the UK and US instruct their UN representatives to talk to Hammarskjold and “goad” him into greater activity. Perhaps they could point out that Lebanon constitutes a test case to the UN which has a mandate there and that UN failure could cause great damage to the organization. We might ask Hammarskjold whether he has suggestions as to increasing the number of observers or the scope of their activities. Mr. Rountree agreed in general to this approach and said it was clear that the Secretary General would not wish to send a UN police force or a substantially larger observer group without referring back to the UN for authority. Lord Hood said that the Foreign Secretary was speaking only of observers. Lord Hood said that if we will advise our UN Delegation along these lines the British will send appropriate instructions to Sir Pierson Dixon. Mr. Rountree assented.

Lord Hood mentioned a report from a UN observer in Lebanon who said that the insurgents have from 5 to 12 thousand men under arms of whom some 300 to 1, 000 are Syrians. The observer expressed astonishment that the government forces have not taken a village in the Bakaa region to illustrate the fact that the Syrians are in Lebanon in significant numbers.

Lord Hood asked what the American views are as to a successor to Chamoun. Mr. Rountree said that we would have to see how he reacted to the Anglo-French approach and the query of Ambassador McClintock before replying and added that he would let Lord Hood know our views after he had talked these matters over in the Department.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–358. Top Secret. Drafted by Dale.

2 See Document 112.

116. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1958, 1:30 p.m. 116. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1958, 1:30 p.m.1

Washington, July 7, 1958, 1:30 p.m.

The Secretary of State

Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge

Mr. Hammarskjold

Mr. Hammarskjold showed me the notes2 of his conversations with Nasser, Chamoun, and some subsequent correspondence with Fawsi, indicating Nasser’s agreement to stop movements across the border into Lebanon and also indicating Hammarskjold’s suggestion that observation be carried out from the Syrian side.

While I was reading these papers, I handed to the Secretary General the “List of Reports received by the US Government bearing on UAR Intervention in Lebanon, May–June 1958”.3 I said that in addition to this report we had from sources in Cairo good reason to believe that, following the Secretary General’s visit to Cairo, Nasser had in fact sought to stop the movement of men and materiel from Syria into Lebanon, although he had apparently desired that the fighting within Lebanon continue. In connection with the paper which I had given to Mr. Hammarskjold, I remarked that I suspected that our own intelligence was far more complete and dependable than that of the Lebanon Government itself. I said that I had been dismayed at the Baghdad Pact meeting in Ankara at the time of the Syrian crisis and Egyptian take-over under guise of the UAR that the intelligence available to the governments of Turkey, Iran, and Pakistan was either lacking or extremely undependable, and that the most dependable information had been obtained from Washington rather than from these neighboring states.

I expressed my appreciation to the Secretary General for what he was doing and said I felt that his intervention with Nasser had been useful, although of course, as the Secretary General agreed, it did not overcome the past intervention, the consequences of which were still apparent. (The notes of the Secretary General’s talk with Nasser indicated that the Secretary General had very strongly asserted as an undeniable fact UAR intervention by men and matériel and by provocative and inflammatory radio.)

I said that the United States recognized that armed intervention from the West would be a very undesirable outcome. It would undoubtedly give rise to an intensified wave of anti-Western feeling on which Nasser could capitalize. It would weaken the position of independent governments in the Arab area and also would create in Lebanon an unfortunate situation because a government which could only survive on the basis of foreign bayonets was not likely to survive very long after the bayonets were withdrawn. However, we had to take into account the fact that if Lebanon, which had been the most independent and pro-Western of the Arab States, appealed for help and was refused, the impact of that also would be great, not only in the neighboring Arab area but also in peripheral states such as Libya, Sudan, Turkey, Iraq, and Iran. I said that the latter three States were strongly insistent upon a United States military intervention and that if Nasser and his Soviet backers were to gain a victory in Lebanon while we stood aside and looked in the other direction, the countries neighboring on the Soviet Union and on Egypt would be so shaken that the effect could be very bad. Indeed, it was quite possible that to obviate this Turkey and Iraq would precipitate fighting by their own action on the theory that it would compel the United States to come in.

Obviously, both to intervene and not to intervene under these circumstances would be very bad. Therefore the objective must be to find a third solution which would involve preserving the independence of Lebanon, while at the same time avoiding any victory for Nasser through a political compromise of Chamoun with the rebel elements. The Secretary General said he fully recognized that there should be no such compromise and that as his notes confirmed he had made clear to Nasser that there could be no such compromise.

The Secretary General then began to outline an idea he had for bringing Lebanon semi-permanently and especially under UN protection by the establishment on an indefinite basis of a small group of UN observers at Beirut who would be there to note and to report on any intrusion from without on the independence and integrity of Lebanon, whether these intrusions were in the form of physical intrusions or radio provocation.

We then adjourned from the luncheon room to the Secretary’s office, Ambassador Lodge left and Mr. Rountree joined us. Mr. Rountree will presumably dictate any further memorandum which he deems necessary.4

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199. Secret. Drafted by Dulles. The source text indicates that the conversation took place over lunch. Hammarskjöld was visiting Washington in connection with the release on July 3 of the first report of the U.N. Observation Group in Lebanon. The report established the problems for effective observation created by a difficult terrain, and by the fact that access to the border by U.N. observers was only established for the 18 miles of the border controlled by government forces. (UN doc. S/4040; printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 952–958) In commenting on the report, Hammarskjöld discounted allegations of massive infiltration of men and arms into Lebanon from Syria. (The New York Times, July 4, 1958)

2 Not found.

3 Apparent reference to a document prepared in INR on June 20 entitled “Evidences of UAR Intervention in Lebanon.” A copy of this 16-page document was sent to INR Director Hugh S. Cumming, Jr., on June 20 under cover of a memorandum from Richard H. Sanger of INR/IRA/DRN. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–2058; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Infra.

117. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1958, 2:25 p.m. 117. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1958, 2:25 p.m.1

Washington, July 7, 1958, 2:25 p.m.

The Secretary

NEA–William M. Rountree

Mr. Hammarskjold

The Secretary’s memorandum of July 72 summarizes his luncheon conversation with Mr. Hammarskjold, at which Mr. Lodge was present. When the Secretary and Mr. Hammarskjold adjourned to the Secretary’s office, Mr. Rountree joined them.

The Secretary repeated for Mr. Rountree’s benefit the Secretary General’s suggestion of a semi-permanent U.N. group of observers in the Lebanon which would note and report on any intrusion from without on the independence and integrity of Lebanon. In reply to the Secretary’s request for his comments, Mr. Rountree expressed the view that this was an interesting idea that might be given careful thought. However, it would appear practicable only after the present crisis had been overcome since the plan assumed the reduction in the number of U.N. observers whereas the present tendency, particularly among the Lebanese, was to believe that the group should be considerably expanded. If there were a satisfactory political solution to the problem and order were restored, it was possible that the Lebanese Government would see in the proposal an opportunity to enhance Lebanese security. On the other hand, it was possible that the Lebanese Government in power at the time would consider acceptance of the proposal an enfringement upon Lebanese sovereignty. Although the matter was discussed further, no conclusion was reached. The Secretary asked Mr. Hammarskjold whether he had discussed this matter with others, and Mr. Hammarskjold replied that he had mentioned it only to Ralph Bunche. He thought that if it should later be decided to proceed with the plan, it was important that it come either from himself or a representative of one of the smaller and relatively disinterested countries, such as Mr. Engen of Norway.

In discussing the situation generally, Mr. Hammarskjold expressed the view that Nasser had been reluctant to become involved in the Lebanese affair and had done so only at the insistence of the Syrians, who had taken the lead in any assistance which had been given to the Lebanese rebels. He expressed the view that Nasser was in the position of feeling compelled to move aggressively either on the external political front or with large scale economic development. He thought Nasser preferred the latter, and hoped that in the future he would pursue that course. The Secretary and Mr. Hammarskjold discussed in general terms the problems of Egyptian-Syrian relations.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.11–DU/7–758. Secret. Drafted by Rountree.

2 Supra.

118. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 118. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, July 8, 1958—2:37 p.m.

104. We have noted your recent reports indicating Chamoun now actively considering problem of successor to him. We believe this process should be encouraged and request that you convey following to President:

You should refer to your statement on July 12 concerning our desire to be helpful to Lebanon in matter of forthcoming election of new President in whom Chamoun has confidence and who shares his determination to defend independence and integrity of Lebanon. Since date of that conversation we have received increasing indications of expectation in Lebanon that Parliament will convene on July 24 or shortly thereafter for purpose of considering election of new president. Our estimate is that failure of Parliament to be convoked at that time for this purpose would have negative effect not only upon opposition but upon some elements loyal to government. Accordingly, and because of our desire to be of appropriate assistance, we are increasingly anxious to know from President what his political program for future is.

We do not want to see any political compromise or “deal” with Nasser. On the contrary, we believe there surely must be within Lebanon qualified presidential candidates dedicated to preserving genuine independence of Lebanon. We confident Chamoun appreciates great measure of faith we have shown him by grave and indeed momentous responsibility assumed by Western powers on behalf of independence and integrity of nation which he heads.3 We believe this attitude on our part entitles us expect from Chamoun a frank and confidential indication of what his own program is. He should not expect us to remain in dark with respect his intentions. We repeat our desire be helpful in assuring election of successor to him of person dedicated like him to genuine independence of Lebanon.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–858. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and Dulles. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

2 See Document 112.

3 In telegram 113 to Beirut, July 8, the Department indicated that it did not believe Chamoun expected a further reply from the United States to his inquiry during the tripartite démarche of July 1 concerning the willingness of the Western governments to stand by the pledges they had given Lebanon. The British Chargé raised the question of a reply on July 8, and Rountree replied that the Department felt Ambassador McClintock had responded adequately to Chamoun’s inquiry at the time, and no further response was required. Hood concurred. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–858; included in the microfiche supplement)

119. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 119. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 10, 1958—8 p.m.

258. Because of urgency of information indicated Embtel 2562 I decided to see Chamoun this afternoon and not tomorrow as indicated Embtel 244.3

Interview opened on sarcastic note when President said he hoped my government was satisfied that he had once and for all buried issue of his re-election in his statement to AP. He added we seemed more disposed to listen to our enemies than our friends. I said we were not at all happy at turn events in Lebanon had taken and recalled at one time we had indicated our full support for his re-election, opportunity for which had been denied by these events. I said however if he wished to open on question of elections Department’s 1044 came at an appropriate moment. I then gave him substance of that telegram.

With scarcely any pause for reflection President said only candidate who could muster enough votes in Parliament to be elected July 24 was General Chehab. When I mentioned candidates favored by Prime Minister (Embtel 244) he said neither Tian nor Boulos5 could secure sufficient parliamentary support.

I asked President if he thought Chehab could be persuaded to run. Chamoun said he did not know, but he was continuing his attempt to persuade him.

Without mentioning source (Colonel Zouein today) I said an intelligence report6 had reached me that Phalangist and PPS partisans might attempt on July 24 to sabotage meeting of Parliament by setting up a fusillade to frighten Deputies away. Chamoun said categorically and with great emphasis this would not happen.

I likewise informed President of my talk this morning with Reyes (Embtel 244)7 and his proposal to hold a national congress July 21. I indicated Reyes favored Chehab. Chamoun said he had no objection if Reyes could get together such a conference.

Comment: All of this looks fairly straightforward, which in itself in Lebanon is a cause for suspicion. I recall distrust of President’s motives in favoring Chehab voiced by Prime Minister this morning (Embtel 244) and various reports reaching me that Chamoun is really angling for a condition of no solution in which performance he would be continued in power. As against this however is growing impatience of country at continued stalemate and obvious will of important commercial elements that Lebanon find its own solution by July 24. Much may depend accordingly on degree of encouragement given to Chamoun by his Turkish and Iraqi friends over this weekend.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1058. Top Secret. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

2 McClintock reported, in telegram 256 from Beirut, July 10, that Colonel Zouein, Commandant of the Gendarmérie, told him that Chamoun intended to use the possibility of intervention by Iraq and Turkey “as his last cartridge.” Zouein characterized Chamoun as “the man of Nuri Pasha.” McClintock noted that he had confirmed from other sources that the Turkish Government viewed Chamoun as the indispensable man in Lebanon, and McClintock concluded that he would not be surprised if Chamoun asked for military support from the Moslem powers of the Baghdad Pact. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 In telegram 244 from Beirut, July 10, McClintock reported on a number of conversations with political leaders concerning a settlement of the crisis in Lebanon. He found Prime Minister Solh disdainful of General Chehab as a possible presidential candidate, despite a “considerable ground-swell” building in favor of Chehab’s candidacy. And he noted that the Edde brothers had served an ultimatum to Chamoun that if Parliament was not convened to choose a new president as scheduled on July 24, their “national bloc” would enter the ranks of the opposition. McClintock described a number of other political initiatives afoot in Beirut. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1058; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Supra.

5 Emile Tian, former President of the Court of Cassation and former Minister of Justice, and Jawad Boulos, writer and well-known political figure.

6 Not found, but see footnote 2 above.

7 In telegram 244, McClintock reported on a meeting with the proprietor of the Bristol Hotel, a Greek Orthodox businessman who said that he could produce on July 21 a national congress representing all the business, industrial, professional, and labor associations in Lebanon to address the political crisis which threatened to paralyze the economy.

120. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 120. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 12, 1958—3 p.m.

325. Ambassadorial SITREP.

(1) British Chargé who had instructions similar to Department’s 1042 called on Chamoun yesterday. President was in a more relaxed mood than when he saw me as reported Embtel 2583 and gave me exactly same answer that General Chehab was only man who could receive sufficient votes July 24 to be elected President. Chamoun also pointed out as he had to me day before yesterday that whoever was next President of Lebanon would have to rely on Chehab as head of Armed Forces. He thought Chehab could probably do better job with intimate support of army than some other President who might have same experience he had gone through during past two months.

(2) British Chargé asked Chamoun if it would help if three Ambassadors should separately indicate to Chehab their hope he would accept presidency. Chamoun nodded and said he had no objection.

(3) French Ambassador, British Chargé and I concur in Chamoun’s assessment Chehab is only potential candidate who can muster sufficient votes July 24. It is likewise highly significant that speaker of Parliament (cf. Embtel 317) 4 has “guaranteed" Chehab unanimous vote in House. Three chiefs of mission concur that despite Chehab’s vacillation and susceptibility to advice from cronies with special axes to grind he perhaps is not much worse in this respect than other possible candidates.

(4) Mood of country is definitely not to tolerate any delay in finding solution to civil war through election of a new President on July 24.

If industrialists turn their workers penniless onto street July 25 conditions of anarchy will prevail. In consequence we recommend we be authorized separately to see Chehab and tell him that since it seems apparent he is only candidate who can command almost universal support and whose acceptance of office might end fratricidal strife we believe as patriotic duty he should accept the presidency.

(5) All three of us agreed that at times of opportunity we should make it clear to Chehab we are opposed to any dissolution of Parliament and general elections as being conducive to reopening civil strife. We would also oppose any trick formula from opposition for Chehab to become “head of state” on a temporary basis until some other president could be elected.

(6) If Sami Bey maintains attitude expressed Embtel 2445 he may contribute to easing problem of amnesty by stepping down in favor of a more neutral Prime Minister. This would go far toward appeasing inflamed passions and reestablishing an atmosphere of calm in which we would hope Chamoun could exit gracefully September 23.

(7) French Ambassador sees Chamoun this evening to make representation similar Deptel 104.

(8) Please instruct re attitude Department wishes me to manifest on candidacy of Chehab.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1258. Top Secret. Repeated to London, Paris, Cairo, and USUN.

2 Document 118.

3 Supra.

4 The reference is in error; it should be to telegram 318 from Beirut, July 12, which reported on a meeting between General Chehab and Speaker of Parliament Adel Osseiran. Osseiran indicated that he had assured Chehab of Chamoun’s support and told him that he was the unanimous choice of the Parliament to succeed Chamoun. Chehab expressed reluctance but did not refuse. He also agreed to use the army to guarantee the security of elections on July 24. The Embassy concluded that Chehab was now willing to accept the presidency if it was offered without conditions attached. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1258; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 See footnote 3, supra.

121. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 121. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 14, 1958—noon.

358. President summoned me this morning. He said “Your government” had consistently underestimated this warning of danger in Middle East. They had thought he was exaggerating for reasons of personal ambition. Now however developments in Baghdad2 had proved him right and US wrong.

President apparently had no hard intelligence on developments in Iraq; certainly none from his own sources. He quoted a fairly extensive message which British Chargé had shown him from Baghdad which said was far more comprehensive than Baghdad’s 82. Chamoun said lines were open to Amman but he had had no information of troubles there following arrest of Radi Abdullah.

Chamoun said in addition to our governments having underestimated his warnings UN had been “blind” and Hammarskjold had by his actions given carte blanche to Nasser. Only thing which surprised Chamoun was that Nasser had not waited until Lebanon had been gobbled up but was now starting against Iraq with Jordan next.

In these circumstances President said he wanted US military intervention in Lebanon within 48 hours.

Chamoun said he did not wish any more inquiries or specifications or conditions re our intervention. He would interpret our intention by our deeds. He wanted 6th Fleet here within 48 hours or else he would at last know where he stood re assurances of support from West. So far as he was concerned he was determined to go down fighting.

I asked if he had made a similar request of British and French. He said he had already called in British Chargé and made such a request; he was seeing French Ambassador at 11:30 and would likewise ask for French intervention which he understood would be largely symbolic because of French lack of means.

I asked if General Chehab had been informed of these appeals and if he was in agreement. He said Chehab had been informed and whether he agreed or not was of no consequence. “He will carry out government’s orders—or else”.

President was in a highly wrought-up mood, obviously angered and filled with a somewhat venomous feeling that events had now vindicated him against erroneous judgments of Western governments and Western press. Department will note he is making this momentous request orally and without other intelligence than what he has heard from Cairo, Damascus and Baghdad radios plus one telegram from British Embassy Baghdad.

I am consulting with French and British colleagues 1 p.m. Will send further comments.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, Cairo, Ankara, Baghdad, Amman, Tel Aviv, Jidda, Damascus, and USUN. Received at 8:35 a.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 9:30 a.m.

2 In telegram 82 from Baghdad, July 14, the Embassy reported that at 5:30 that morning a group of young army officers, headed by Brigadier Abdul Karim Qassim, executed a coup against the Royal family and the government of Nuri Said, and proclaimed the establishment of the Republican Government of Iraq. (Ibid., 787.00/7–1458)

122. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 14, 1958, 8:29 a.m. 122. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 14, 1958, 8:29 a.m.1

Washington, July 14, 1958, 8:29 a.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT

The Pres heard re Iraq. The Sec said now we have a call from Lebanon to come to their aid2 —also the Br have. The Pres said it looks now as if you have a solid Arab world against us because Jordan can’t stick. … 3 The Sec agreed and said the main problem is our relations with Turkey, Iran and Pakistan. We always felt we would lose the Arab world but did not want to under circumstances that would lose the confidence of these countries. The Sec has no ideas because it happened so fast but thinks we ought to have a meeting today. NSC is set but this is more important. He will try to accumulate info and join NSC whenever he can and then perhaps recess and have a limited meeting with Defense, CIA and JCS.4

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 Reference is to the message transmitted in telegram 358, supra. According to notes on the source text, Dulles placed the call to Eisenhower 6 minutes before telegram 358 was received in the Department, which suggests that he received an advance copy of the message.

3 Ellipsis in source text.

4 After talking with the President, Dulles called Cutler, Allen Dulles, and General Twining to inform them about the crisis created by the Iraqi coup and the Lebanese request for military support. All agreed to a 10:30 a.m. meeting at the White House to discuss the situation. (Memoranda of telephone conversations, July 14, 8:32–8:51 a.m.; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations)

123. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, Department of State, Washington, July 14, 1958, 9:30 a.m. 123. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, Department of State, Washington, July 14, 1958, 9:30 a.m.1

Washington, July 14, 1958, 9:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Meeting re Iraq

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. Berry

Defense General Twining

Mr. Rockwell

Mr. Murphy(briefly)

Mr. Henderson

Mr. Reinhardt

Mr. Macomber

Mr. Sanger

Mr. Mathews

Mr. Greene

Mr. Quarles

Mr. Sprague

CIA

Mr. Allen Dulles

[less than 1 line of source text not declassified]

The group discussed the possible effects of intervention and non-intervention in the Middle East, with particular reference to Chamoun’s request (Beirut’s 358).2 As a first action Mr. Berry suggested, and General Twining agreed, that the delivery of F–86 aircraft and other military equipment to Iraq should be suspended at once. Note was also taken of King Saud’s messages (Jidda’s 46 and 47).3

Mr. Allen Dulles noted that the situation which would greet U.S. forces on arrival in Lebanon might be quite different from that pertaining now. He also noted that the loyalties of the Iraqi Army are not yet clear, although it seems likely that the army will follow the coup group and that Iraq would probably then withdraw from the Baghdad Pact, followed by Iran.

There was general agreement that the effects of the United States doing nothing would be: 1. Nasser would take over the whole area;

2. The United States would lose influence not only in the Arab States of the Middle East but in the area generally, and our bases throughout the area would be in jeopardy;

3. The dependability of United States commitments for assistance in the event of need would be brought into question throughout the world.

General Twining felt that in these circumstances we had no alternative but to go in. It was noted too that we would not go into just Lebanon but would have to be prepared to go into the whole area; this might involve a “division of labor” with the British (going into Iraq and Kuwait), and possibly the Israeli (moving into West Jordan), and the Turks (who might be disposed to move into Syria).

General Twining said that the Sixth Fleet is already moving east from the central Mediterranean and that the United States military can meet their planned schedule of landings which would get the first battalion landed twelve hours after the order is given.

Mr. Quarles attached great importance to having a United Nations or other “umbrella” under which to operate so as to give adequate moral sanction to our action. Mr. Macomber noted this would be important in terms of Congressional reaction here and that there would be a disposition in some political quarters to equate Western intervention in the Lebanon–Iraq situation to the 1956 intervention in Suez.

Mr. Reinhardt felt that the scale of Western intervention would in great part determine the nature and scale of Soviet reaction. Mr. Henderson and the Secretary agreed with him that intervention involves the risk of general war. Mr. Henderson felt that we would face the risk now as well as any time although he noted that at least in the beginning part of the non-Communist world would be unfriendly to us.

JG

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1458. Secret. Drafted by Greene. The meeting took place in advance of a 10:50 a.m. meeting at the White House with the President; see infra.

2 Document 121.

3 Telegrams 46 and 47 from Jidda, July 14, conveyed King Saud’s urgent request for military intervention by the Baghdad Pact Powers to reverse the coup in Iraq and to prevent a similar occurrance in Jordan. (Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1458; included in the microfiche supplement)

124. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 14, 1958, 10:50 a.m. 124. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 14, 1958, 10:50 a.m.1

Washington, July 14, 1958, 10:50 a.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

The Vice President

Secretary Dulles

Assistant Secretary Macomber

Assistant Secretary Gerard Smith

Mr. Rockwell

Mr. Berry

General Persons

General Cutler

Mr. Gordon Gray

Secretary Anderson

Mr. Allen Dulles

Secretary Quarles

General Twining

Assistant Secretary Sprague

General Goodpaster

Mr. Allen Dulles opened with a summary on the situation in Iraq. According to reports received thus far (mostly from the rebel-seized Baghdad radio), the Crown Prince has been killed, and perhaps Nurialso. The King’s situation is unknown. A Leftist government has taken over. Secretary Dulles commented that there has been no report regarding Iraqi forces outside of Baghdad. Allen Dulles continued that Hussein’s situation is extremely critical in Jordan. Hussein has assumed power as head of the Arab Union and supreme commander of the Arab Union armed forces. The Israelis will be extremely alarmed; they are likely to take over Transjordan if disorder occurs in Jordan. Chamoun has asked for U.S. intervention within forty-eight hours, and has indicated he has already asked for U.K. intervention and will ask for French. The fate of Kuwait is presently in the balance. Two messages have come from Saudi-Arabia.2 King Saud demands action at once, stating that if the United States and United Kingdom do not act now they are finished as powers in the Mid-East.

The President commented that this is probably our last chance to do something in the area. While this rebellion continues, we still have a basis for going in, but once it succeeds the situation will be different. He did not think we could ignore the situation, but that we must move.

Secretary Dulles then gave a political analysis. The situation must be judged in a most serious way, going back to what is fundamental— what will the Russians do. If we go in we must expect very threatening gestures, particularly affecting Turkey and Iran. What the Russians will do depends upon what they judge to be the balance of power for a general war. We are better off now, according to General Twining, than three or four years from now. At the present time the Soviets do not have long-range missiles, at least in any quantity. Nor do they have a substantial long-range air capability. If we do not accept the risk now, they will probably decide that we will never accept risk and will push harder than ever, and border countries will submit to them. If we do not respond to the call from Chamoun, we will suffer the decline and indeed the elimination of our influence—from Indonesia to Morocco. Pakistan may stand with us because of India; Iran would gradually go down; Turkey would probably stand firm but with increasing anxieties. In Africa Nasser is already making gains in Sudan; Libya is in the balance; and Tunis and Morocco are already unfriendly.

If, on the other hand, we do respond to the request, we must expect a very bad reaction through most of the Arab countries—a cutting off of the pipeline, stoppage of transit through the Suez, and hostile activity throughout the area. The British will have to move into Kuwait. Saud seems to want us to move in, but it is questionable if we can control the situation in his country. It must be noted that there is an appreciable chance that Nasser may have overplayed his hand and that if we are firm, he may withdraw from what he is doing if the Soviets do not come in.

If we were to move in we would have to take simultaneous moves in the United Nations and in other international forums. The difficulty is that we do not have hard evidence in this case as in the case of Lebanon. It must be noted that a meeting of the Baghdad Pact powers at Istanbul has been called off, with the representatives other than Iraq going on to meet in Ankara. There is good chance that, whatever we do, the Turks will move.

On balance, the Secretary was inclined to feel that the losses from doing nothing would be worse than the losses from action—and that consequently we should send our troops into Lebanon. Regarding Iraq, he was not certain as to what we should do. This is primarily a UK responsibility. He made the further point that if we do not act quickly, we are unlikely to act at all—if we don’t act today, we never will and the situation will be lost to us. In this connection, the world expects that, if we have a strong case we will act promptly, rather than delay. In his opinion, by acting we make general war less likely than if we don’t, because in the latter case we will lose our allies. What we must decide upon is the lesser of two great evils. We thought we had a third way out in Lebanon but with the events in Iraq, that is no longer available to us.

The President said it was clear in his mind that we must act, or get out of the Middle East entirely. He thought that the action of Hussein makes it easier for the UK to intervene. What concerns him more than the Russian question is the temper or the attitudes of the people throughout the area. He cannot foresee a way of bringing the matter to a settlement.

Secretary Anderson asked what Israel would do if we were to move into Jordan and Iraq. Mr. Dulles thought that, if we go in, Israel will probably stay out. In Saudi Arabia, Secretary Anderson commented that the power rests with the tribes which are loyal to the King.

The Vice President anticipated that we will undergo an adverse reaction around the world in this case, as we gained a favorable reaction at Suez. Mr. Dulles felt that the world will divide on this question, not on intellectual grounds but according to instinctive lines. Western Europe will support us, although the Scandinavians will be reserved. Most of the Latin American countries will probably do so, given persuasion. Most of Asia will be against us, including India, Ceylon and probably Burma and most of Africa wherever it is vocal will also. In many areas the leaders will privately applaud.

Mr. Quarles said that in the Defense Department, all is in readiness to move. It is unfortunate we do not have a better international aura to move under, especially in the United Nations. He recommended placing greater emphasis on the UN aspect—getting as much of a UN umbrella as we can. He did feel, though, that if we are going to act we should act at once and not wait in hopes of the UN finding a solution to the problem.

Secretary Dulles said he thought it was clear that we should act immediately to call an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council.

General Twining said that the plans and preparations we have made are enough to protect American lives and property. Two battalions of Marines and two Army battle groups from Germany are ready to go. When these go into Lebanon, we would load up two divisions in the United States.

General Persons asked as to whether the President would make a decision without holding a bipartisan meeting. The President said he would not but that he would like to have the bipartisan leaders down right away. He would simply tell them that we cannot subject ourselves to the blackmail Nasser would be able to enforce should Lebanon and Iraq follow. Mr. Macomber said we would not find much enthusiasm among the Democratic Congressional leaders. The Vice President suggested that, while this had been true concerning intervention in Lebanon prior to the Iraq coup, it is likely that it is not so true today. Mr. Macomber acknowledged this. Secretary Anderson asked whether we could go into Lebanon without giving some assurance to Jordan, since Faisal was so close to Hussein. Mr. Dulles said it is preferable for us to go to Lebanon, and for the UK to go into Iraq and Kuwait. The Vice President said the major point to consider is whether this action will succeed, and how long the situation will continue. Secretary Dulles said this is a situation where it will be easy to get ourselves involved, and very hard to get out. However, there exists in Lebanon a very strong community having an interest in stability, commerce and ties with the West. The Vice President asked what public reason will be given for our intervention, and Mr. Dulles said it would be to protect American lives and property at the request of Lebanon. The President added as a further reason, because of the increasing danger to the West from these developments.

The Vice President said these may be mob violence against American embassies and Americans throughout the whole Middle East. In a way this is our greatest risk—as to what the mobs will do.

The President said that the situation is clear to him—to lose this area by inaction would be far worse than the loss in China, because of the strategic position and resources of the Middle East. In further discussion the President commented that the most strategic move would be to attack Cairo in the present circumstances, but of course this cannot be done. Mr. Dulles commented many will say we are simply doing what we stopped the British and the French from doing at the time of the Suez crisis. Although there are differences, they will be hard to put across.

The Vice President raised again the matter of consulting Congress. He strongly advised that this be done and that the President chair the meeting. Mr. Dulles commented that we should bring out that we can never foresee what will happen beyond the initial line of action, but that action is required. The Vice President said we should not assume that the Democratic members of Congress will oppose the President’s action, at least at this time. Some may. Others will probably be silent, so that they can later oppose it if they think it helpful to them to do so.3

G
Brigadier General USA

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster. Another memorandum of this conversation was prepared by Rockwell. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458) Presidential Assistant Robert Cutler also prepared extensive notes on the meeting. (Ibid.) Both are included in the microfiche supplement.

2 See footnote 3, supra.

3 After the meeting, Rockwell drafted and sent a brief telegram to Beirut in which he indicated that telegram 358 from Beirut had been considered that morning in a meeting with the President, and that, barring strong opposition from the Congressional leadership, the response to Chamoun’s request very likely would be affirmative. (Telegram 189 to Beirut, July 14; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458)

125. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 125. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 14, 1958—4 p.m.

366. Ambassadorial SITREP.

1. There are a few discrepancies in representations made by Chamoun to UK, US and France (Embtel 358):2 A. To both British Chargé and French Ambassador Chamoun demanded military intervention within 24 hours. To me he asked intervention in 48 hours. I am certain on this because I repeated it back to him, asking if he wanted indication of our readiness to intervene in 48 hours or of actual landing of forces in that time and he said forces in 48 hours (this may be explained by fact Chamoun thinks Sixth Fleet is deployed westward).

B. To British Chargé who called at 10:30 a.m., Chamoun made it very clear that if allied intervention were not forthcoming as requested, he would “appeal to Soviet Union and to UAR.” British Chargé got definite impression this was an ultimatum. However, when Chamoun mentioned possible need to have recourse to USSR if west failed him, I took this to be a derisive statement. He made similar comment to French Ambassador who made similar interpretation.

C. President told both French Ambassador and British Chargé he expected new developments in Iraq would result in immediate and fairly large-scale desertion in Moslem elements of Lebanese Army. He did not make such an observation to me.

D. To French Ambassador only Chamoun interpreted radio report (Embtel 362)3 calling on Iraqi pilots either to return Baghdad or assist forces of liberation in Lebanon as a cover to justify intervention from new revolutionary regime in Iraq.

2. In analyzing Chamoun’s mood and motives, all three of us are struck by fact he made this very vital request, based entirely on radio reports from sources which ordinarily he would have regarded with deepest suspicion, namely radios Cairo, Damascus and Baghdad, in rebel hands. His decision was made prior to reading British report from Baghdad summarized to Chamoun by British Charge. In consequence, it is difficult not to feel that Chamoun may regard this opportunity as his last card to play to bring about friendly military intervention in Lebanon. We believe he is sincere in saying integrity and independence of Republic are at stake and not his own personal fortunes. However at the same time he feels a sense of vindication, that he has been right all along and we wrong.

3. As for hard evidence of an increased military threat to Lebanon, it is difficult to find this morning. Chamoun’s statement to French Ambassador that Syria would now be free to step up its infiltration of men and matériel and that if such a heightened attack occurred, Lebanese Army could not resist more than 48 hours, we must subject to more cool analysis. We should doubt if Syrian High Command would wish thus openly to invite Allied military intervention when it must be preoccupied with moves which Turkey may have in contemplation.

4. We feel decision on military intervention can only be taken in light of broader intelligence and political and strategic considerations affecting the entire Middle East. So far as Lebanon alone is concerned, we cannot as of midday discern need for so portentious a step.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, Cairo, Ankara, Baghdad, Amman, Tel Aviv, Jidda, Damascus, and USUN. Received 11:23 a.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 11:30 a.m.

2 Document 121.

3 Dated July 14. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458)

126. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Dulles in Washington and Secretary-General Hammarskjöld in New York, July 14, 1958, 1:26 p.m. 126. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Secretary of State Dulles in Washington and Secretary-General Hammarskjöld in New York, July 14, 1958, 1:26 p.m.1

New York, July 14, 1958, 1:26 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO MR. HAMMARSKJOLD

The Sec said we have a request from Lebanon and the Pres is meeting with Congressional leaders at 2:30 to reach a conclusion as to what to do. The Sec thinks it is radically altered since they talked by what has happened in Iraq. The Sec had been hopeful and indeed confident the situation would work out without intervention—the situation is changed and the Sec would not feel what he said at that time would necessarily be the conclusion of his Govt today. H said no, he can see that. The Sec said it is shocking to him. He thinks if we decide to respond we will probably ask for an emergency meeting of the SC. H hopes we would. The Sec said we want to work under the Charter as much as we can and would not want to move without reporting to the UN. He said we are facing a wide revolution. He said he hoped they would be kept informed and they will do what they can to keep things on the rails.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in Dulles’ office by Phyllis D. Bernau. A note on the source text indicates that Wilcox was with Dulles at the time of the call and Dulles reported to him Hammarskjöld’s response.

127. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 14, 1958, 2:35 p.m. 127. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 14, 1958, 2:35 p.m.1

Washington, July 14, 1958, 2:35 p.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

Congressional leaders (list attached)2

The Vice President, Secretary Dulles, Assistant Secretary Macomber, Secretary Anderson, Mr. Allen Dulles, Governor Adams, General Persons, Mr. Hagerty, Mr. Harlow, Mr. Martin, Secretary Quarles and General Twining (after first ten minutes)

The President began by thanking the Congressional group for coming up. He said the situation in the Middle East has changed drastically for the worse within the past few hours. President Chamoun has asked us to come in to assist, and American lives and property are endangered in Lebanon. In Iraq the Crown Prince has been murdered and Nuri Said may have been murdered as well. Substantial parts of the Army have gone over to the rebels, but it is not clear that the bulk of the forces have done so. The rebels are of course tied in to groups that are led and influenced by Nasser.

At the President’s request Mr. Allen Dulles gave an intelligence review,3 paralleling his report to the President earlier in the day, and giving information concerning the situations in Iraq, Lebanon, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Israel in particular.

At the President’s request Secretary Dulles next reviewed the political situation. He started with a discussion of the situation in Lebanon, stating that Cairo has been whipping up sentiment on calling for violence by radio. That situation had been showing signs of stabilizing up until the Iraq coup. Chamoun had decided not to run to succeed himself, and it looked as though the problem would work out without loss of Lebanese independence. Chamoun now says he is no longer able unaided to preserve Lebanese independence, and we agree, unless the Iraqi forces outside of Baghdad remain loyal to the former regime—this we consider unlikely. Thus, we are faced with the question, should we respond to Chamoun’s appeal. If we go in, our action is likely to accentuate the anti-Western feeling of the Arab masses. While the governments of Iraq [Iran?], Saudi Arabia and Jordan want us to intervene, it is not clear that this action will prevent them from being overthrown. Neighboring states such as Sudan, Libya, Tunisia and Morocco would probably also like for us to intervene, but their leaders do not dare to say so. Our intervention would not therefore be likely to be a quick and easy solution. However, if we move quickly and decisively the Soviet Union—which is undoubtedly behind the whole operation—may feel that Nasser has gone too far too fast and may call on him to pull back. Secretary Dulles did not think that the Soviets wished to risk general war. Their long-range missiles are not ready, and they are far inferior in long-range aircraft. Undoubtedly, their violent propaganda against us will continue, and there will be danger to our people in the area. While we will probably be able through the presence of our forces to hold Lebanon’s independence, we would be drawn into the area and it is not clear how we could withdraw.

The opposite side is that it does not appear we can hold Lebanon free if we do not go in. The first consequence of not going in would certainly be that the non-Nasser governments in the Middle East and adjoining areas would be quickly overthrown. Thus, whether we go in or not the result will be very bad within the Middle Eastern area. Elsewhere, the impact of our not going in—from Morocco to Indo–china—would be very unfavorable. Although popular feeling in these countries tends to oppose the West, the governments are anti-Nasser in orientation, even though they do not publicly stress this. With regard to Turkey, Iran and Pakistan, it is clear that they would feel—if we do not act—that our inaction is because we are afraid of the Soviet Union. They will therefore lose confidence. We could expect Turkey to continue to work with us but with less firmness and resolution. The question of Iran is much more difficult. The Shah tends to vacillate emotionally, and the popular situation is not good. We would therefore have to expect a rise in neutralism and an increase in the influence of the Soviet Union. Pakistan would stay with us while they are getting equipment from us but would not stand up to the Soviet Union.

In summary, in the Secretary’s judgment, if we do not act we will have to take losses greater than if we do. We would soon be faced with a stronger Soviet Union, with a worsened and weakened situation on our own side.

We must anticipate an immediate effect on the pipelines and tanker transit through the Suez. Offsetting this to some extent is the fact that oil is in better supply than at the time of Suez.

From the standpoint of the United Nations, our action to send forces in is entirely consonant with the provisions regarding collective defense. We would be putting troops where we could act if we found that the disorder arises from a group which is influenced by Communist controlled countries. The Secretary said he had just talked with Hammarskjold.4 Last week the two had agreed that the situation could probably be worked out without intervention. The Secretary today told Hammarskjold that the situation has drastically changed. He also said we would keep in close touch with the United Nations. Hammarskjold himself recognized that the situation had altered. At this point the President asked if we had heard anything from the British and Mr. Dulles said we had not.

Mr. Dulles said we had assumed up until now that if it were necessary to go into Lebanon we and the United Kingdom would go in with approximately equal numbers of troops, we going in first. He understood General Twining thought that it might be desirable if the United Kingdom held back, and formed a reserve for possible use in Iraq. He had told Lord Hood of this line of thinking. He was confident the British would want to participate in stationing armed forces in Lebanon in order to uphold their Middle East position.

The President then asked Speaker Rayburn if he had any comments. Mr. Rayburn asked if we go in and intervene and our operation does not succeed, what do we do then. He thought the Russians would threaten general war. The President said it is not possible to prophesy the exact course of events. If we do or if we don’t go in, the consequences will be bad. He thought it was better if we took a strong position rather than a Munich-type position, if we are to avoid the crumbling of our whole security structure. Mr. Rayburn thought that intervention would intensify resentment against us throughout the area. The President agreed that, at least on the popular level, that would be likely to be true.

Senator Knowland said he thought we must respond to the appeal from Chamoun or see the whole area go down the drain piece by piece. Throughout the world a failure on our part to act would be a tremendous victory for Nasser. In his opinion we are in fact at a turning point in history. The President pointed out we would be going into Lebanon at the request of Chamoun, and that our action would be a symbol of American fortitude and readiness to take risks to defend the values of the free world. If Iraq and Jordan ask the British to come in, we would have to consider what our own action should be. Senator Knowland suggested calling the UN Security Council into session. He thought a token force from Iran and Turkey would also be needed.

Speaker Rayburn asked if these are not civil wars. The President said that they have that appearance, but in fact they are being fomented by Nasser. He stressed the danger there would be to the West to be cut off from Middle Eastern oil. Mr. McCormack asked what agreements expressed or implied we have with Lebanon that would require us to come to their support. Secretary Dulles said that they received at the benefit of the Middle East resolution in three respects—first, economic and military assistance to those that desire it to preserve their independence; the declaration that the integrity and independence of the countries of the area are vital to the security of the United States; and third, the President’s authority to intervene to oppose an armed attack by a country dominated by international communism. He added that we are not planning to act under the third category above. It is our thought that the presence of our troops will stabilize the situation. In addition, the tri-partite declaration of 1950 extends to the countries of the area. He recalled that he had said that we wouldn’t send in forces if the United Nations could handle the situation. Today the new situation is such that it could whip through the entire Middle East if left unchecked. Senator Russell asked what we plan to do in Iraq. Secretary Dulles said he had no present plans because we do not know enough. We must find out the thinking of the United Kingdom, Turkey and Iran. Senator Russell said he had no doubt that our troops will be engaged in hostilities if we go into Lebanon. However, he said he was prepared to see us go if our security requires it. Secretary Dulles said we must certainly expect some sniping, but we have some grounds to hope that full-scale opposition will not develop. However, he felt that if the world comes to believe that we will not take risks we are heading for a series of disasters. He recognized that going in has many liabilities. Hostilities may spread, and we may take a heavy beating in propaganda. Senator Russell said that the Soviet prestige is also committed. Mr. Dulles pointed out it has not yet been committed, and that this is why we must act quickly. Senator Russell said he had hoped that, if we had to intervene, we could intervene on a basis in which world opinion would be with us.

Mr. Martin said that there is not much of a choice in his view. If we do not go in we are likely to lose our whole position in the Middle East. He thought that the British should put at least a small force into Lebanon with us.

Secretary Dulles commented that Lebanon is the one country that joined the Middle East resolution. They feel that for that reason they have undergone extra pressure. They feel that we are morally bound to help them.

Senator Mansfield said that he did not think the tri-partite agreement would hold because this is a civil disturbance. He considered that we would be getting into a civil war, and hoped that before American troops go in we would put the matter before the United Nations.

Congressman Vorys asked what our forces would do. General Twining said that three battalions and two battle groups would be landed in Beirut to protect lives and property and support the Lebanese government. They would be under the command of Admiral Holloway. He did not think there would be heavy fighting and did not anticipate they would have to fight their way ashore.

Senator Saltonstall asked whether reasonable men would think we have broken our word to Lebanon if we do not go in. Secretary Dulles said that governments will feel that we have reneged on an agreement. World opinion will be divided. Generally our friends will think that we did the right thing if we go in, and the wrong thing if we do not. Our foes will take just the opposite view. Senator Saltonstall thought that we gained world respect at the time of the Suez incident. Secretary Dulles pointed out some of the differences in the situation. In the present case a country is under attack and has invited us in. Because this is a civil war the situation is unclear and therefore more difficult. He recalled, however, that the Soviet had claimed that Korea was a civil war. The key point is as to whether the strife is fomented, inspired and aided from without. We have a great deal of intelligence as to the money, arms and forces that have been sent in from outside. If we were to adopt the doctrine that Nasser can whip up a civil war without our intervention, our friends will go down to defeat. He cited the “essentials of peace” resolution in the United Nations which provided that nations should refrain from fomenting civil war.5 It also brought out that we must look to the real source of the impetus for internal strife.

Congressman Albert asked whether we could not retaliate in kind, and outdo Nasser and Syria in subversion. It was pointed out that we have no successful record in this regard.

Senator Fulbright recalled that the United Nations had found that the strife is not being supported from the outside. Secretary Dulles said that this finding was that, at the moment the inspection was made, support was not moving across the border, but was silent as to earlier movement. The United Nations sent observers and the situation was tending to calm down, but had now been greatly stirred up.

Senator Russell asked whether, if the Jordanian and Saudi Arabian governments were to fall, we would have to go in. Secretary Dulles said we have no relation with them comparable to Lebanon. They could, however, seek to invoke the Middle East doctrine. The President commented that Saud has sent us word that if we do not come in we are finished in the Middle East. Senator Bridges said that he believes we have a commitment to go to the aid of Lebanon and that we must keep it. He thought that control of the Middle Eastern oil is of determining effect on the free world’s future. If the Middle East goes, all of Africa immediately goes as well.

Congressman Vinson stated that we must make up our minds to go the distance—that he thought we must envisage deeper involvement. The President said he believes that when we decided to resort to force we must be ready to use whatever force is necessary. The whole group knew how repugnant to him the resort to force would be. He did believe, however, that free government is on trial. While this could be a terrible thing he would welcome suggestions if anyone could tell him a better line of action. Really we are standing for just what we have stood for since 1947 and the attack on Greece. Mr. Vorys recalled that the Soviets had claimed that the Greek affair was a civil war and Secretary Dulles agreed.

Senator Saltonstall asked when, if our operation succeeds, we will be able to get out. The President said there is one thing about war he would stress—we must expect it to be different from what was initially anticipated. The free world is going to have to make sacrifices if it is going to win through. He recognized that even this group, with all its wisdom, would find this a terribly difficult decision to make. However, we are faced with war-like struggle, and we must accept the burdens of defense.

The President asked how soon an emergency session of the United Nations could be called. Mr. Dulles said it could be done within minutes after a decision was taken. He commented that by the following day it should be possible to see the situation more clearly in Iraq. Mr. McCormack asked whether it would not be better to send our troops in before calling the emergency session. Secretary Dulles said that it would be—thus we would put our prestige on the line before the Soviets do. Accordingly, we cannot allow much time to pass before acting. Mr. McCormack asked whether the President would act by legislation or under his powers as Commander in Chief. The President said he thought legislation would be needed before too long, but that if he tried to act after a debate the Soviets would be able to forestall us. He therefore thought he would be obliged to take action, were he to decide on this course, and then put the matter before Congress. Secretary Dulles said that we would not be sending our troops in to fight, but on a basis more like that by which they are now in some twenty-five other nations in which we station troops.

Senator Fulbright said that it is not clear that this crisis is Soviet-or Communist-inspired. He said that perhaps Nasser is playing his own game. The President commented that there is not enough hard intelligence to be completely sure. It is clear, however, that whatever Nasser may think he is doing, the Soviets have a tremendous interest in this. Mr. Allen Dulles recalled that Nasser had recently visited Moscow and that his presence at the present time in Yugoslavia is the result of long-standing arrangements. Senator Fulbright asked whether CIA had had notice of the coup in Iraq. [1 line of source text not declassified] Senator Green commented that we do not know the full facts of the matter as yet. He said there is much that we could lose in war, but more that we could lose if we don’t make good on our agreements.

Senator Wiley asked whether we have consulted our allies—specifically the British and the Turks. Secretary Dulles said the Turks have been pressing us hard to take this action. The British believe the action should be taken. Also the Israelis, the French and the Iranians have been pressing us. Senator Wiley said he had two further questions—is it necessary in the interest of America that this should be done, and what will public opinion be throughout the world. Secretary Dulles recalled his earlier statement that reaction will follow existing division. The West will applaud us and probably Latin America also. In Asia, India and Burma will oppose. There is not much vocal expression in Africa. He did feel it is clear that the backbones of our friends will dissolve if we do not go in. Senator Wiley asked as to the strength of Egyptian forces and Mr. Allen Dulles said that they are not in a high status of military capability. The principal problems facing our forces would be the people of the area and its great spaces.

Mr. Morgan asked whether, if we do go into Lebanon, the Soviets are likely to go into Iraq. Secretary Dulles said that they might send in volunteers but he would not see it as likely unless the British, Turks or Iranians send in their forces. Mr. Morgan said the North Koreans are demanding the removal of our troops from South Korea and asked if there is any connection between this and the Middle Eastern events. Secretary Dulles did not think so.

Congressman Chiperfield thought that we had no possible choice but to send our troops into Lebanon. Senator Fulbright asked whether, if the Soviets were not involved, this would make any difference to us. For example, if we felt that Nasser is independent and not subject to direction by the Soviet Union, could we not then hope that he would collapse of his own weight. But with a close working arrangement between him and the Soviets, a victory for him is a victory for Soviet communism. The President commented that one crucial question is what the victims believe. Chamoun believes it is Soviet communism that is causing him his trouble.

Senator Russell asked whether, if we send in forces, we would have to mobilize and strengthen our own forces. The President did not think it would be necessary immediately, but said that two divisions would be alerted and made ready to move. Mr. McCormack asked what the NSC had thought of this. The President said that he had met with the statutory members of the NSC in his office and that they had laid out alternatives and had seemed to feel that the alternative of doing nothing was worse than the other. He did want to stress, however, that this is not a matter of a decision already taken—that he wanted to hear the full views of the group and then try to reach a decision. General Twining commented that if we do not go in we must expect to lose the Middle East and Africa and encourage Communist expansion in the Far East. We must recognize, however, that the situation might spread if we do go in. In that case our forces are ready.

Senator Mansfield said that there are questions of prestige and policy involved and suggested consideration of the possibility of requesting a United Nations emergency session and going in on a multilateral basis. Secretary Dulles said that in his talk with Hammarskjold they had discussed the need for some way to make Lebanon a ward of the United Nations. He did expect to have a meeting of the United Nations Security Council tomorrow morning. He recalled that under Article 51 member states are allowed to act until the United Nations can itself take action. Anything that we do will be in the nature of an initial reaction to the situation, until an adequate UN force replaces us. We cannot, however, wait to see what they will do. The President asked what we will do, supposing we went in and the UN were to condemn us. Mr. Dulles said he thought we would have to pull out. Speaker Rayburn said he felt that if we are going to do this we should not wait for the United Nations. Senator Knowland asked concerning statements to the press, referring to the question of leakage before the President and the government take action. He hoped the discussion within the meeting could be kept secure and simply say that it was a briefing on the Middle East. The President said he knew that everyone was conscious of the need to avoid even inadvertent disclosures and suggested that there had simply been an examination of alternatives. Mr. Rayburn said he would say simply that there was discussion on the situation in the Middle East. Senator Russell suggested that the President should make a statement at once. The President said we would be working on one, and in addition studying our probable needs for money for which we would have to make a request to the Congress.

Mr. Rayburn concluded by saying that only one person should make a statement on the matter, and that should be the President.

G
Brigadier General, USA

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster on July 16. Another memorandum of this conversation was prepared by Bryce Harlow. (Ibid., Bryce N. Harlow: Records, 1953–1961, Middle East; included in the microfiche supplement)

2 The attached list indicates that the Congressional leaders attending the meeting included Senators Mike Mansfield, Theodore Green, William Fulbright, Richard Russell, William Knowland, Styles Bridges, Leverett Saltonstall, Alexander Wiley, Everett Dirksen, and H. Alexander Smith, Speaker Sam Rayburn, and Congressmen John McCormack, Carl Albert, Thomas Morgan, A. S. J. Carnahan, Carl Vinson, Clarence Cannon, Joseph Martin, Robert Chiperfield, John Vorys, John Taber, and Leo Allen.

3 On July 18, Allen Dulles sent a copy of the briefing notes which he used for this meeting to the White House, under cover of a memorandum to Goodpaster. (Eisenhower Library, Staff Secretary Records, International Series, 1958 Iraqi Coup Effects in the Mid-East; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 See supra.

5 See footnote 2, Document 102.

128. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 14, 1958 128. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 14, 19581

Washington, July 14, 1958

OTHERS PRESENT

Secretary Dulles,

Mr. Allen Dulles

General Twining

Secretary Quarles

Mr. Hagerty

General Goodpaster

Following the President’s meeting with the Congressional Leaders, the above group stayed in his office to fix firmly upon specific action steps.

Secretary Dulles said that Lord Hood had talked with him, indicating the Prime Minister is available for phone conversation with the President, should the President so desire, and also that Selwyn Lloyd thinks he should come over to talk with us (Mr. Dulles did not think this is necessary), and finally that, if we go into Lebanon, the British would have to go into Iraq, and they would want to know if we can help and support them there. The President said that it might be better to put our troops into Lebanon unilaterally. Mr. Dulles recalled that we had been working closely with the British on this whole matter. He also said that the United Kingdom has been asked by King Hussein of Jordan for help. The President said he thought we could give them logistical support, but did not see how we could commit ourselves quickly to do more (since this would exceed his constitutional authority without legislative action).

There was next discussion as to when our forces should be put ashore, and when any statement should be made about it. The President stressed strongly that he did not want to make any statement until the landing is actually taking place. It must be done with complete surprise—otherwise opposition could be organized, and we should be under great pressures politically. He thought Chamoun could be notified about an hour and a half ahead of the landing (later he agreed this might be as much as three hours).

He thought a platoon or so should be sent in ahead to clear and secure a direct space. He would prefer the landing to be made at the dock rather than over the beach in anything like combat style.

Mr. Quarles thought that a decision now to go ahead would leave us free to move immediately to the United Nations. He thought there was great merit in giving notice to the United Nations in advance of a landing.

Mr. Hagerty said that some of the Congressmen who were in attendance this afternoon have already been leaking to the press information about the meeting. The President said there was a lot of difference between leaks and an official statement as to intentions.

Mr. Allen Dulles said that we cannot depend on Chamoun to be able to hold his position too long, and that we must therefore plan to move at the earliest possible time.

After further discussion, Secretary Dulles said that we could now take an action in the form of announcing a call for an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council for a time as early as possible tomorrow morning. The President thought that our best course is to put our forces ashore in Lebanon, with the United Kingdom holding its force ready for Iraq or Jordan. He asked how long our First Marine battalion would be on the ground by itself, and General Twining indicated that it would be something like twelve hours.

There was discussion as to what could be said at the UN meeting if we have put our forces ashore just prior to that meeting. Secretary Dulles said he could stress that events have taken a grave turn, that we have been invited in, and that we are going in. The President interjected that we could add that we seek to stabilize the situation until the United Nations can act.

Mr. Hagerty stressed that we will need a statement to put out at about 4 or 5 AM tomorrow, assuming that our forces go in to land just twelve hours from the time of this meeting. The President suggested that the landing be at about 3 PM Lebanon time. Mr. Dulles would have a statement ready at 8 AM our time to be given out by Mr. Hagerty at the moment we know our forces are ashore. We could include in this announcement a statement that the President will have a statement to the Nation at about noon.

During the discussion it was made clear that Defense should order the landing of the advance Marine contingent at 3 PM, should order elements of the Sixth Fleet now in the Western Mediterranean to move at once to the Eastern Mediterranean (it was recognized that the press would undoubtedly take some notice of this) and that the two battle groups to be moved down from Germany should receive their movement orders at approximately the same time as the initial landings in Lebanon (i.e., should begin their assembly some time tomorrow afternoon Wiesbaden time).

G
Brigadier General USA

1 Source: Eisenhower library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster on July 15.

129. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 14, 1958 129. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 14, 19581

Washington, July 14, 1958

SUBJECT

Iraq and Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Ali Gholi Ardalan, Iranian Ambassador

Mr. Ali S. H. Urguplu, Turkish Ambassador

Mr. Mohammed Ali, Pakistani Ambassador

NEA—William M. Rountree

NE—Richard B. Parker

Mr. Rountree said that it had been a very disturbing day. There was little firm news from Baghdad. King Faisal’s and Nuri’s whereabouts were unknown. Fadhil Jamali, Abdul Ilah, Nuri’s son, and a number of others were reported killed. There was no clear indication as to the extent of resistance, if any, to the coup d’etat. The rebels appeared to have firm control of Baghdad radio. The British Embassy had been sacked. The situation had all the earmarks of a pro-Nasser, anti-Western coup.

The situation in Jordan was precarious, but King Hussein was determined and was in control. He had recently announced his assumption of the functions of Chief of the Arab Union.

Mr. Rountree continued that the purpose of the meeting was to consult with the Ambassadors and to express to them our concern over the situation in Iraq. A great deal of thought had been given to this matter at the highest level in the U.S. Government. We were concerned because we believed perhaps there was a connection between the situations in Iraq and Lebanon. We had asked for a meeting of the Security Council for the following morning. This would be a very important meeting. He wished he were in a position to tell them what we were planning but the details were still being worked out and he could say only that we would take action responsive to the situation.

The Pakistani Ambassador asked if Mr. Rountree meant by this that we were planning to take action in Lebanon. Mr. Rountree replied affirmatively. The Pakistani Ambassador asked how this could be effective if we did not at the same time back up Jordan which also was seriously threatened by the events in Iraq. Mr. Rountree replied that we were seriously concerned with the situation in Jordan and were watching it closely but that we would have to cross that particular bridge when we came to it. Our planned action in Lebanon would be evidence of the seriousness of our concern for the situation throughout the Middle East. The Iranian Ambassador asked if the Security Council was being called to discuss Iraq or Lebanon. Mr. Rountree replied that Lebanon was to be the subject of the discussion and that at the meeting we would inform the Security Council of the action we were taking and the reasons for it.

The Iranian Ambassador said that this was a very wise decision. The Pakistani Ambassador said that the real showdown had come. Our action now would determine whether we would make a strategic retreat or face up to the Soviet menace in the Middle East. The Iranian Ambassador said that as he understood our plans, by giving support to Lebanon we would give support to Hussein and would let our friends in Iraq know that we were still a force to be reckoned with. The people of the area would know that the United States was serious in its intent.

Mr. Rountree said that in general he agreed with this analysis. The difficulty with the Iraqi situation was that as yet we did not have many facts about it. There might be loyal elements or the coup might be completely successful. The Iranian Ambassador said that he wished to be forgiven for mentioning it but two years ago the Iranians had been informed that their fears regarding Syria were exaggerated. Events had proved the Iranians correct. A year ago he personally had told the British Ambassador that something was going on beneath the surface in Iraq. The Turkish Ambassador said that he and his colleagues had not been surprised by the coup and felt that now was the time to stop the steady decline of the Western position in the area.

Mr. Rountree replied that the trend of events in the Middle East over the last several years had been fairly clear to us. The danger of Communism had been clear. The danger of the spread of Nasserism had been even clearer. We had realized the tremendous appeal of Nasser throughout the Arab World. It was obvious that this was a problem with which only local governments could deal. We had tried to work with these governments and support them. He agreed that the coup in Iraq was not totally unexpected, but the rapidity of action, not preceded by rumors of an impending coup, was most unusual in the Arab world. As a result of rumors and reports regarding a similar situation in Jordan, King Hussein had been much more on guard than King Faisal and had been able to take action to forestall a planned coup.

The Turkish Ambassador said that this was an important moment in which the United States should join the Baghdad Pact in order to save the situation. This was the time to show that the United States was really concerned. He asked if it was not necessary now to reconsider U.S. policy toward Nasser. Mr. Rountree inquired what the Turkish Ambassador considered to be U.S. policy toward Nasser. The Turkish Ambassador replied that because of our desire to get along with Nasser we had been lukewarm in our support of the Arab Union.

Mr. Rountree replied that this was absolutely fallacious. We had wanted to help and had supported fully the Arab Union. We had offered large amounts of money to cover the Union’s budget deficit. We had been carrying Jordan on our shoulders for a year and one-half. We were willing and ready to support the Arab Union but we could not do everything. We could not put the Iraqis and Jordanians together and force them to cooperate effectively. This was something they had to do for themselves. With regard to our policy toward Nasser we had not resumed economic aid to him and our release of frozen Egyptian assets had been made because there was no legal justification for retaining them in the U.S. after a settlement had been reached between Egypt and the Suez Canal Company. We understood Nasser. Our troubles with him were not concerned with the situation in Egypt but with Nasser’s desire to subvert other states while we were committed to support their independence and integrity.

The Pakistani Ambassador referred to statements made in the Congress earlier in the day critical of the Eisenhower Doctrine and the Baghdad Pact. He said that such statements were very disturbing to people in the area, who did not understand the American constitutional system and who thought these were official statements of the U.S. Government. Mr. Rountree noted that this was one of the difficulties of foreign policy in a democratic state where freedom of speech and expression were maintained.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1458. Secret. Drafted by Parker on July 16.

130. Telegram From the Chief of Naval Operations (Burke) to the Commander in Chief, United States Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (Holloway) 130. Telegram From the Chief of Naval Operations (Burke) to the Commander in Chief, United States Naval Forces, Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean (Holloway)1

Washington, July 14, 1958—5:23 p.m.

29288. Land Marines at 1500 Bravo time 15 July. Do not notify Lebanese you are landing prior 1200 Bravo time but notify Alusna prior to this if you desire. Join your flagship now. Sail all Sixth Fleet eastward earliest.2

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 3. Top Secret; Emergency; Restricted Distribution. Drafted by Burke. Also sent to COMSIXTHFLT and repeated to CINCLANTFLT, CINCPACFLT, and USCINCEUR.

2 JCS telegram 944751, sent on July 14 at 7:31 p.m. personal for the commanding officers at USCINCEUR in Paris, CINCNELM in London, CINCSPECCOMME in London, CINCUSAFE in Wiesbaden, CINCUSAFE ADVON in Ramstein, Germany, and COMTAC in Langley, Virginia, informed them of the decision to undertake an amphibious landing at Beirut on July 15. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

131. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between President Eisenhower in Washington and Prime Minister Macmillan in London, July 14, 1958, 5:43 p.m. 131. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between President Eisenhower in Washington and Prime Minister Macmillan in London, July 14, 1958, 5:43 p.m.1

London, July 14, 1958, 5:43 p.m.

The President said first: “You have all the news and intelligence on Iraq and know how it exacerbates the Lebanon situation. President Chamoun has asked us both to go in. We have decided to implement the plan (for your very secret information). As I understand it, the contingent of yours is about 3, 700, and it is apparently in the lift that gets in somewhere toward the rear of the procession.”

The Prime Minister: Yes, that’s right.

The President: It is just possible that in view of the Jordan situation that I understand has been put in your lap, you may want to hold those people a little bit in reserve as the situation develops in Lebanon. I just wanted to say that if there is that much modification in the military plan if you thought it wise to make it you could do that unilaterally.

The Prime Minister: Yes, but the thought is this: if we do this thing with the Lebanese it is only really part of a much larger operation, because we shall be driven to take the thing as a whole, and I want to feel that if we treat it as a whole it looks like a showdown.

The President: Of course, you must understand that so far as we are concerned, as of this moment we can’t talk about anything happening elsewhere. I agree with you that the situation must contemplate more than that.

The Prime Minister: Yes, I agree the situation is going to be hard. It will start off all the row with the pipelines, with the bigger things, but this will stand right up to them. If this thing is done, which I think is very noble, dear friend, it will set off a lot of things throughout the whole area. I’m all for that as long as we regard it as an operation that has got to be carried through.

The President: Now just a minute so that there is no misunderstanding. Are you of the belief that unless we have made up our minds in advance to carry this thing on through to the Persian Gulf, that we had better not go in the first place?

The Prime Minister: I don’t think that, but I think that we have got to see it together, dear friend. There is no good in being in that place and sitting there a few months and the whole rest being in flames. As soon as we start we have to face it—we have probably got to do a lot of things.

The President: Well, now, I will tell you of course I would not want to go further. Today we tried to project in our discussions here I and with the legislative leaders the development of the situation, and they could take many forms. If we are now planning the initiation of a big operation that could run all the way through Syria and Iraq, we are far beyond anything I have to [the?] power to do constitutionally. We have had quite some trouble justifying to our own leaders what we intend to do.

The Prime Minister: Yes. What is your time-table?

The President: Right now. It would take—I don’t know the exact time that they will get there on account of the orders and hours, but I would not want to give any information over an open wire.

The Prime Minister: Of course. Now, are you going to speak to the country?

The President: Yes. This is very secret. We are calling an emergency session of the Security Council for tomorrow morning. I will broadcast after that Council does something.

The Prime Minister: Tomorrow?

The President: Well, probably.

The Prime Minister: Well, now, we have had a request from the two little chaps—the one is gone and the other is there, the king—

The President: We did not know what the final reports were.

The Prime Minister: I know there is little news. The second is going along for the other. We have got a sort of request from him saying that [what?] are we going to do. I feel, my dear friend, that if you set off this great show, which I think is fine, you can’t confine it to what you say publicly, but in fact all the trouble will blitz through on destroyers, oil fields, pipelines. Taking on Turks and getting things back. We should be ruined. I am for it. I don’t want you to say that now to me, but so long as I understand we are in this together. We are doing this together.

The President: My own idea would be this. If this situation develops where our whole national interests are abandoned and destroyed, I have to go before the Congress and ask for authority to act. We can understand and agree on that much. And that is exactly what you say, except I have to say it in my guarded terms.

The Prime Minister: You see, we shall have a terrible reaction. Do you want us to come with you or do you want to do it alone?

The President: At this moment, not knowing now under the new situation where your people may be needed, I think they should be alerted and then whatever happens, we will do it that way.

The Prime Minister: We must support the whole thing in public and all that. It is the whole that matters. That is what we have to deal with.

The President: Of course, as of this moment that has been—we don’t know what is going to happen and I think it would be very bad for you and me to talk over an open wire to discuss the great possibilities.

The Prime Minister: What is your timing? Is it now seven o’clock?

The President: No, it is six o’clock here.

The Prime Minister: What have you got to do about speaking?

The President: No, not tonight. This is very secret.

The Prime Minister: I will send you a good message by wire, and you will get it in an hour or two. There are many things I can’t say over the wire.

The President: Yes, do that. Tell the Ambassador here to get a copy of it instantly to the Secretary of State.

The Prime Minister: I will write something out and get it to you in an hour. I will send it to Foster.

The President: Now, on the rest of it, we will talk about these possibilities and what we have to be prepared to do. I realize we are opening a Pandora’s Box here, but if we don’t open it, I think it is disastrous.

The Prime Minister: Yes, I quite agree with you. What I mean is the old box when it is opened does a lot of harm. I am all for it.

The President: You’d better send a message laying out your thoughts on it.

The Prime Minister: I will send you a message on those lines where I can speak more clearly.

Then the President turned to the Secretary, at the conclusion of the phone call, and said he talked about destruction of oil lines, then we are really at war, then what do we do? He (Macmillan) says we can’t sit down in Lebanon and do nothing, while the British are taking the hard knocks all over the area trying to get this thing straight. (And the President added he agreed with Macmillan.) But, the President continued, he tried to tell Macmillan that he, the President, cannot make a decision such as this. We have now to justify our immediate action, which is that we did honor commitments. The President repeated that Macmillan would sent a cable immediately which he said would be through in an hour.2

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. According to a memorandum for the record prepared by Joseph Greene, Eisenhower placed the call to Macmillan. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458; included in the microfiche supplement)

2 According to Greene, Dulles concluded from this conversation that some doubt remained “about whether the British will go in with us at all.” Eisenhower, on the other hand, subsequently told Dulles that his opinion of Macmillan had gone up as a result of the conversation. He had asked for an assurance of British support and felt that Macmillan was “very fine” in providing it. (Memorandum of telephone conversation between Eisenhower and Dulles, July 14; Eisenhower library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

132. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower 132. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower1

London, July 14, 1958.

I was very glad to hear your voice on the telephone tonight,2 and I hope you understood what I was trying to say in spite of the difficulties of talking on the open line. I am sure you are right in feeling that the situation in the Middle East generally, justifies and indeed demands, urgent action.

2. Intervention in the Lebanon in response to Chamoun’s request is certainly made much more necessary by what has happened in Iraq. No doubt you will justify it in the United Nations and to the world in general as action against interference both from Egypt and from Syria against the independence of another state. We shall certainly give you full support in any action you decide to take.

3. What I was trying to say on the telephone was that the action you contemplate must not necessarily have great repercussions. It will set off a lot of trouble. The installations at Tripoli cannot be immediately protected, and will probably be destroyed, and all the pipelines through Syria will be cut. There may also be attacks on other oil installations throughout the whole area, all of which will inflict great loss upon the international companies and particularly upon us who depend on sterling oil. I have talked this over with my colleagues and we are quite prepared to face these risks if it is part of a determination between us both to face the issues and be prepared to protect Jordan with the hope of restoring the situation in Iraq. With regard to the Persian Gulf which you mentioned, we have already taken preliminary steps and I hope we shall be able to handle this ourselves. Of course I understand your difficulties with Congress and there is also the United Nations which will have to be handled. I also understand that you must seek the necessary authority step by step. But what I would like to feel is that it is our joint intention, not merely to be content with rescuing Lebanon (not very important in itself) but to face the wider issues together.

4. Now with regard to the Lebanon expedition. I think you are right in feeling that our 3, 700 men should be held in reserve: they may very soon be needed elsewhere. We will of course give the fullest public support here and in the United Nations and through all our friends in the Commonwealth and in friendly countries with whom we have influence. I want you to feel that we are completely with you in this enterprise. If you decide that you do not want us for the Beirut expedition, will you please let us know at once. One minor point. It occurs to me that it might be wiser for you to inform the Canadians yourselves. It also, I think, might be wise for you to inform India. We would of course send our own messages to these two countries and to the other Commonwealth countries.

5. To sum up. I should like to feel that you agree with me that in the new situation the Lebanon cannot be looked at by itself. Indeed if these events had not happened in Iraq we would probably be carrying on the policy on which we were working together up till today; that is to hope for a political settlement in the Lebanon and a gradual quietening down of the situation. Now Lebanon is only part of a much wider crisis. But, if you decide to go into the Lebanon realising all that is involved, we will give you every support. I am sending you a separate message about Jordan.3

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series, Macmillan–President 6/58–9/30/58. Top Secret. The source text is the copy of the message as received by the British Embassy from the Foreign Office and conveyed to the White House on July 14. It included an instruction to the Embassy to convey the message as a personal message from the Prime Minister to the President, and to give a copy to the Secretary of State. On July 15, Minister Hood conveyed to the President a dated and more formal text of this message, and the accompanying message concerning Jordan, with signature lines bearing Macmillan’s name. (Ibid.)

2 See supra.

3 Document 172.

133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations 133. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations1

Washington, July 14, 1958—9:22 p.m.

45. Re Lebanese situation. USUN requested to take following steps immediately: (1) Request urgent meeting SC to be convened Tuesday 10:30 a.m. Request should be made within framework item already on SC agenda.

(2) Objective SC meeting would be give US opportunity make report to SC regarding decision to make available US military assistance to Lebanon pursuant to its request.

(3) In order establish most favorable possible climate for request for US assistance without having SC take action which might inhibit military efforts, suggest you indicate to Lebanese desirability of including following elements in its statement before SC: (a) expression appreciation of SYG’s and UNOGIL’s efforts in carrying out SC mandate; (b) recognition that UNOGIL has made useful, though limited, contribution in connection with problem of infiltration, emphasizing at same time factors which have tended to limit UNOGIL’s effectiveness; (c) expression of hope that UN will soon be able provide armed forces to maintain independence of Lebanon; (d) forceful and factual statement of infiltrations that continue seriously threaten independence and integrity of Lebanon; (e) expression of deep concern that recent grave developments in Iraq, and plots in Jordan constitute grave further threat to independence of Lebanon; (f) expression intention GOL cooperate and support fully UNOGIL, but in meantime necessity in light of circumstances to request military assistance from US.

(4) We believe at this stage it would be undesirable to seek further SC resolution since proposal which would record fact of Western assistance and call upon friendly SC members to stand up and be counted might very well embarrass number our friends in SC without enhancing our public posture. We hope other SC members will be able likewise express their concern over present events and endorse in their statements, to extent feasible, action being taken by Western states pursuant to Lebanese request. We hope statements will also emphasize grave situation created as result of developments in Iraq. Statements should also point out continued need for UNOGIL and for increasing its strength and effectiveness by all appropriate means. It would be desirable if supporting statements from number other Council members could be secured. However in order avoid premature leaks re US military presence in Lebanon you should not consult with other SC members or with Lebanese with view to getting supporting statements until 9:30 a.m. (exception to above procedure is UK who fully aware of timing). Of utmost importance to abide by above injunction re consultations.

(5) We believe USSR will seek identify US military presence with aggression and may even submit resolution condemnatory of US action. We believe it essential avoid having SC bogged down by transparent propaganda maneuver this character. Therefore USUN should in so far as possible lay groundwork for countering any Soviet initiative by seeking focus SC attention on external character of threat to GOL and fact Western forces operating under mission limited to support of legitimate government threatened from outside its own frontiers and which requested assistance. You would of course counter any Soviet efforts to press condemnatory resolution to vote which in any case we believe would fail to obtain necessary 7 supporters.

(6) You should concert fully with Lebanese representative, SYG and friendly SC members.

(7) Department preparing urgently Lodge SC statement.2

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Elizabeth A. Brown, David Gamon, and Joseph J. Sisco in IO/UNP. Cleared with IO, L/UNA, EUR, NEA, C, and with Secretary Dulles. Repeated to London, Paris, Beirut, and Cairo.

2 Lodge telephoned Dulles on July 14 at 7:20 p.m. to ask for an appreciation of the situation in the Middle East and guidance on the approach to take at the United Nations. Dulles outlined the decision to intervene militarily in Lebanon. Lodge was directed to arrange for a Security Council meeting the next morning to explain the intervention as an interim measure taken until the United Nations could organize a force to deal with the situation, at which point the United States would withdraw. (Memorandum of a telephone conversation; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement) Lodge cabled back, after requesting the Security Council meeting, to say that Hammarskjöld was very concerned and wanted some warning concerning U.S. intentions. The Secretary-General told Lodge that “you and we” were in a jam, and added that some “gifts" the United Nations received were “too big for the UN lap.” (Telegram 59 from USUN, July 15; Department of State, Central Files, 330/7–1558)

134. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Washington, July 14, 1958 134. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Washington, July 14, 19581

Washington, July 14, 1958

Last evening Lord Hood brought me two messages to the President from Harold Macmillan.2

With respect to the Prime Minister’s wish to feel “that it is our joint intention, not merely to be content with rescuing Lebanon (not very important in itself), but to face the wider issues together”, I told Lord Hood that in general we would agree, although it is hard to see at the moment what the course of events will be in Iraq or what we could do. I also indicated we would be prepared to help in meeting the problem of oil if, as the Prime Minister’s message suggests, the pipelines are cut.

On the point in paragraph 4 as to whether we want the British in on the Lebanon landing, I said that if it is militarily feasible for the British to hold back from the initial operation as planned, that would be agreeable to us.

I said we would instruct Ambassador Bunker to inform Nehru and that we have already informed the Canadians.

As to the Jordanian request for assurance that we will come to their assistance, I told Lord Hood that this was a totally new question, not covered by our present military planning, and that I did not therefore feel that at the moment we could either give King Hussein the assurance he sought or accept the British suggestion that we urge him to request the assurance at once. We would, however, give this matter urgent study.

We discussed where the 3700 British troops earmarked for the initial operation in Lebanon might go if they do not join our forces. Lord Hood said that HMG would be prepared to send them to Jordan and emphasized that action in Jordan is seen in London as a necessary complement to action in Lebanon.

I said that I could not give any considered view of what to do about Jordan without consulting our military and political advisers but that my off-hand thought was that Hussein has a better chance of pulling through without western military assistance than with it.

I told Lord Hood also with regard to Selwyn Lloyd’s message to me3 that I had earlier in the evening told Ambassador Alphand in general terms of our intention to give Chamoun an affirmative reply to his request for our military presence in Lebanon.

John Foster Dulles4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Top Secret. Drafted by Greene on July 15. The source text indicates that the meeting took place in the evening at the Secretary’s residence. Dulles sent a copy of this memorandum of conversation, in the form of a letter, to the President on July 15. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Dulles–Herter Series)

2 See Document 132 and footnote 3 thereto.

3 The following message was passed from Lloyd to Dulles through the British Embassy on July 14:

“The French Government have been pressing to know how we intend to reply to Chamoun’s appeal. I expect they have been pressing you too. So far we have said nothing, but clearly they must be told something as soon as possible. I assume that you will inform them of your intentions”. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series, Macmillan–President 6/58–9/30/58)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

135. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 135. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, July 14, 1958—11:36 p.m.

204. London for Barbour. Deptel 189.2 President has issued orders for amphibious landing by Marine battalion landing team at Beirut 1500 Beirut time tomorrow July fifteen. No later than noon (that is at least three hours prior landing) you should therefore inform Chamoun that foregoing action being taken pursuant his request and that US Government expects full cooperation Lebanese armed forces. In so informing Chamoun you should at your discretion base your remarks on draft political directive, Deptel 4790,3 and other pertinent telegrams. If feasible you should also urge Chamoun take necessary steps to prevent information being transmitted outside of Lebanon prior actual landing.

If for any reason task force should be unable make exact deadline, task force commander being instructed communicate any time change to you.

Shortly before landings you should request Lebanese Government issue immediate NOTAM closing Beirut Airport and, if considered necessary, declaring airspace over Lebanon danger area until further notice.

While we hope that US action will bring improvement general situation Lebanon, assume you, in collaboration with appropriate military commander, will take such further necessary evacuation action as local circumstances may require.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Symmes and cleared by Rockwell, Rountree, Reinhardt, and with JCS. Also sent to London and repeated to CINCNELM, COMSIXTH FLEET, USUN, and Paris.

2 See footnote 3, Document 124.

3 Document 82.

136. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 136. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 15, 1958—11 a.m.

390. I saw Chamoun 10:30 a.m. today and communicated contents Deptel 204.2 He authorized me to see General Chehab (noon appointment) to emphasize our expectation of fullest cooperation Lebanese armed forces.

President himself will arrange for closing Qei airport 1400 hours local.

Re Deptel 47903 I left him copy of contingency statement of themes set out paragraphs (A) through (F) of Deptel 47414 with deletion of reference in paragraph (C) to participation by United Kingdom. I offered personal suggestion it would be highly advisable for Chamoun himself to make a nationwide broadcast to his people which could be picked up in Arabic transmissions throughout Middle East. Anything an Arab leader could say would be more effective than anything foreigners could say. Chamoun agreed.

He is meeting with Cabinet and will dictate a governmental statement. I warned him of need to take necessary steps to prevent information being transmitted outside of Lebanon prior to actual landing and indicated Pierre Edde at least would be in opposition to our landing. Chamoun said he would not discuss operation before 2 p.m.5

I likewise told President that of course we wished to provide him personally with maximum security but for political reasons I would very much hope presidential palace could be defended by Lebanese security forces. He agreed and said he would not call on our protection unless in case of last resort.

I pointed out that since British are not landing in initial phase of operation and may not land at all, it seemed to be unnecessary to request French participation. I repeated same observation to French Ambassador who called at 1100. Roche was most reasonable and said he entirely agreed that if this were solely an American operation, there was no need for French participation. I hope same line of reasoning will prevail in Paris.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN. Received at 6:55 a.m.

2 Supra.

3 Document 82.

4 Telegram 4741 to Beirut, June 12, provided the text of a political directive to U.S. and U.K. military commanders for use in the event of military operations in Lebanon. The text had been approved by the U.S.–U.K. Working Group and was submitted for Embassy comment before final consideration by the Department of State and the British Foreign Office. Included was a contingency statement of themes, approved by the Secretary of State, for use as a public position in the event of U.S.–U.K. intervention. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–1258; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 During the conversation with McClintock, Chamoun stressed that the initial landings should be made with an impressive show of force in order to impress the Arab world. McClintock endorsed the suggestion. (Telegram 393 from Beirut, July 15; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558; included in the microfiche supplement)

137. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 15, 1958, 8:40 a.m. 137. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 15, 1958, 8:40 a.m.1

Washington, July 15, 1958, 8:40 a.m.

The Secretary of State called the President—8:40 AM. The Secretary said that he had had quite a little talk with Lord Hood last night on messages from the Prime Minister.2 The British are greatly concerned that we should commit ourselves to act with them in Jordan and possibly Iraq. The Secretary last night told Hood that he could not possibly give him an answer on that last night and that, further, the President would not want to give any answer without careful check with the military and area advisers. The Secretary said that the British were particularly concerned with the Iraq business because they have tremendous investment in oil there and in nearby Kuwait.

The Secretary went on to say that as far as Lebanon was concerned, we were on pretty solid ground—that there was a large segment of the population on our side there. In the other countries the thing might blow up—for instance, what would you do with the refugees in Jordan? The Secretary finally told Lord Hood that he could not possibly give them an answer until the latter part of the day.

The Secretary reiterated that Lord Hood wants a commitment that we (the British and the Americans) will stand together on this situation. The Secretary says we cannot give them a blank check. He said that if the British were worried about the oil situation, if the Iraq pipe line is destroyed, that we would of course help them meet their shortages.

To intervene militarily would introduce problems that we have not even considered.

Dulles said that King Hussein had asked if we (and the British) would be willing to intervene if we were called on. The British think he should be asked to call on us right away. The President said he did not think so. Dulles said the British do not want the situation to drift. The President said we all agreed what we should do in Lebanon—we have studied that carefully.

Dulles said he had sent over a statement to be issued as soon as the planes reach Lebanon (which should be within 15 minutes). Dulles asked if the President had given thought to whether he would go before Congress—and the President replied he was going to talk to the staff this morning. Dulles said it was very hard to tell how to play it— there are some advantages and some disadvantages in going before the Congress. The latter makes a much greater affair of the action, looks like a declaration of war.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Another record of this conversation was prepared in the Secretary’s office. (Ibid., Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations)

2 See Document 134.

138. Editorial Note 138. Editorial Note

At 9 a.m. on July 15, President Eisenhower released a statement to reporters at the White House, timed to coincide with the landing of the first elements of the Marine units at Beirut, which announced and explained the basis for the U.S. military intervention in Lebanon. The statement outlined the request from President Chamoun for military support, and indicated that a contingent of U.S. forces had been dispatched to Lebanon in response to the request in order “to protect American lives and by their presence there to encourage the Lebanese government in defense of Lebanese sovereignty and integrity.” (White House Press Release, July 15; American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 959–960)

When the U.N. Security Council met later that morning, in response to a U.S. request, Representative Henry Cabot Lodge laid out the background of the U.S. intervention in Lebanon, and stressed “the sole purpose of helping the Government of Lebanon at its request in its efforts to stabilize the situation, brought on by threats from outside, until such time as the United Nations can take the steps necessary to protect the independence and political integrity of Lebanon.” Lodge pointed out that the tense situation in the Middle East had been exacerbated by the coup in Iraq and by persistent efforts to subvert the Government of Jordan. Together those developments had jeopardized “both the independence of Lebanon and that of any Middle Eastern state which seeks to maintain its national integrity free from outside influences and pressures.” U.S. forces, Lodge stated, would remain in Lebanon only until stability was restored or until the United Nations assumed “the necessary responsibilities to insure the continued independence of Lebanon.” (USUN Press Release 2956; ibid., pages 960–964)

Later in the day, Lodge introduced a draft resolution calling for the United Nations to take over the defense of Lebanon. (Ibid., pages 967–968) President Eisenhower also sent a special message to Congress on July 15 to explain the United States intervention in Lebanon. (White House Press Release, July 15; ibid., pages 965–967) In the evening of July 15, the principal radio and television networks carried an address from President Eisenhower to the nation in which he expanded upon the rationale for intervention in Lebanon outlined in his initial statement that morning. (White House Press Release, July 15; ibid., pages 969–972)

139. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Vice President (Nixon), White House, Washington, July 15, 1958, 9 a.m. 139. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Vice President (Nixon), White House, Washington, July 15, 1958, 9 a.m.1

Washington, July 15, 1958, 9 a.m.

The President and the Vice President talked a little more about situation in Mid East.2

The President said we had come to the crossroads. Since 1945 we have been trying to maintain the opportunity to reach vitally needed petroleum supplies peaceably, without hindrance on the part of any one. The present incident comes about by the struggle of Nasser to get control of these supplies—to get the income and the power to destroy the Western world. Somewhere along the line we have got to face up to the issue. It is too bad. You see the mistakes that were made.

The President said he was sure of one thing: we need a strong powerful voice speaking in the Mid East—powerful in the terms of technical capacity and a man (as well as a station) that could present the Western point of time [view?] all the time and who would also support legitimate nationalism. The trouble is that we have a campaign of hatred against us, not by the governments but by the people. The people are on Nasser’s side.

The Vice President then gave the President his ideas as to how the talk to the nation, or to reporters, should present the case. For the United States, the argument has to be tied to Mid East oil; for world opinion you cannot allow it to appear that the Mid East countries are simply a pawn in the big power contest for their resources. What is required, the Vice President said, was an historical announcement of when a civil war becomes the type of action in which outside intervention by the United States is justified. When is a civil war not a civil war? Any nation ought to have the right to revolution. We recognize the right of revolution. We also say every people has the right of self-determination—that right of self-determination is one that carries with it the right not to have outside interference that stimulates it. We go into Lebanon because we were invited in and because here is a man, Chamoun, who was freely elected leader in his country who finds his country infiltrated by corruption, subversion and bribery. In the larger sense the President could say we have to find a way to deal with civil war—if we do not, we will lose the world. The Communists have developed the device of foreign-inspired revolution to create a civil war (a classic case was Czechoslovakia). What we are doing here is saying that finally the West has reached a conclusion. We will not stand by to allow civil war to deliver a country even to Nasser. The Vice President further cited our action in the Greece–Turkey difficulty.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. The source text bears the heading “Staff Notes.” There is nothing to indicate who drafted the notes.

2 Shortly before this conversation with Eisenhower, Nixon called Dulles and discussed the announcement of the troop landing in Lebanon. Nixon complimented Dulles for his handling of the Congressional briefing on the previous day. Of the decision to intervene, Nixon said “if it works we are heroes and if not we are bums,” but he added that nothing would be worse than waiting for the United Nations to act. (Ibid., Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

140. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 15, 1958, 11:25 a.m. 140. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 15, 1958, 11:25 a.m.1

Washington, July 15, 1958, 11:25 a.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

General Twining

General Goodpaster

General Twining said that the landing operations in Lebanon have gone well. The second Marine battalion will land beginning at dawn tomorrow, and the third one will begin landing by nightfall. The two battle groups in Germany can land within twelve hours, on call from Admiral Holloway. This will give us a very respectable force in the area.

The President said that the United Kingdom wants to get us to commit ourselves now to clearing up the whole mid-East situation, and this gives him a good deal of concern. General Twining said that he and the Chiefs are strongly of the view that going into Lebanon was the right thing to do—otherwise we would lose our whole position. The President said that he too thinks it was the right thing to do, so long as the action rests on moral ground. If, however, our only argument is economic—saying that the life of the western world depends upon access to oil in the Middle East—this would be quite different, and quite inferior to a purpose that rests on the right to govern by consent of the governed. The President said he is giving deep thought to finding a moral ground on which to stand if we have to go further. He also referred to a question in the Congressional meeting yesterday—as to whether the impetus action comes solely from Nasser, or through him from the Soviet Union. The fact is that he is so small a figure, and of so little power, that he is a puppet, even though he probably doesn’t think so.

General Twining next said that the Joint Chiefs of Staff think that they should put SAC on increased alert. He was in agreement on all measures except the one of deploying our tanker aircraft into forward positions. This would be a very major operation, and could well occasion a good deal of alarm. The President thought there would be merit in dispersing our tankers at the present time. After further consideration he said he felt we should send a few of them forward. General Twining asked whether this could be limited to the continental United States, but the President said he would like to see some contingents sent overseas, including Great Britain. General Twining said they also consider that the Air Defense Command should be put on increased readiness. This would not attract so much attention. The President approved this action.

General Twining next referred to the two divisions (one Army and one Marines) which have been placed on alert in the United States for movement to Europe or the Mediterranean area. To proceed with loading them out would call for the Navy to charter vessels, and this again would give notice of an operation of major scope. Part of the Marine Division could be loaded on the Navy’s own transportation, but the remainder of it and all of the Army division (the 101st) would require chartered vessels. In addition, a part of the 82nd Division is ready for quick airlift to Europe if directed. The President first suggested keeping a careful roster of shipping that is in position to be quickly chartered, and used for this purpose. He agreed that if the ships were chartered now, this action would give alarm. He said he would like to see a study by the Chiefs as to just what would be involved, but recognized that anything of major proportions would create a bad psychological impact at this moment.

General Twining said that, if orders are given now, the Marines could be loaded and ready to move within ten days without substantial disruption. The President approved this action, but told General Twining not to charter vessels for the 101st Division as yet—but rather to plan such an operation. He agreed that all of these units could be placed on alert, leaves cancelled, etc. In response to a question by the President, General Twining said that some 400 transport aircraft could be pulled off MATS activity in order to move elements of the 82nd Division if so directed. (In checking over the foregoing with me, after leaving the President’s office, General Twining indicated that he would defer any chartering of ships at least until tomorrow, so as to avoid adding any impact from that action to the situation created by the initial landings.)

G
Brigadier General, USA

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster.

141. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 141. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 15, 1958—4 p.m.

401. Although my original appointment with General Chehab had been fixed for noon (Embtel 390),2 at request of President Chamoun I put it off until 1:30. Obviously President did not wish to give time for Chehab to stage an Army coup before landing of US Marines. It later developed from my conversation with General that Chamoun had given evasive information to Chehab this morning. It was not until I saw General that it clearly understood we contemplated landing a battalion of Marines. As I was speaking to Chehab, his Chief of Staff announced seven vessels were standing to, six miles off airport. This was 13:45 local.

With an air of infinite sadness General said only thing which had saved Lebanon during these recent months was its Army. With arrival of US forces he could no longer be sure as to future conduct of that Army. He gravely feared Army would disintegrate on confessional lines. As for future of Lebanon he predicted it would either become a Christian Israel or would be inundated in the sea of Islam.

When I said we fully expected complete cooperation from Lebanese military and further expected Lebanese Army would continue to do its duty in opposing rebellion, Chehab shrugged his shoulders in a tired way. He did however say he would continue to do his best to keep Army together.

Stressing this was a purely military opinion unrelated to politics, General asked me urgently to prevent actual disembarkation of troops. He said “We are on the brink of catastrophe. There is a very thin chance we can avoid going over that brink provided your soldiers stay on board their ships.”

I said I would ask our Army Attaché who was present to convey this professional opinion to commanding officer of expeditionary force. My own recommendation would be that, if compatible with his orders, he keep his force on board, ships be docked in Beirut port ready for immediate deployment. Chehab said he would have no objection if such small detachments of Marines as I might wish to protect US Embassy installations went ashore for that purpose.

Subsequent to this interview, I am informed by Naval Attaché that his messages suggesting coming alongside in port did not reach task force which is at 1430 disembarking troops in landing craft off airport. At 1500 five hundred men had been deployed at airport.3

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN. Received at 12:05 p.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 2 p.m.

2 Document 136.

3 Between 3 p.m. and 10 p.m. Beirut time, approximately 1, 800 Marines of the Second Battalion, Second Marines landed in the vicinity of the Beirut airport and secured the airport. An additional 1, 800 Marines of the Third Battalion, Sixth Marines went ashore at the airport on the morning of July 16. (USARMA telegram CX 241 to the Department of the Army, July 16; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 3)

142. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 142. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut July 15, 1958—6 p.m.

406. London pass CINCNELM. Department pass Defense. As is to be expected in these affairs there is always an initial SNAFU in command arrangements, but I do wish Department and Defense would urgently clarify to whoever is commanding landing operation here that views of US Ambassador re political matters are paramount.

I am currently engaged in an extremely delicate endeavor to keep Lebanese Army from disintegrating (cf. Embtel 401).2 My recommendations to commander of task force coming into port with most of his men on board were based on political considerations since if Chehab decides to throw in sponge, Lebanese Army will fall apart, and one of essential elements of our intervention (that Lebanese armed forces continue fighting) will have disappeared.

In answer to my oral message set out penultimate paragraph Embtel 401, I have received following message from “Gladwell” (whether brassbound man or ship not indicated) torn straight out of military manual: “I am operating under orders from Commander Sixth Fleet and Commander-in-Chief Special Forces Mediterranean who in turn are operating under orders US President. All troops have landed and will remain ashore in vicinity airport until further orders.”

Furthermore, subsequent to despatch Embtel 4023 I had a direct oral request from Chamoun on his secret radio channel to send Marines with tanks for defense of palace. I passed this on by messenger to Marine Colonel commanding at airport, thus far without result. This again bears upon my major political responsibilities.

Three times this afternoon General Chehab or his chief of staff have protested that at airport Marines have told Lebanese military to pack up and go home. Chehab says his understanding was we were landing to cooperate with Lebanese security forces, not to take their places. This also is my understanding.

I refer to Deptel 50934 in which it is explicitly stated that: “In case of difference between CINCAMBRITFOR and local US and UK diplomatic representatives in regard political matters relating exclusively to Lebanon, views of latter shall be controlling.”

Request immediate instructions to whoever is in command of landing forces that he must get in touch with me and likewise take my judgment on matters of vital political importance. I realize local commanders are doing their best but are bound by exceedingly rigid orders. Thus far Lebanese military look to me to interpret actions of our military and I have not yet even been able to establish contact with commanding officer almost four hours after operation began and apparently has been completed.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Top Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London. Received at 1:13 p.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 2 p.m.

2 Supra.

3 In telegram 402 from Beirut, July 15, McClintock reported that President Chamoun had sent word to him that he had received information through military sources that General Chehab had decided to send an armed force to arrest Chamoun. McClintock responded that he would try to arrange for the despatch of a detachment of marines to help protect the palace, and he called Chehab to express astonishment at the report. Chehab said that he had tried to dissuade his officers from attempting a coup, but he felt his arguments were weakened by the fact that the U.S. forces had come ashore. McClintock stated that he had warned the General “very explicitly" that the United States was undertaking the landing in support of the legitimate government of Lebanon and that if the Lebanese army arrested the chief of state “there would be most disagreeable consequences.” Chehab responded that he would “recommend" that the coup against Chamoun be stopped. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Dated June 30. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/6–3058)

143. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 143. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, July 15, 1958—2:27 p.m.

217. Following is State–Defense cleared political directive to military commander being communicated to CINCSPECOMME by Defense: “1. The USG has acceded to the request of the lawful Government of Lebanon that US military forces be dispatched temporarily to Lebanon. The purpose of this action is to assist the Government of Lebanon in maintaining the independence and integrity of the country and to ensure the protection of US life and property.

2. The military measures whereby those objectives are to be attained are laid down in the overall military plan. Military operations will be limited to the geographical confines of Lebanon unless the Government of the US specifically authorizes their enlargement.

3. Only the minimum degree of force necessary to attain the objectives should be used, and military tasks should be handed over to the Lebanese forces as soon as they are in a position to assume them. It is intended that withdrawal should take place as soon as practicable after the Government of Lebanon is able to fulfill unaided the purposes set out in para 1 above or the UN has assumed the responsibilities now being exercised by the US. The US Government will provide further instructions when this stage appears to have been reached.

4. This is an operation in a friendly country in support of a friendly government, and members of the US armed forces should act accordingly in dealing with local authorities and with the local population. All public relations activities should be fully consistent with official guidances issued by the US Government and to that end should be coordinated with the local US Diplomatic Representative.

5. Advice on political matters relating exclusively to Lebanon should be sought from the US Diplomatic Representative in Beirut. To this end liaison should be maintained with him at all times, and he should be consulted also in regard to procedures for making any necessary official contacts with Lebanese political and military authorities. Through the local American Diplomatic Representative, the US forces landing in Lebanon should also establish appropriate liaison with the UN Observer Group in Lebanon. To the maximum extent compatible with their mission, the US forces should cooperate with the UN Observer Group and avoid any action which would impede the functioning of the Observer Group. Wider political issues affecting US military forces in Lebanon should be referred to the US Government through military channels and should such reference become necessary, the local Diplomatic Representative of the US should be kept fully informed.

6. In case of difference between the military commander and the local US Diplomatic Representative in regard to political matters relating exclusively to Lebanon, the views of the latter shall be controlling.”

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1558. Top Secret. Drafted by Symmes and cleared with NEA, C, G, and JCS. Also sent to London. The text of this directive was also sent by the JCS to CINCSPECOMME, London, in JCS telegram 944787, July 15. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 3)

144. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 15, 1958, 5:55 p.m. 144. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 15, 1958, 5:55 p.m.1

Washington, July 15, 1958, 5:55 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT

The Sec said Hood is coming in. The British are very naturally exercised about the situation in Iraq and tried yesterday through M’s talk with the Pres2 and through cables to get a blank check which the Sec does not think they should do but one suggestion was that Selwyn Lloyd would come over to talk about it and the Sec is inclined to suggest to Hood that if they think that is desirable we would be glad to have him come. The Pres said that is all right. It will show what the difficulties are—we are not a parliamentary govt and they can’t get it through their heads. We can do a good deal on logistic support etc. beyond what we are now doing. All our statements today are full of prudence but we have laid the groundwork for showing the bad ones are in Iraq and Jordan.

The Pres made the statement all right—just under 14 minutes. The Sec praised our technique for 1 minute to a page.

The Sec referring to the above is not clear as to their strategy.3

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 See Document 131.

3 An hour later, Dulles discussed developments in the Middle East with Nixon. Nixon referred to McClintock’s effort to keep the troops from coming ashore, in response to Chehab’s request, and “indicated the need for people who can stand up better than that.” He suggested that Deputy Under Secretary of State Robert Murphy might be effective in addressing the political problems involved in the crisis. Nixon added that, having taken the initial military step in the area, he hoped the United States would not vacillate in supporting the British where necessary in Jordan and Iraq. Dulles responded that it was important to avoid getting bogged down as the British had in Suez and have to pull out. (Memorandum of telephone conversation; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

145. Notes of a Telephone Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m. 145. Notes of a Telephone Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m.1

Washington, July 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m.

Mr. Secretary:

Ambassador Lodge telephoned the following message:2 “I have just talked with the Secretary General about a session of the General Assembly. He expressed these opinions: 1. Of course the United States should not appear opposed to the idea of a General Assembly.

2. It would be bad to have an emergency session immediately after the Security Council. The Secretary General wants time to try to work things out with the Lebanese and with the UN Observers group. He wants at least two weeks.

3. If a General Assembly is held it should be a special session two or three weeks from now, the date to be set in the light of developments.

4. Lodge recommends that he be authorized to state that the U.S. intends to ask for a session of the General Assembly in the light of events.”3

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. The message was taken and the notes prepared by Amelia Kullman of the Secretary’s office.

2 Dulles had talked by telephone with Lodge 45 minutes earlier and discussed the course to pursue in the United Nations. Lodge stated that he anticipated the Soviet Union would veto the resolution calling upon the United Nations to undertake the defense of Lebanon which he had introduced in the Security Council the day before. Lodge indicated that he had an appointment to see Hammarskjöld at 10 a.m. and would discuss with him the possibility of a subsequent emergency session of the General Assembly to consider the crisis. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Lodge submitted a full report of his conversation with Hammarskjöld in telegram 70 from USUN, July 16. (Department of State, Central Files, 330/7–1658; included in the microfiche supplement)

146. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 146. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 16, 1958—4 p.m.

423. General Chehab telephoned me at 9 this morning to protest intent of Marine landing force to enter Beirut. He said he could not be answerable for conduct of his force if they moved into the city before he had had an opportunity to speak with his men.

On my own responsibility I requested General Wade temporarily to suspend operations until I had a chance to talk to President. This General Wade did. Because of communications difficulties I was not able to consult Admiral Holloway.

I called on Chamoun at 9:30 accompanied by General Wade. President said he was seeing Chehab immediately and unless General could advance more convincing arguments than he expected, he, Chamoun, would agree to Marines carrying out their operational plan to invest port area, this deployment to be along avenues skirting seacoast and harbor. I concurred particularly since Marines will have an impressive show of force in way of armor and firepower.

I suggested to President (who confirmed his continuing apprehension that Army coup d’etat might at anytime be launched against the palace) that rather than station Marines in palace itself, it would serve purpose for a detachment of armor to be stationed at my residence compound in the old Chancery. This would place aid within five minutes of palace and since I am on a 24-hour open radio hook-up with Chamoun, I could summon assistance in very short order. Chamoun thought this an excellent idea and I have made arrangements with General Wade accordingly.

I told Chamoun that unless I hear from him by 10:30 a.m. I would request General Wade to carry out his orders. As of 10:35 when this is written, movement of Marines into port area will recommence. Some Lebanese tanks have been moved into position on airport road on which they will pass. I have sent Foreign Service Officers speaking French and Arabic to assist General Wade in dissuading tank commanders from opening fire.

Expect envelopment of port to be completed shortly after noon today. Will bring Admirals Holloway and Yeager with General Wade call on Chamoun 1430, Prime Minister 1500, Chehab 1530.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN. Received at 12:46 p.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force.

147. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 147. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 16, 1958—4 p.m.

428. London for CINCNELM. Following Embtel 423,2 Chamoun asked me to join him and General Chehab. General repeated his objections to US deployment in Beirut but finally agreed to consider a gradual movement by small detachments. Chehab said he feared his army might resist if such precautions were not taken.

I told General that President had learned from General Wade that Lebanese artillery and tanks had taken up positions along airport road subsequent to Wade’s call on President. Chehab professed to be in complete ignorance of these dispositions.

In consequence in Chamoun’s presence I suggested General accompany me to these new positions in order personally to make arrangements for safe passage of marine battalion. Chehab had no option but to go along with this request. I then took General in my car out toward airport where we met entire column stopped by Lebanese military who had meanwhile lined up every available tank and recoilless rifle in Beirut with guns trained on US column.3

Fortunately at this juncture I met Admiral Holloway and Admiral Yeager who had just arrived and together with General Chehab we proceeded to nearby command school where General got in touch with his headquarters staff and countermanded orders which had set up Lebanese tanks and artillery in a hostile posture.

Chehab went through an extensive telephone arrangement ostensibly to provide escort jeeps manned by Lebanese army to bring column into harbor area in platoons of three vehicles with a ten-minute interval between each segment. Whether by design or accident a small burst of firing near command school gave Chehab further pretext to hold up movement of column on grounds he wished to prevent “incidents”.

By this time Admiral Holloway and I had impression Chehab was stalling. In consequence I said we would now move with General Chehab and Admiral Holloway to escort first segment of column to port area. With some reluctance Chehab went along. We got first column well on way to port and then found main body was stalled near airport. By this time all pretense of Lebanese military escort had evaporated. Admirals Holloway and Yaeger and I have since been doing operation “sheep dog” herding our column along Corniche to port area. We expect entire column to be in port by 1530 local and will then go about our rounds of calls on President, Prime Minister and Chehab … who, characteristically, is taking the afternoon off at Junieh.4

Admiral Holloway request pass to JCS and DOD.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658. Secret; Niact. Also sent to USUN. Repeated to Paris, Rome, and London. Received at 11:26 a.m. and passed on to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force at 12:30 p.m. Admiral Holloway reported to Admiral Burke on the incident described in this telegram in telegrams 161156Z and 162056Z from CINCSPECOMME to CNO, both July 16. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS 381 Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 3; included in the microfiche supplement) Ambassador McClintock subsequently published an account of the incident in United States Naval Institute Proceedings, October 1962, p. 71.

2 Supra.

3 According to a memorandum prepared for McClintock on July 17 by Embassy Political Officer Robert L. Funseth, who had accompanied General Wade to monitor the advance of the Marine column from the airport to the harbor, the Lebanese Army units deployed along the road were under orders to fire on the Marine column if it advanced to their positions. General Wade learned of these orders only after discovering the Lebanese tanks deployed along the road and halting the Marine column. (Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Beirut Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 5159, July 16, 1958–July 31, 1958; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Ellipsis in the source text. McClintock reported, in telegram 433 from Beirut, July 16, that the Marine battalion was fully positioned in the harbor area by afternoon, without any further opposition from the Lebanese military. President Chamoun and Prime Minister Solh each offered personal and official thanks for the rapid and effective landing of the Marine force. Chamoun also agreed to make certain that the necessary orders were issued to insure complete cooperation by the Lebanese military with U.S. forces in Lebanon. Chehab confirmed this offer in a separate meeting with McClintock and Holloway. McClintock noted, however, that he and Holloway were “agreed that we can no longer submit to subtle sabotage by Lebanese high command including its general and its senior staff officers.” He added: “If we find further evidence of such sabotage or unwillingness to cooperate, I intend to suggest to Chamoun to relieve these officers immediately.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658; included in the microfiche supplement)

148. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Ambassador in Lebanon (McClintock) in Beirut, July 16, 1958, 3:20 p.m. 148. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Ambassador in Lebanon (McClintock) in Beirut, July 16, 1958, 3:20 p.m.1

Beirut, July 16, 1958, 3:20 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO AMB McCLINTOCK IN BEIRUT

The Sec said Murphy is flying out this p.m.2 M heard it on BBC and is delighted to have him. The Sec said he would be there a few days3 and can give M a better background than by cable. He will be helpful to get things straightened out and give M the fill-in of our thinking. M kept saying fine etc. The Sec said he will help with the cooperation with military people. M has fine cooperation with Holloway today. He is first class. He gave some details that are in 428.4 Everything is going so well. The Sec asked if there are any defections from the Army. M said Chehab told them Damascus was urging the rebels to rise and make a last attempt to form a new Lebanese govt but Chehab did not see any enthusiasm for the rebels to do that. The thing is well in hand. The Sec said we have great confidence in M and he is doing a wonderful job. Murphy will be there about noon tomorrow and M said he can stay with him. M said to tell Adm. Burke there is excellent cooperation between the Navy and Embassy.5

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau. A note on the source text indicates that Dulles reported to Eisenhower on the conversation after he completed the call to McClintock.

2 The decision to send Deputy Under Secretary Robert Murphy to Lebanon as the President’s Political Representative was taken at an 11 a.m. meeting with the President at the White House on July 16. The decision to send Murphy to Beirut to “establish better relations as among our own military and diplomatic people, Lebanese military, and the Lebanese government” was the first item of business in a meeting which ranged over the entire Middle Eastern crisis. (Memorandum of conference with the President; ibid., Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries; included in the microfiche supplement) A full record of this meeting is also scheduled for publication in volume XII.

3 In a telephone conversation with Herter on July 16, Reinhardt stated that Murphy was only expected to remain in Beirut for a short time “to see how the relationship between the Ambassador and the military command there is working out and to pave the way for sending a political adviser to the military command if the decision is made to do it.” (Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, Telephone Conversations) When Dulles discussed the mission with Murphy after the 11 a.m. meeting on July 16, he stressed Murphy’s liaison role, and indicated that Murphy would be “the top fellow” while he was there. Dulles felt that Murphy would probably spend about a week in Lebanon “as things will or won’t happen in that time and they should be in the right channel.” (Ibid., Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Supra.

5 Rountree explained Murphy’s mission to Malik in a meeting in Rountree’s office on July 16. Malik welcomed the U.S. intervention and Murphy’s mission, and stressed that the Marines should not be withdrawn from Lebanon until the entire regional situation improved. (Telegram 256 to Beirut, July 16; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658; included in the microfiche supplement)

149. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State 149. Telegram From the Embassy in the Soviet Union to the Department of State1

Moscow, July 16, 1958—7 p.m.

135. Kuznetsov, acting Foreign Minister, handed me at 6:15 p.m. 6-page declaration of the Soviet Government in connection developments in the Near and Middle East.2 He read me concluding paragraphs which are as follows: “Soviet Government imperatively calls upon the Government of the USA to cease its armed intervention in the internal affairs of the Arab states and to immediately withdraw its forces from Lebanon.

The Soviet Government declares that the Soviet Union cannot remain passive toward events creating a serious threat in an area bordering on its frontiers and retains for itself the right to take the necessary measures dictated by the interests of preserving peace and security.”

Kuznetsov said declaration would be published tomorrow. Full translation in following telegram:

I merely stated that he was aware of the position of my government from the statement I had made to him yesterday and from the debate in the Security Council. I did, however, wish to point out with reference to the use in the declaration of the words “open USA aggression" that we had acted in response to an appeal of the legitimate Government of Lebanon. He replied that the position of his government was also known and that it considered that this appeal was merely a pretext for our intervention.

May be significant that although Gromyko returned from holiday to receive Stevenson this morning he did not remain to conduct this operation.

We know MFA press conference has been called for 1830 Moscow time today.

Thompson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to Paris, London, Cairo, and Ankara. Received at 3:31 p.m.

2 The full text of the declaration, which was transmitted to the Department in telegram 136 from Moscow, July 16, charged the United States with “open aggression” in the Middle East creating a “serious threat to peace.” (Ibid.) An assessment of the Soviet declaration, prepared in INR on July 17 for the Secretary, noted that the wording of the statement had been exceeded in terms of gravity only by the warning issued by the Soviet Union in conjunction with the Suez crisis on November 5, 1956, and by the TASS statement of October 18, 1957, warning against an attack on Syria. Nonetheless, the INR analysis concluded that the purpose of the Soviet statement was to deter the West from moving against the new Iraq regime rather than to foreshadow a forceful reaction to the U.S. intervention in Lebanon. (Memorandum from Cumming to Dulles; ibid., 783A.00/7–1758; included in the microfiche supplement)

150. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations 150. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations1

Washington, July 16, 1958—7:29 p.m.

57. Eyes only for Ambassador Lodge. Secretary wishes you to give the following information orally to Hammarskjold as soon as possible, emphasizing that it is for his information only: We have received information from a source of known reliability that UAR military authorities have ordered irregular forces in Lebanon to give armed resistance to any movement of American forces beyond their present positions and have decided to commence paramilitary action West of the Jordan River within a matter of hours in anticipation of arousing pro-UAR military action within Jordan by disaffected Jordanian forces. The UAR is taking direct action to stimulate disaffection within the Lebanese army and has urged the rebel command in the Tripoli area to react cautiously to any cease-fire proposals from the Lebanese Army.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320.5783A/7–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted in INR by Cumming and cleared with NEA, in substance with Wilcox in IO, and with the Secretary.

151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt 151. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

Washington, July 17, 1958—1:14 p.m.

148. Convey orally urgently following to Nasser or highest ranking other appropriate UAR official you can reach:

US in landing troops in Lebanon at request GOL has acted to assist in preservation independence of Lebanon and in interest safety US nationals in that country. Presence US forces in Lebanon has no other purpose and US desires withdraw them as soon as circumstances permit.

Our forces thus are not on hostile mission. We seek, as we sought in 1956, to preserve the independence and integrity of a country which considers itself threatened from without. We cannot deny responding to such a plea from a small country which turns to us for aid—aid which seems the more necessary in view of the bloody liquidation of the legal government of neighboring Iraq.

We earnestly hope that our mission will be completed in circumstances which will have a minimum adverse effect upon our relations with UAR. We believe that government of UAR should understand that if US forces are attacked by forces of UAR or by elements known by US to be under UAR control or responding to its direction, there would be grave danger that the scope of the problem would expand and the state of our relations be seriously impaired.2

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5411/7–1758. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Rountree and Dulles and approved by Dulles.

2 Before this message was sent, a statement was issued by Nasser on July 17 condemning the U.S. intervention in Lebanon. Nasser characterized the U.S. landings in Lebanon as a threat to peace in the Middle East, a serious violation of the U.N. Charter, and a menace to all Arab states. (Telegram 149 from Cairo, July 17; ibid., 780.00/7–1758) Ambassador Hare took up the Egyptian protest on July 17 with Ali Sabri, Acting Foreign Minister, and Sabri said that the United States should expect a strong personal response when it intruded its forces into the area. (Telegram 161 from Cairo, July 17; ibid.) The text of telegram 148 was not received at the Embassy until late in the evening of July 17. Hare conveyed the message to the Foreign Ministry at 1 a.m., and was called in to discuss it with Sabri an hour later. Sabri objected to the message, and stated that Nasser would be certain to object most vigorously to the concept of holding the UAR responsible for the actions of forces perceived by the United States to be under the control of the UAR. This amounted, Sabri said, to a threat of war over activities which the UAR could not control. (Telegrams 169 and 176 from Cairo, both July 18; ibid., 783A.00/7–1858; included in the microfiche supplement)

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 152. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 17, 1958—6 p.m.

463. Chamoun asked me to call this morning for a general review of situation. In particular he was anxious to know reactions of General Chehab to yesterday’s events. I said I thought on basis of our visit with him yesterday afternoon, reported Embtel 433,2 General was sincerely if reluctantly ready to cooperate with Admiral Holloway. I regretted I could not say the same for Chehab’s staff.

President said he was deeply disturbed at evidence of treason in Chehab’s headquarters. He said he had tried twice to reach me yesterday when I was absent from Chancery in arranging for entry of Marine column (Embtels 4283 and 433), to say staff had ordered men, tanks and guns from two areas to deploy against American column. These deserted sectors had promptly been occupied by rebel forces.

Chamoun said he was determined to order Chehab to remove disloyal officers including Colonels Tewfick Salem, Abdel Kader Chehab, Youssef Chemaiet and Jamil Lahoud, Major Saab and Captain Genadry.

Comment: We have been through this exercise before. Each time Chamoun for lack of power has not been in a position to make his orders stick. This morning he seemed obviously to be looking for American assistance, but I told him in my judgment it was politically imperative for Lebanon military house-cleaning to be done by Lebanese themselves.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1758. Top Secret. Repeated to London and Paris.

2 See footnote 4, Document 147.

3 Document 147.

153. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 17, 1958, 2:30 p.m. 153. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 17, 1958, 2:30 p.m.1

Washington, July 17, 1958, 2:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Duration of U.S. Stay in Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

UK Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd

Admiral Denny, NATO Standing Group

Marshal of the RAF Dickson

Sir William Hayter, Foreign Office

Lord Hood, British Chargé d’Affaires

Mr. Roger Jackling, British Embassy

Mr. Willie Morris, British Embassy

Mr. Denis Laskey, Private Secretary to FM

Mr. Donald Legan, Foreign Office

US Secretary of State

Secretary of Defense

General Nathan Twining

Mr. Allen Dulles

General W. Wisenand

Under Secretary Herter

C—Mr. Frederick Reinhardt

NEA—Mr. William M. Rountree

EUR—Mr. C. Burke Elbrick

NE—Mr. Stuart Rockwell

NE—Mr. David Newsom

Mr. Lloyd asked the Secretary whether the U.S. forces intended to clear out of Lebanon quickly. The Secretary replied that it was the U.S. intention to stay there. The only possibility, he said, might be that whoever was elected President might ask the U.S. forces to leave, say in September. If that should happen, he said, he did not see how the U.S. forces could remain.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1050, Memoranda of Conversation, Lloyd’s Visit, July 17–20, 1958. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Newsom. Lloyd visited Washington July 17–20 to discuss the Middle East crisis. A number of the discussions between Dulles and Lloyd concerned the British intervention in Jordan on July 17, and are printed as Documents 186–188. The discussions also ranged over Kuwait, the Persian Gulf, the Baghdad Pact, Iraq, Turkey, French interests in the crisis, and the strategy to follow in the United Nations. Memoranda of these conversations are in Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1050. A general discussion of the Middle East with Eisenhower at the White House at 3:30 p.m. on July 17 touched on most of the issues discussed by Dulles and Lloyd, but did not deal with Lebanon. The text of the memorandum of conversation among Eisenhower, Dulles, and Lloyd is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

154. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 154. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut July 17, 1958—9 p.m.

473. For the Secretary from Murphy. You might be interested to know that the AF Boeing 707 took us from Westover non-stop to Beirut in exactly 11 hours averaging close to 500 miles an hour at an altitude of about 40, 000 feet. Pilot said it was minus 70 degrees Fahrenheit outside.

Temperature in Beirut fortunately considerably warmer. Immediately after arrival McClintock and I met with Holloway. I find a very satisfactory working relationship and understanding between them. They deserve credit for the skillful manner in which incidents with Lebanese forces were avoided yesterday, due to fact that Chehab had failed to persuade his military entourage of the necessity and wisdom of US military intervention.

Accompanied by McClintock I called this afternoon on President Chamoun. He gave me lengthy account of events preceding present outbreak of civil strife in Lebanon attributing his principal difficulties to enmity of Nasser for his refusal to reject British and French diplomatic representation after Suez. In larger field he felt Nasser was following Soviet policy objectives in ME, and although he “hoped Nasser might reform” he had frank doubts.

Chamoun said so long as Syria was in Nasser’s hands, there could be no lasting peace in ME. However for immediate crisis he thought if situation could be restored in Iraq, Government of Jordan stoutly maintained and Lebanese assisted in preserving its integrity, there would be a good chance for maintenance of general peace. If anything were to be done against Syria militarily, it should be done with secrecy and speed. He emphasized latter as being an essential element if Russians were to stay out.

Most of our conversation naturally dwelt with situation in Lebanon. Chamoun was warm in his expression of thanks to President Eisenhower and yourself for swift and effective action by US forces.

President was frank in admitting we had been very close to an ugly incident yesterday and was equally candid in saying that unless Lebanese Army could be divested of a small group of disloyal officers, our military and political enterprise here would be placed in jeopardy. He said he could not give a final answer as to extent to which Lebanese Army would be effective in putting down revolt until he had settled this problem. He said he would instruct General Chehab tomorrow morning to remove disloyal officers in the general staff. McClintock will check with President after his talk with General who is calling on me at 1 p.m. tomorrow.

In response to my query whether elections could be held July 24, Chamoun said answer must wait on development of events particularly purging of higher army staff. He said it was already clear, however, many deputies now would be reluctant to vote for Chehab as President because of yesterday’s near-miss between Lebanese Army and Marines.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–1758. Secret; Niact. Received at 5 p.m. and passed to the Office of the Secretary of Defense and the Departments of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. Murphy arrived in Beirut on July 17 and remained until July 30. He traveled thereafter throughout the Middle East and left Athens for Washington, via Paris and London, on August 10.

III. Background to the Crisis in Jordan and the Introduction of British Forces, January 1–July 17, 1958: U.S. Economic and Military Aid to Jordan; U.S. Support for the Establishment of the Arab Union; The Crisis in Iraq and the Jordanian Request for U.S. Military Support; U.S. Support of the Introduction of British Forces Into JordanIII. Background to the Crisis in Jordan and the Introduction of British Forces, January 1–July 17, 1958: U.S. Economic and Military Aid to Jordan; U.S. Support for the Establishment of the Arab Union; The Crisis in Iraq and the Jordanian Request for U.S. Military Support; U.S. Support of the Introduction of British Forces Into Jordan

155. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) to the Secretary of State

Washington, January 17, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5622/1–1758. Secret. Sent to the Secretary through Dillon. Drafted in NEA/NE on January 3 by R.B. Parker and cleared with U/MSA, ICA, and ISA in the Department of Defense.

156. Editorial Note

157. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, January 27, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/1–2758. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, and Jerusalem.

158. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, February 3, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/2–358. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, and Beirut.

159. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, February 6, 1958—7:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/2–458. Secret; Priority. Drafted in NEA/NE by Bergus and cleared with NR and NEA. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, Beirut, and London.

160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, February 13, 1958—8:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 685.87/2–1358. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Herman F. Eilts in NR, Berry, Dillon, and Herter. Also sent to Baghdad, Tel Aviv, and Jidda and repeated to Cairo, Damascus, Beirut, and London.

161. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, February 24, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/2–2458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, Damascus, Beirut, Baghdad, Jerusalem, Jidda, and London.

162. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Director of the International Cooperation Administration (Smith)

Washington, March 7, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/2–2858. Secret. Drafted in NEA/NE by Parker and cleared with W/MSC, NR, NE, and NE/E.

163. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree)

Washington, March 26, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.86C/3–2658. Secret. Drafted in NEA/NE by Newsom.

164. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, May 7, 1958—7:11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/5–758. Secret; Noforn except British. Drafted in NEA/NE by Waggoner and cleared by Rountree. Also sent to Baghdad and repeated to Cairo, Damascus, Beirut, Ankara, Jerusalem, Jidda, Karachi, Tehran, Tel Aviv, and London.

165. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, May 20, 1958—6:07 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/–1958. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Waggoner and Parker and cleared in L and by Rountree. Also sent to Baghdad.

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, June 12, 1958—2:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.5–MSP/6–1258. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree, by Smith and Bell in ICA, and in substance by Dulles and Eisenhower. Also sent to Baghdad and repeated to London.

167. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, June 28, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/6–2858. Secret. Repeated to Baghdad.

168. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, June 30, 1958—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/6–3058. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, London, and Beirut.

169. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, July 10, 1958—7:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–958. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and approved by Berry. Repeated to Baghdad and London.

170. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 11, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1158. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad and London.

171. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 14, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Received at 5:51 p.m. Repeated to Baghdad, London, Beirut, Cairo, and Damascus.

172. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower

London, July 14, 1958.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series, Macmillan-President 6/58–9/30/58. Top Secret. For additional information on this message, see footnote 1, Document 132. Regarding the British decision to intervene militarily in Jordan, see Documents 131 and 134.

173. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 15, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 885.2553/7–1558. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, Rome, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Damascus, and Jerusalem. Received at 11:30 a.m.

174. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 15, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1558. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Dhahran, Jerusalem, Jidda, Tehran, Tel Aviv, Paris, and London. Received at 7:41 p.m. and passed to the Department of Defense at 11 p.m.

175. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1958

Washington, July 15, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1558. Secret. Drafted by Greene.

176. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, July 15, 1958—7:25 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Parker and Newsom and cleared by Rountree, Deputy Under Secretary Loy W. Henderson, and Dulles.

177. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1958

Washington, July 15, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1558. Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt.

178. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State

Ankara, July 16, 1958—1 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series. Top Secret; Niact; Presidential Treatment. Also sent to Istanbul. Received at 10:34 p.m. on July 15 and passed to the White House.

179. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 16, 1958,11 a.m.

Washington, July 16, 1958, 11 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster. The full text of this memorandum is scheduled for publication in volume XII. Another memorandum of this conversation was prepared by Reinhardt. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658)

180. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 16, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1658. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Tehran, Tel Aviv, Damascus, Dhahran, Jerusalem, London, and Paris. Received at 2:32 p.m.

181. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 16, 1958—10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Tehran, Tel Aviv, Damascus, Jerusalem, USUN, London, Paris, and Rome. Received at 6:14 p.m. and passed to Defense at 7:45 p.m.

182. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Prime Minister Macmillan in London and Secretary of State Dulles in Washington, July 16, 1958, 6:20 p.m.

Washington, July 16, 1958, 6:20 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

183. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, July 16, 1958—6:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1658. Top Secret; Niact; [distribution indicator not declassified]. Drafted in INR by Cumming and cleared in NEA by Berry, in C by Reinhardt, and by the Secretary in substance.

184. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Prime Minister Macmillan in London and Secretary of State Dulles in Washington, July 16, 1958, 8 p.m.

Washington, July 16, 1958, 8 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Secret; Personal and Private; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Dulles.

185. Editorial Note

186. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 17, 11:30 a.m.

Washington, July 17, 11:30 a.m.

187. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 17, 2:30 p.m.

Washington, July 17, 2:30 p.m.

188. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, July 17, 3:30 p.m.

Washington, July 17, 3:30 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series. Top Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt. The full text of this memorandum is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

189. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, July 17, 1958—8:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and Reinhardt. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

155. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) to the Secretary of State 155. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, January 17, 1958.

SUBJECT

Jet Fighter Aircraft for Lebanon and Jordan

Problem:

To determine whether the United States should make jet fighter aircraft available to Lebanon and Jordan on a grant basis.

Background:

1. Lebanon:

The pro-West Government of Lebanon continues to feel insecure in its position and to look to the United States for economic and military aid. The Lebanese are particularly urging that we furnish the Lebanese Air Force with modern jet fighters to replace the obsolete planes with which they are presently equipped. The Lebanese believe that their possession of jet fighters would act as an important deterrent to the Syrians. They also stress the psychological effect which the provision of such fighters would have on Lebanese public opinion. The British have expressed an interest in Lebanon’s air strength and are maintaining a small air training mission in Lebanon. We have been advised by the British, however, that while British fighter aircraft might be made available to Lebanon, the United Kingdom is not in a position to offer them on a grant basis nor even to pay a portion of the cost of these planes on the understanding that the United States would assume the balance.

2. Jordan:

Since his accession to the throne in 1953, King Hussein, himself a trained pilot, has exhibited a strong interest in the strengthening of Jordan’s Air Force which presently consists of about 36 planes, of which 12 are obsolescent British jets. While the Anglo-Jordanian Treaty was still in force, King Hussein constantly sought British assistance in this connection, but relatively little was done. About a month ago, the King advised the British Ambassador in Amman of his desire to purchase a number of the latest type of British fighters. The British have accordingly provided considerable information as to availabilities. Just recently a representative of the British aircraft firm of Hunter has been in Amman and has awakened the King’s interest in acquiring 16 Hunter Mark VI fighter aircraft at a total cost of about $7 million. Not unexpectedly, the Jordanians have approached us as to the possibility of our assisting Jordan in financing this transaction.

Basic Considerations:

1. The Department of Defense states that it has no military requirements for aircraft to be supplied to either Lebanon or Jordan. However, Military Assistance Program funds can be made available for this purpose if the transaction is of sufficient importance to warrant the diversion of funds from other military assistance programs because of overriding political considerations.

2. Defense further states that if a political decision is made to supply these aircraft, there are more than adequate numbers of United States F–86 jet fighters available immediately at less than half the cost of the Hawker Hunter. However, Defense will not object to the supply of British aircraft and recommends the Hawker Hunter as the best choice among British aircraft for this purpose.

3. Although it would be cheaper to provide American fighter aircraft such as the F–86, we feel that considerations arising from the Arab-Israel dispute and our past refusal to supply United States jet aircraft to Israel would make it preferable for us to avoid placing United States aircraft in either Lebanon or Jordan. Aircraft from a friendly Western power would seem to be preferable and Britain is apparently willing to assume the political risks involved.

4. Political considerations applying to both Lebanon and Jordan are so similar that it seems clear that we could not decide to supply the planes to just one of these two countries. If we made the planes available to Lebanon, it would be almost impossible for us to justify a negative response to the Jordanian request, and vice versa. From the economic viewpoint, the major difference is that once planes were made available on a grant basis to Lebanon, there would be some prospect that Lebanon could bear the recurring costs of their maintenance. These costs, so far as Jordan is concerned, would have to be absorbed by a budget which is already being supported primarily by the United States. These recurring costs are estimated at $1 million annually for maintenance and operation of 12 aircraft of the Hawker Hunter type.

5. The total cost of a program of 12 Hawker Hunter Mark VI’s for Jordan and 6 for Lebanon is estimated at between $5 and $6 million. This includes an allowance for adequate spares and ground servicing equipment. Procurement would be under standard MAP procedures rather than through financing a commercial transaction as requested by Jordan.

6. While the International Cooperation Administration has stated that it has no direct substantive responsibility in this matter or reason to object to the proposed provision of jet aircraft, attention was called to the fact that continuing costs associated with military build-up carry with it a probable requirement for future military assistance and/or defense support from the United States, though not of major magnitude.

7. Admittedly, the provision of aircraft to countries which request them primarily for reasons of prestige is a costly business and a risky one so far as its global implications are concerned. The heavy pressures to which these two small pro-Western countries are being submitted, however, incline us to the belief that we should be prepared to do something by way of an affirmative and sympathetic gesture. Both Governments have assumed considerable local and international political risks in maintaining a pro-Western position, and we believe they should be sustained and encouraged by us. We believe that these considerations are overriding and that we should give a favorable response to their requests in this instance. Specifically, we believe we should agree to supply 6 Hawker Hunter Mark VI’s to Lebanon and 12 to Jordan.

Recommendations:2

1. In view of the political considerations outlined above, that you approve in principle our making available 6 Hawker Hunter Mark VI’s to Lebanon and 12 to Jordan at an estimated net cost of $5 to $6 million to be paid from Fiscal 1958 or 1959 military assistance funds.

2. Since we do not have bilateral agreements with Lebanon and Jordan containing the assurances required under Section 402(a)3 of the Mutual Security Act, that we be authorized to seek Presidential authority under Section 401 of the Act to waive such requirements and to provide the aircraft requested.

3. That, pending completion of Section 401 action, we be authorized to consult with the British regarding price and availability on a contingency basis.

4. That we be authorized to inform the Lebanese and Jordanians, also on a contingency basis, that we have agreed in principle to assist them in obtaining a limited number of modern jet fighters. Until details are worked out with the British we would not inform them of the numbers and type we intend to provide.

5. That Mr. Dillon be authorized to communicate the above decisions to the Department of Defense and ICA.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5622/1–1758. Secret. Sent to the Secretary through Dillon. Drafted in NEA/NE on January 3 by R.B. Parker and cleared with U/MSA, ICA, and ISA in the Department of Defense.

2 Acting Secretary Herter initialed his approval of each of the recommendations.

3 Section 401 of the Mutual Security Act of 1954 provided for the establishment of a special fund to be administered by the President, without specific reference to the Congress, when he deemed use of the fund important to the national security. Section 402 of the Act dealt with funding for mutual security purposes derived from the sale of surplus agricultural commodities. (68 Stat. 832, as amended)

156. Editorial Note 156. Editorial Note

On January 24, President Eisenhower approved NSC 5801/1, “Long-Range U.S. Policy Toward the Near East,” which had been adopted by the National Security Council on January 22. NSC 5801/1 contained a paragraph which outlined U.S. policy toward Jordan: “Jordan

“49. In order to maintain the present orientation of Jordan, provide necessary aid for economic development, defense support and, to the extent required to retain the loyalty of the Army to the King, military assistance. While maintaining support for the present regime in Jordan, continue efforts to strengthen Iraqi and Saudi influence there, with a view to increasing political, economic and military ties between the three countries. Seek the continuing acquiescence of Israel in these moves and make clear to Israel U.S. support therefor.” (Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 63 D 351, 5801 Memoranda)

The full text of NSC 5801/1 is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

157. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 157. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, January 27, 1958—11 a.m.

1394. Reference: Deptel 1784.2 In compliance Deptel 1784 informed Foreign Minister Rifai who immediately conveyed information to King Hussein. Latter delighted, instructed Rifai express his appreciation USG. Inquired as to when “detailed arrangement” might expect be completed.

I used visit Rifai as opportunity solicit HKJ views Egyptian-Syrian federation. Foreign Minister requested I come his home last night where our meetings less likely be interrupted. Following are highlights our conversation lasting over two hours: (A) King Hussein, deeply concerned, believes that while “real" federation Egyptian-Syrian unlikely some kind “paper unity” will be announced shortly which would put propaganda initiative for Arab unity in Nasser’s hands, make Jordan’s position precarious since even “paper federation” would have tremendous appeal throughout Arab world especially among west bank refugees.

(B) Rifai basically differs with King in that he regards Egyptian-Syrian link-up as a possibility whereas King believes it immediate definite probability.

(C) Following several conferences between King and Rifai latter convinced of imminent danger propaganda victory through paper federation required immediate action. At King’s direction Rifai prepared plan in effort counter Egyptian-Syrian federation move.

(D) Plan drafted by Rifai which King accepted is based on revival treaties friendship and brotherhood between Iraq, Jordan, Saudi Arabia which permit great latitude economic, military integration without surrendering any sovereignty as would be required in either federation or confederation. Rifai intends explain plan along following lines. Inasmuch as treaties have been in force more than ten years and already renewed for additional periods five-ten years plan cannot be called response to or in competition with the Egyptian-Syrian proposal but rather as the next logical step toward greater unity among Arab states sharing common borders. Furthermore since Egypt, Syria now under Soviet domination Jordan, Iraq, Saudi Arabia as only logical remaining defenders holy places Mecca, Medina are faced choice either join opposing power bloc (Baghdad Pact) or seek common front among independent Arab states, continue work for Arab unity, provide only defense Arab world against further Israeli aggressions.

(E) King instructed Rifai draft two identical letters—one addressed King Faisal, other Saud—in which plan would be outlined and a request made for a meeting of the three Kings (Hussein, Faisal, Saud) and their Prime Ministers/Foreign Ministers to be arranged within ten days after receipt of letters at which time a dramatic announcement of revival of the treaties and a long-range program designed to eventually lead to confederation would be made public.

Rifai in order maintain maximum security wrote draft letters by hand, reviewed them with King only few hours before our meeting. Hussein ordered them prepared final form, one to be carried personally by Court Minister Tuqan to Faisal, the other to be delivered to Saud by Rifai himself not later than January 28–29. In order show deference Saud, Rifai will inform him orally that Hussein and Faisal will meet at time and place his choosing but meeting in order be effective must take place before February 15 since latest HKJ intelligence estimates probable launching Egyptian-Syrian federation not later March 1.

Rifai said King instructed him review situation with me and asked I transmit information Washington with request USG give all possible assistance convince Faisal, Saud urgency immediate steps be taken establish common front Jordan, Iraq, Saudi Arabia deny propaganda benefits certain to accrue both Nasser and Communists if announcement Egyptian-Syrian Federation made first.

Comment: In view time element Rifai’s plan to reaffirm Arab Friendship, Brotherhood Treaties would appear offer best opportunity quick agreement between Jordan, Iraq, Saudi Arabia which essential if Egypt, Syria are to be beaten to punch same time afford us opportunity profess support idea Arab unity where such action accordance with will of governments and peoples involved. My opinion despite all security measures taken by HKJ news meeting three Kings likely be known Egyptians, Syrians. Therefore may have effect force their pace toward Federation which makes timing of both meetings and public announcement paramount to success undertaking. Even if E–S Federation proclaimed first, announcement reaffirmation of treaties and long range plans for ultimate confederation providing they make public shortly thereafter might serve blunt E–S propaganda spearhead that is almost certain to characterize plan as “me too” affair instigated at Baghdad Pact direction.3

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/1–2758. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, and Jerusalem.

2 Telegram 1784 to Amman, January 24, instructed the Embassy to inform King Hussein that the United States agreed in principle to make a limited number of late model jet fighters available to Jordan. (Ibid., 785.5622/1–2458; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 On January 28, the Department sent a telegram to Amman, Baghdad, and Jidda instructing those posts to respond, if consulted concerning the proposal outlined in telegram 1394 from Amman, that the United States had for some time expressed the belief that closer collaboration between Iraq, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia “would be in their mutual interest and in that of ME and Free World.” The Department added, however, “we do not presume to offer substantive comment on Hussein’s specific proposal as this purely intra-Arab matter.” (Telegram 1805 to Amman, also sent as telegram 1941 to Baghdad, and telegram 1026 to Jidda, January 28; Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/1–2758; included in the microfiche supplement)

158. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 158. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, February 3, 1958—4 p.m.

1433. Prior receipt Department circular 7022 King Hussein summoned me palace for meeting with him and Foreign Minister Rifai which lasted over three hours. Hussein [1 line of source text not declassified]. Said it [United Arab Republic] posed serious threat not only Jordan, Lebanon but if permitted go unopposed to entire ME, indirectly free world as well. It was this conviction which prompted him write letters Faisal and Saud(Embassy telegram 1394).3 At this point he asked Foreign Minister Rifai fill me in on his recent mission Jidda.

Rifai said Saud deeply concerned creation UAR but unfortunately his official advisers do not share this view and on contrary inclined favor it. Under these circumstances he cannot openly condemn union and proposes adopt wait-and-see attitude new state. However, Rifai after considerable effort convinced HIM inherent danger E–S union posed for monarchies in general, Saudi Arabia particularly. Secured his agreement meet with Hussein discuss establishment organization other Arab states which would initially consist Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Iraq, Lebanon. Saud insisted that Hussein’s proposal could only be successful providing Iraq withdrew from Baghdad Pact. Otherwise new organization would immediately be branded by Syrians, Egyptians as “tool of imperialists” and creation recent BP meeting Ankara. Due visit Moroccan Crown Prince Hassan Jidda, Saud unable meet Hussein this week as requested. Therefore agreed, meeting will take place Jordan–SA frontier within next two weeks. Rifai believes Saud likely make any Saudi adherence new Arab organization contingent on Iraqi withdrawal BP.

When Rifai had finished discussion Hussein proposal, Saud said he regretted necessity inform HKJ due precarious financial condition his country it would be impossible provide Jordan dinar 5 million ($15 million) promised Jordan next fiscal year. He suggested that US provide money to be transmitted via SA for political purposes. Saud hopeful he will be able renew payments following year. Hussein said this heavy blow and one which he felt could not be absorbed without serious danger to Jordan and stability his government. I offered no comment but directed conversation other subject inquiring progress Sulaiman Tuqan mission Baghdad. Hussein replied Faisal reaction quite favorable and as soon date fixed for his conference with Saud he will arrange meet Faisal. [61/2 lines of source text not declassified]

[4 paragraphs (81/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Rifai volunteered opinion British would not object too strongly if Jordan liquidated providing this were price of working their way back into Egypt and by making full use of Nuri Said and his clique into Iraq and eventually other parts ME. He said HKJ had intelligence information indicating British are willing make considerable concessions Nasser in exchange more liberal Egyptian policy toward British interests. Rifai became quite excited and said in light creation UAR and serious threat it held for Jordan and King Hussein in particular HKJ must quickly assess its position and determine who her friends are. In an impassioned voice he said while British, US interests are mutually compatible in Europe they tend to fragment in ME where we seem to be in competition with one another. He therefore wished to know USG position in view Ambassador Johnston’s statements.

I replied that despite fact I had been informed by British Embassy officer of certain common conclusions reached at Ankara I had as yet received no specific directive other than the general policy that my government was favorably disposed to all efforts toward Arab unity providing they represented the will of the people and governments involved. I gave as my personal opinion that it would be most difficult for any country to publicly oppose UAR or to deny it recognition although the latter might be delayed pending outcome proposed plebiscite. I reminded both Hussein and Rifai that my government had demonstrated its friendship for Jordan in a most tangible way and as far as I knew had no intention alter its present policy which was based on a willingness work with our Arab friends wherever and whenever possible. I suggested that it would be helpful if Hussein could give me outline any specific plans create and Arab organization to counter the effect of the UAR.

[9 paragraphs (11/2 pages of source text) not declassified]

I expressed my appreciation to both Hussein, Rifai for information they had provided and said I would appreciate knowing what they envisioned as role to be played by the US in present situation.

At Hussein’s direction Rifai asked me transmit following request to US: (A) Public support by USG for the new organization of Arab States as proposed by Hussein;

(B) USG not to oppose Iraqi withdrawal from BP and if possible persuade British adopt same attitude;

(C) USG make $60 million available in aid for all purposes of which $14 million would represent replacement Saudi aid not likely be forthcoming.

I immediately pointed out to both Hussein, Rifai that on the surface this seemed to represent a considerable upward revision in the amount of US aid and I felt would require considerable study Washington.

[1 paragraph (61/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Embassy comment follows.4

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/2–358. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, and Beirut.

2 Circular telegram 702, sent to the principal Middle East posts, London and Paris, February 1, reported Secretary Dulles’ remarks at the Ankara Baghdad Pact meeting concerning the announcement that day of the establishment of the UAR. Dulles spoke of the dangerous implications of the union of Egypt and Syria, and suggested that Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, and Saudi Arabia develop a united position in response to the establishment of the UAR. (Ibid., 674.83/2–158)

3 Supra.

4 The Embassy’s comment followed in telegram 1436 from Amman, February 4. The thrust of the comment was that the Saudi response to Hussein’s proposal cast doubt over the prospect of a federation of the three Arab states, and Hussein’s suspicion of British motives indicated an increasing conviction that U.S.-British interest were incompatible in Jordan. The Embassy concluded that Jordanian anxieties were rooted in a fear that Jordan could not survive a “popular” call for Arab unity unless Hussein’s federation proposal was adopted. (Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/2–458; included in the microfiche supplement)

159. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 159. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, February 6, 1958—7:58 p.m.

1873. Amman’s 1433,2 1436,3 1437.4 You should inform King and Rifai that we have given careful consideration to points raised by them. We are pleased that consultation of type envisaged in Depcirtel 7025 is taking place and continue believe it essential that common attitude and plans be developed by friendly Arab states.

On specific requests made by King you should state following: a) As we have indicated, if Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Iraq and Lebanon, or any two or more of these states, decide to establish closer political relations among themselves US would regard this as constructive move consistent with interests states themselves and that of strengthening security of region. Would not be feasible, nor do we believe useful for US publicly to express an attitude re King’s proposal in absence at least substantial progress toward realization thereof.

b) Question of Iraq’s relationship Baghdad Pact is of course one for Iraq to decide. In our view Pact provides security shield to all ME states, and none would profit by weakening of Pact through Iraq’s withdrawal. In addition to security benefit, latter country receives substantial material advantages from its Pact membership. There is nothing inconsistent between Iraq’s membership in Baghdad Pact and fulfillment of Iraq’s obligations to other Arab countries. Iraqi offers of military assistance to Jordan demonstrate this.

c) Constitutional limitations on our ability make commitments over future US fiscal years pointed out in Deptels 1294 and 1309. These same tels indicated strongly sympathetic attitude of Executive Branch and our belief that Hussein can be certain that Jordan’s needs will continue receive sympathetic consideration by US. You should review points made these tels with King and refer our readiness make available from US FY 1958 funds $20 million for support Jordan budget. New US FY begins July 1, 1958 at which time we hope be able render further assistance re Jordan’s needs. We have already informed King of our willingness provide number of modern jet fighters and expect be able discuss further details shortly. We hope King and HKJ Govt will continue efforts persuade Saudis of necessity SAG aid to Jordan and are prepared appropriately support such efforts. We and UK are also making strong efforts persuade Iraq make substantial aid available HKJ. While we can appreciate King Hussein’s deep concern for financial stability of his country, we believe that he has no basis for serious apprehension that HKJ’s essential needs will not be met.

We appreciate King’s advising us of Soviet overtures and of his forthright attitude in dealing with them. We feel that he has correctly assessed motives behind this Soviet move.6

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/2–458. Secret; Priority. Drafted in NEA/NE by Bergus and cleared with NR and NEA. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, Beirut, and London.

2 Supra.

3 See footnote 4, supra.

4 Telegram 1437 from Amman, February 4, reported a discussion on February 3 between Chargé Wright, the Director of USOM in Amman, and Foreign Minister Rifai concerning the U.S. aid program for Jordan. Rifai outlined aid requests for fiscal year 1959, and, when asked concerning anticipated aid from other Arab states, he replied that the only aid likely to be forthcoming was their prayers and best wishes. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/2–458; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 See footnote 2, supra.

6 In telegram 592 from Amman, February 7, Wright reported that he had conveyed the message contained in telegram 1873 to Amman to Rifai that day, and the Foreign Minister was pleased with the U.S. response. He was certain that King Hussein would feel the same. He added that King Faisal had accepted Hussein’s invitation to come to Amman to discuss the formation of the Arab federation proposed by Hussein. (Department of State, Central Files, 685.87/2–758; included in the microfiche supplement)

160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, February 13, 1958—8:33 p.m.

1919. Amman’s 1489 to Department.2

For Amman and Baghdad—Following comments can be made to appropriate Iraqi and Jordanian officials: 1. We consider strengthening ties between Jordan-Iraq to be constructive move and have noted with pleasure substantial progress apparently being made to this end. We think that a closer Jordan-Iraqi association will confer real benefits upon peoples of both countries and contribute to peace, stability and economic progress of area.

2. We are pleased that Baghdad Pact formula acceptable to Iraq and Jordan has been found. We are confident any Iraqi reconsideration of its BP relationship will be carried out accordance Article 7 of Pact3 and will also take into account legitimate interest of all Iraq’s treaty partners. In our view Pact provides a useful security shield from which all ME states benefit and there is nothing inconsistent between Iraqi membership in BP and fulfillment of Iraqi obligation to other Arab states.

3. US has in past been pleased to offer assistance to Iraq and Jordan in efforts being made by them to strengthen their independence and integrity and to promote economic well-being. If new association formed, these efforts presumably thenceforth would be directed toward mutual purpose of strengthening association. US for its part would be prepared, subject US constitutional requirements and availability funds, to consider how it could best assist partners in carrying out this task, with particular reference to needs of Jordanian member.

4. We have on past occasions made clear to the Israelis our view that a strengthening of ties among friendly Arab states would be a favorable development. In particular we have stated that we viewed with favor Iraq–Jordan mutual assistance efforts. We shall continue as circumstances warrant to take this position with Israel Government.

For Jidda

Jidda should appropriately communicate paragraphs 1 through 3 to King. Add our hope that Saud would continue policies of maintaining close relations with Kingdoms of Iraq and Jordan and will lend appropriate support to new association if formed.

For Tel Aviv

If approached by Israelis re Jordan–Iraq association, you should comment that we favor this move, which should strengthen position pro-West Arab states in area and provide counter-balance to Egypt-Syria union. We believe that last thing Iraq and Jordan want is trouble with Israel, and hope that Israel will take no action re new association which will cause it difficulties in its formative stage.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 685.87/2–1358. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Herman F. Eilts in NR, Berry, Dillon, and Herter. Also sent to Baghdad, Tel Aviv, and Jidda and repeated to Cairo, Damascus, Beirut, and London.

2 In telegram 1489 from Amman, February 13, Wright reported that a compromise agreement had been reached in the talks between Jordan and Iraq on the issue of Iraq’s membership in the Baghdad Pact which would permit Iraq’s continuing membership. He also reported that agreement was near on an announcement of a federation under which both monarchs would retain their thrones, but there would be a substantial integration of military and foreign services and policies. (Ibid.)

3 Article 7 of the Baghdad Pact provided that any of the contracting parties could withdraw from the pact by giving written notice within 6 months of the expiration of the renewable 5-year periods that the pact remained in force. For text of the Baghdad Pact, see American Foreign Policy, Basic Documents, 1950–1955, pp. 1257-1259.

161. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 161. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, February 24, 1958—6 p.m.

1553. Complex problems in US–Jordan relations posed by announcement Arab Federation2 are made subject following preliminary country team assessment. Underlying most conclusions reached below is belied that US–free world interests dictate support of this western-orientated federation which, while obviously requiring time prove successful, eventually likely play important role in any future Arab grouping.

1. Political

A. Jordanian attitudes.

Despite initial enthusiasm Jordanian officialdom, full implications Jordan-Iraqi action not yet realized by most. Emotional appeal momentarily has brushed aside awareness of difficulties ahead in process implementation. Future sacrifices by vested interests only vaguely understood.

General Jordanian reactions still difficult define in precise terms. While reception favorable particularly on east bank, there remains sizeable frustrated elements on both banks incline reject federation as mere gimmick designed block “real” Arab unity through UAR. Much potential negativism tempered however by expectations of economic gain for Jordan with result that large portion population appears willing wait and watch developments. Public demonstrations of enthusiasm have been obviously lacking in spontaneity and conviction. But failure of announcement to elicit full popular acclaim does not detract from CT over-all evaluation that pressures against King and government, which received added strength through declaration UAR, have now subsided greatly. CT believes it safe assume that HKJ has passed at least temporarily from year-long “holding operation” into stage of greater stability. However, changes in martial law rule not expected until stability becomes more demonstrably permanent.

B. Initial implications for US.

Past record Arab states of rising above local considerations has not been such as to inspire faith in their ability produce more than paper results, e.g., Arab League and multilateral treaties. Jordan no exception to this record, but apparent increased local awareness of present international political circumstances provide basis for CT optimism that selfish interests can be subordinated to larger considerations of unity provided US lends full support to maintenance of momentum generated by federation announcement.

CT expects even during period preceding promulgation new constitution many pressures will be generated through painful process of relinquishment sovereignty. If unchecked these pressures could vitiate true effectiveness of federal authority by creation of supranational body incapable of directing national policies. Indications of such tendencies have been observed already in King Hussein, Rifai, army and others, although these attitudes are partially tied in with maintenance of bargaining position for Jordan.

It may be expected that schedule for initial steps implementing agreement will conform in general with that outlined by Rifai, reported Embtel 1507. Request for recognition therefore likely early May. But before this stage is reached CT believes that well-formulated political decisions by US will be necessary in order to provide needed impetus to federation. Perhaps certain appropriate indications of US plans prior to May could serve to check tendencies “have cake and eat it too”.

CT envisages basically uncompromising positions on some sovereignty issues which would seem require early formulation by US of policy most likely to enhance position federal authority even at expense wounding royal prides. By taking such action CT believes US can begin laying ground for its eventual disengagement from direct participation Jordanian politico-economic scene and still exert constructive influence on federation. However, premature attempts at such disengagement, in CT opinion, can spell only failure of Arab Federation.

2. Economic

A. General considerations.

Much of US support must continue to be provided in terms economic and military needs of area without undue emphasis being given at this time on potential capacity Iraq to assist Jordan.

Economic integration is likely to proceed slowly and any indications prospective losses in public or private sectors will tend retard implementation. Ministry of Finance and some businessmen already advocating go-slow attitude in view interests considered threatened by Iraqi competition. However, these interests not significant in total picture since with few exceptions Jordanians should eventually profit economically from federation.

Certain early developments must be expected if any progress to be made. Among these would be (1) abolition trade barriers and (2) free mobility capital and labor.

Governmental expenditures in Jordan will continue dependent US and other aid. British attitude development aid and HKJ debt repayment to UK likely to become less generous owing favorable Iraqi financial situation. Especially in view growing Jordanian suspicions British motives, effort should be made encourage full British recognition Jordan’s continued need for UK economic assistance in context latter’s support of federation.

B. US aid program.

In order bolster federal authority CT believes basic US aid relationships should be established soon as possible on centralized basis with new federal government. Since Jordanian officials still do not know how operations will be carried out or what will be completely unified it’s still too early to foresee best method of operation and organization. Some difficulties precluding current assessment are: (1) Communications;

(2) Extent to which Jordanian and Iraqi Governments will consolidate functions, e.g., Minister of Economy expecting consolidation and seeking immediate action before his authority curtailed; Minister of Agriculture expects no unification agricultural operations; Ministry of Health anticipates some sort federal advisory health service in future but expects no direct authority from federal government over his administration of health program for Jordan.

In order to produce successful transition in operation US aid program care must be taken to allay fear that Jordan will become economically neglected province of Baghdad’s empire.

3. Military

Jordanian army views federation project with studied caution but no lack of agreement in principle that higher joint staff headed by Iraqi general will be created. Belief is that under this command Iraqi and Jordanian armies will operate as separate forces and that details for complete integration will not be completed before 1960. At present Jordanians expect stipulation in agreement concerning previous international commitments will “protect” Jordan from association MAAG or BP whereas US aid to Jordan would continue be channeled through “Jordan” army.

Many Jordanian analyses of army unification suffer from close examination particularly since it is clear that problems of logistics and administration have received only casual study to date. Integration of Iraqi officers into Jordanian army must be done on larger scale than contemplated now using their greater experience and rank; schooling of officers must be standardized; budgeting and programming of funds will have to be maintained by central authority to be successful; promotions and pay rates must be standardized; and many prior international agreements so intimately affect army operations that Jordan will be required adhere to them in spite of present reservations.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/2–2458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, Damascus, Beirut, Baghdad, Jerusalem, Jidda, and London.

2 On February 14, Iraq and Jordan announced the formation of an Arab Federation with King Faisal II of Iraq as Chief of State and King Hussein of Jordan as his Deputy. The announcement, which was signed by the two Kings at Amman after 2 days of meetings, indicated that each King would retain constitutional authority in his own kingdom, the federal capital would rotate between Baghdad and Amman every 6 months, a federal legislature would be established, but two regional councils would exist to deal with non-federal matters, and a constitution would be enacted within 3 months to implement the announced federation.

162. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Director of the International Cooperation Administration (Smith) 162. Memorandum From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs (Dillon) to the Director of the International Cooperation Administration (Smith)1

Washington, March 7, 1958.

SUBJECT

Budgetary Support for Jordan

I refer to your memorandum of February 28, 19582 in which you question the necessity of continuing budgetary support for Jordan under the Mutual Security Program in the light of the recently announced agreement of federation between Iraq and Jordan. Specifically, you ask whether it is in the interest of the United States and within the intent of Congress to use Mutual Security Funds to help maintain governmental operations and services in Jordan, which has now become part of a federal state whose total resources appear to be adequate for the purpose. We believe it is in our interest to continue budgetary support for Jordan. The following are the principal considerations bringing us to this conclusion: 1. United States Interests in Iraq–Jordan Merger: We believe that the federation between Iraq and Jordan is potentially a significant and favorable development with respect to United States interests in the Middle East. Properly implemented and executed, this federation can make a substantial contribution to area stability and economic development and should have a favorable effect on both long and short term problems now facing us in the area. For example, it could help check Soviet penetration and eliminate or lessen the effect of some of the elements of instability in Jordan. Therefore, it is in our interest that the federation be successful and that we support and assist it to the greatest possible extent.

In our approach to it at the present time, however, we must remain aware that, while the federation has been proposed, it has not been formally established and, while we have no doubt that the February 14 proclamation will be implemented, it would be premature to formulate policies on the assumption that actual federation has been established. Our separate commitments to Iraq and Jordan are, therefore, still fully in effect and must be considered to be so until formal federation gives us a basis for taking a new look at the situation. Further, our desire to see federation successfully implemented makes it desirable to continue to demonstrate, in discussions of the future, a keen United States interest and desire to render assistance to Jordan and Iraq under whatever new political arrangement they may make.

2. Past United States Assurances: Prior to the February 14 federation agreement, we had given assurances to both the Iraqis and Jordanians of our continuing desire to assist Jordan (Deptels 1294 and 1309 to Amman3 and Deptel 1989 to Baghdad4 ). On February 13, we sent Deptel 1919 to Amman,5 expressing our favorable view of the proposed federation and stating that the United States was prepared, subject to constitutional requirements and the availability of funds, to consider how it could best assist in strengthening the association, with particular reference to the needs of Jordan. This, plus subsequent telegrams dealing with technical aspects of our assistance program in Jordan, has conveyed to both the Iraqis and Jordanians the clear, and correct, impression that we support the Federation proposal and to aid in its success we wished to continue economic and financial assistance to Jordan.

An indication now that the United States sought to terminate its financial assistance to Jordan would not only be considered by the Iraqis and the Jordanians to be a breach of faith but might also cause the Iraqis to reconsider their role in the new federation.

3. Implementation of the Federation Agreement: The February 14 agreement stipulated that a new constitution would be drafted for the federation and that the necessary measures for setting up a federal government would be taken within three months. It has already become apparent that there will be considerable difficulty in working out specific details of the merger, particularly in the government organization and economic spheres. We believe the Iraqis should be more forthcoming in the field of financial and economic assistance to Jordan, and will urge in the strongest terms that they be so, but we must recognize that we can not expect the Iraqis to agree to a one-sided arrangement whereby Jordan obtains great economic advantages at Iraq’s expense while Iraq, by the nature of Jordan’s economic position, can expect almost none. While it is too early to forecast the final terms of the economic aspects of the federation, we are reasonably sure that they will fall far short of Iraq’s immediately assuming responsibility for Jordan’s budget. We do not think it practicable to attempt to influence these terms radically now, but rather that we should work toward a gradual assumption of Jordan’s financial burden by Iraq.

4. Iraq’s Economic Needs: While Iraq’s economy is far stronger than Jordan’s, substantial uncommitted Iraqi funds are not available for budgetary assistance to Jordan. In the first place, Iraq is not expected to recover from the financial losses suffered as a result of the sabotage of the oil pipe lines in Syria until some time during the second quarter of this year and has, in fact, incurred an indebtedness of around $80 million as a result of loans from the Iraq Petroleum Company during 1957. Its ordinary budgets for the past two fiscal years have shown deficits which were financed by these IPC loans and a deficit of ID 3.8 million ($10.6 million) is expected in Iraq’s fiscal year 1959. In the second place, 70 percent of Iraq’s oil income is earmarked for an economic development program which authorizes expenditures of over $1 billion during the four year period April 1957 through March 1961. Any delay in the realization of the economic benefits of this program would seriously impair a promising long-term possibility for ultimate drifts of population from overcrowded Jordan to Iraq. Therefore, it would be unwise both politically and economically to urge a reduction in this development program. As you know, one of the reasons for our grant military assistance to Iraq is to permit Iraq to strengthen its defenses, and to contribute actively to collective defenses within the Baghdad Pact without diverting funds from its development program. Therefore, although we believe that Iraq can contribute more to the support of Jordan’s budget than it has in the past and we will continue to urge it to do so, we do not think it will be possible to discontinue or reduce United States budgetary assistance to Jordan during the coming Jordan fiscal year. In fact, we may well have to face a more serious budget support problem than in the past year, since indications are that Saudi Arabia’s financial situation is forcing a serious reconsideration of its aid to Jordan.

Douglas Dillon6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/2–2858. Secret. Drafted in NEA/NE by Parker and cleared with W/MSC, NR, NE, and NE/E.

2 Not printed. (Ibid.)

3 Neither printed.

4 In telegram 1989 to Baghdad, February 1, the Department conveyed assurances to the Iraqi Government that the United States remained interested in the stability and integrity of Jordan and would continue to give sympathetic consideration to the requirements of the Jordanian Government for economic assistance. (Department of State, Central Files, 885.0087/1–2258)

5 Document 160.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

163. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree) 163. Memorandum From the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern, South Asian, and African Affairs (Rountree)1

Washington, March 26, 1958.

SUBJECT

Long-range Policy Toward the Arab Union 2

Discussion:

Question: What can the United States do to insure the long-term success of the Arab Union?

Related to this is the further question: How can the United States assure that its identification with the Arab Union will not be detrimental to wider United States interests in the area?

The Problem:

The long-range threat of the United Arab Republic to take over neighboring Arab states is considered to be contrary to the interests of the United States in the area. The most likely challenge to Nasser’s advance in the area would be a strong and successful federation of Iraq and Jordan. The Arab Union, however, has little broadbased appeal within Iraq and Jordan and plays a definite “second fiddle" to Nasser in other areas of the Arab world. The Governments of Jordan and Iraq rest mainly on force and are regarded with cynicism and suspicion by all but a small minority in each country. While the United States believes it to be in its interest to support the Arab Union, there are disadvantages to a close identification of the United States with the regional and internal political policies of the Arab Union and its component governments.

The popularity of any Arab government among the politically conscientious sectors of the population is determined mainly by the degree to which that government: (a) avoids dependence upon Western European nations; (b) supports issues of importance to the Arab world; (c) opposes excessive internal corruption, and (d) fosters economic and social reforms. The chances of increasing the popularity of the Governments of Iraq and Jordan are, however, further handicapped by a basic cynicism toward government itself, which exists in both these countries as a holdover from Ottoman times. Furthermore, both present regimes in these countries suffer from their own past association with the mandate period.

The Iraq Government enjoys little popular support because it is considered to be still in control of those who depend on Western support for their strength and because little appears to be done to oppose traditional and excessive corruption. Recent efforts to gain popularity by the extreme espousal of Arab views on Palestine and Algeria have been of little help. Only in the field of economic progress is the present Iraq Government gaining any popular support.

King Hussein of Jordan, by his dismissal of Glubb,3 his unquestioned courage and will to rule, and his continuing firm stand against Israel, enjoys some popularity. His government, however, is also considered corrupt and has been able to gain little support through economic activity.

Popularity in itself in this part of the world is not necessarily an essential element for the survival of a government. Popularity has proved in the past to be a fickle thing and moves made solely to gain popularity may not contribute to stability. No government in the area, however, can afford to be completely unresponsive to public opinion for any extended period of time. Even the strongest governments seek means of assuring, on occasion, waves of public acclaim.

In pure theory, a number of possible courses of action are open to the Arab Union as means of gaining more support within Iraq and Jordan and some measure of support externally.

The withdrawal of Iraq from the Baghdad Pact, the abrogation of Iraq’s special agreement with the United Kingdom, or Iraq’s withdrawal from the sterling area are examples of action which might serve to erase to some extent the impression of excessive dependence upon the West.

In the field of Arab issues, Iraq and Jordan might recognize a separate Arab state on the West Bank under refugee control, although the loss of the West Bank could be a serious psychological blow to the Union. The Arab Union might seek action in the United Nations to reaffirm the 1947 resolutions or might promote joint action with Saudi Arabia in blocking the Gulf of Aqaba. These governments might seek to strengthen their hands by efforts to undermine Nasser’s control of Syria. On the more positive side, the Arab Union might seek more actively over the next few months to obtain the adherence of Saudi Arabia and possibly Kuwait and Bahrein to the Arab Union.

Internally, there are in pure theory a number of actions which the Iraq or Jordan Governments might take to strengthen their popular appeal. They might agree to conduct genuine free elections or agree to the sincere sponsorship of tax and land reform laws. Iraq might resume its anti-corruption campaign (instead, the new Nuri Government is reviewing previous dismissals for corruptions). Nuri and Rifai might retire and provide an opportunity for new faces in the Government.

In the economic field, the Iraq development program is already having some positive appeal, although much remains to be done to create genuine public confidence in its efforts. If this enlightened concept with its essentially non-political character could be extended to Jordan and the Union as a whole, it would undoubtedly help the stability and support for the Union.

Given these various possible courses of action by which the Arab Union might seek to gain wider popular support, the possible role of the United States is extremely limited. Any support or encouragement on our part for extreme moves of the type which might give the Iraq, Jordan or Union Government some public acclaim would probably not be in our broader interests.

In the internal field, any effort by us to encourage directly the type of political reforms with which we might be sympathetic and which might create a more popular government would run the grave risks of being considered interference in internal affairs and of undermining the strong governments which now provide stability. Once the present restraints on political life are removed, it is not at all uncertain [certain?] that the result would be favorable to the United States.

Concern over the possibility of being charged with intervention in internal affairs, however, need not prevent us completely from seeking opportunities to provide advice to these governments. We do this with some degree of success on a daily basis through our Point IV programs. We can find frequent opportunities as we comment to these governments on new developments in their Union. The chances, however, of their accepting or appreciating advice, which might require a fundamental change in their thinking or in their social order, are extremely limited.

The internal security in these countries remains an important element. It is always possible that a long period of internal stability, accompanied by some economic improvement, can create a preference for and a vested interest in stability which can have a marked and beneficial effect on the long-range development of the country. We can continue to support the stability of the present regime by assistance to the armed forces and the security forces, although it may not be long before the saturation point for such assistance is reached.

The economic field appears to provide the best possibility for a constructive United States role in strengthening the Arab Union and its component parts. The Union, itself, would probably be strengthened and the United States could assume a more appropriate role if Iraq could be induced to assume responsibility for budgetary support for Jordan. The United States might then assist the Arab Union or its components on specific development projects. Assistance to the Union in the economic field would avoid our involvement in internal political matters and provide the least risk to our wider position in the area.

In addition, we can remain alert to opportunities to assist in establishing new or alternative methods of petroleum transit which would give greater insurance to Iraq’s economy.

The ultimate success of the Arab Union will also depend to a considerable extent on the degree to which satisfactory relations can be established with the other Arab states, and particularly with the United Arab Republic. The Arab Union has, undoubtedly, been handicapped by the bellicose and unrealistic policy which Nuri has pursued toward the United Arab Republic. We recognize that it may be difficult to advise leaders of the Arab Union to pursue correct relations with the United Arab Republic in view of the past history of their relations and the very real fear that the United Arab Republic represents a threat to their ultimate existence. We nevertheless believe, if opportunities arise, it is important that we and the British advise leaders of the Arab Union against continued public opposition to the United Arab Republic, and, to such an extent as may be possible, encourage them to establish correct diplomatic relations as a minimum.

Recommendations:

That our future policy toward the Arab Union be based on these considerations: 1. The present regimes of Iraq and Jordan, while not popular, have created stability and appear to be the best able to bring about an alternative union to the United Arab Republic.

2. There is little possibility of our increasing their internal or external popularity through political measures in a manner consistent with our interests and with the continued stability of the area.

3. By supporting the continuance of strong governments in the Arab Union, we can provide a climate for economic improvement which may, over the long run, lead to evolutionary reforms and to a broader base of support for the government.

4. The United States role toward the Arab Union should for the foreseeable future be: A. To continue in cooperation with the United Kingdom to assist the armed forces and the security forces.

B. To encourage measures, particularly in the financial field, which will result in a genuine union of Iraq and Jordan. Iraq should be encouraged gradually to assume responsibility for the Jordanian budget deficit.

C. Express our willingness through an expanded technical assistance program and through economic projects to further to the maximum extent possible the economic development and progress of the Union and its component parts.

D. To render assistance as may be required to develop alternative transit routes for Iraq’s petroleum.

E. To encourage on a realistic basis the adherence of other Arab States to the Arab Union.

F. To encourage the Union to adopt a realistic policy of “learning to live” with the United Arab Republic.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.86C/3–2658. Secret. Drafted in NEA/NE by Newsom.

2 Under the constitution of the new federation, which was completed and released on March 19, the name of the federation was changed from Arab Federation to Arab Union. (Telegram 1670 from Amman, March 19; ibid., 786.00/3–1958)

3 General John Bagot Glubb was dismissed by King Hussein as Commander of Jordan’s Arab Legion in 1955.

4 A handwritten note by Rountree at the bottom of the source text reads: “I concur. The latter point, of course, will be particularly delicate and each step will require careful thought.”

164. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 164. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, May 7, 1958—7:11 p.m.

2488.1) We believe it to be in US interests and in those of AU that AU, largely through its own efforts, become true union and evolve into meaningful constructive entity responsive in important respects to wishes of its people. Approach by HKJ and GOI to practical problems involved in implementing Union should therefore be positive in terms of establishing sound foundation state which will constitute new constructive influence in area. In our view Union has very little chance of success if sole or most important motivation is to establish counterpoise to UAR and if component parts continue go own separate ways on important problems. In practical terms, foregoing means that any move proposed by Iraq or Jordan in connection with Union should be weighed in terms of whether it contributes in fact as well as in appearance to accomplishment meaningful Union.

2) We are concerned by recent reports from Amman and Baghdad which give impression some members governing group still thinking more in terms preserving national and personal prerogatives than in terms making concessions necessary to effective implementation Union. We recognize important concessions made heretofore, particularly by King Hussein, and realize it natural individuals should not wish surrender perquisites and prestige attached to present positions. Seems evident, however, such feelings must give way to pressing need endow Union government with attributes and authority customary in federal state.

We have also noted tendency count on outside assistance, either from US, UK or Kuwait, to accomplish what must in essence be responsibility of Arab Union Government. There appears to be too much emphasis on what must be done by outsiders to assure success of Union and insufficient emphasis on actions which Iraqis and Jordanians themselves must take. Finally, we sense undesirable inclination evade basic problems such as financial situation which will face AU as well as HKJ and GOI Governments, and problems involved in determining precise international status.

3) Foregoing leads us consider whether we and UK should not take more active role in pressing for immediate consideration important problems facing Union and in providing appropriate guidance in solution these problems. We recognize need avoid giving impression we are sponsoring or directing specific proposals, our association with which might prejudice position HKJ and GOI and invite charge we were endeavoring force Union on reluctant government and people, as well as need avoid being maneuvered into position where major financial assistance requested and expected of us. In any discussions this question we believe it is essential however stress first of all importance for Iraq and Jordan of making Union a going concern and our conviction Union will succeed if GOI and GOJ want it to.

4) Coordinated comments Amman and Baghdad requested on foregoing.2

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/5–758. Secret; Noforn except British. Drafted in NEA/NE by Waggoner and cleared by Rountree. Also sent to Baghdad and repeated to Cairo, Damascus, Beirut, Ankara, Jerusalem, Jidda, Karachi, Tehran, Tel Aviv, and London.

2 The Embassy in Amman responded, in telegram 1912, May 9, that it agreed with the overall assessment of the circumstances facing the Arab Union, but added that, in many important respects, the United States considered the success of the union to be more important than most Jordanians did. It was necessary, the Embassy felt, to avoid any action which would reveal that disparity, such as attempts at direct guidance, in that such action could lead to demands for material assistance beyond what the United States was prepared to contemplate. The Embassy suggested that the correct approach to the new union would be for the United States and the United Kingdom to treat it in all important respects as a single entity, in order to underwrite the integrity and prospects for success of the union. (Ibid., 786.00/5–958) The Embassy in Baghdad also agreed with the Department’s general analysis of developments affecting prospects for the union between Iraq and Jordan, and echoed the Embassy in Amman’s emphasis on the importance of encouraging a genuine union capable of developing inherent strength. (Telegram 1843 from Baghdad, May 9; ibid.) Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement.

165. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 165. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, May 20, 1958—6:07 p.m.

2565. Amman’s 1970 and 1972.2 We are greatly concerned by latest developments as reported reftels. We believe it essential immediately take strong line with Jordanian and Iraqi leaders, particularly Nuri and Faisal, Rifai and Hussein. You should urgrently inform them orally that information we have received regarding proposed implementation Union agreement, particularly delay in formal assumption conduct foreign affairs by AU Government and proposal that independent missions be retained Amman and Baghdad,3 creates serious doubts in our minds that Union will in fact have international status required for recognition as new state. Apparent lack of intention establish functioning AU governmental authority at early date also creates problem from point of view immediate recognition. Apparent unwillingness GOI and HKJ leaders make concessions necessary to establishment real Union will in our judgment enable enemies of Union without difficulty to convince public opinion in Middle East and elsewhere that AU is merely sham and that principles of Arab unity are being advanced only by leaders UAR. As we have made clear on number occasions in past we believe security and welfare of both Iraq and Jordan can be best assured through establishment strong and durable Union. We consider that having publicly committed themselves to form such Union, e.g. February 14 declaration, if Iraq and Jordan now do not carry through their political position in the area will be seriously damaged.

You should emphasize our approach is based on close and friendly relations which have existed between us and is prompted by our very real concern over what we fear may be consequences of failure establish Arab Union as constructive entity in Middle East. Further point out that, assuming AU found to possess legal qualifications for recognition as state, we assume diplomatic relations would properly be conducted only with duly constituted AU Ministry Foreign Affairs, not with local governments as Rifai proposes. We also assume international agreements would be concluded only with AU Government through which US economic and military assistance should be channeled.4

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/–1958. Secret; Niact. Drafted by Waggoner and Parker and cleared in L and by Rountree. Also sent to Baghdad.

2 Telegram 1970 from Amman, May 19, commented on the impending formation of a cabinet for the Arab Union Government, and the implications for the new federation of the decision of Samir Rifai to bypass an active role in the Arab Union Cabinet for the position of Prime Minister of the local cabinet formed by King Hussein to deal with local Jordanian affairs. The Embassy concluded that this decision did not bode well for the success of the Arab Union. (Ibid.)Telegram 1972 from Amman, May 19, reported that Rifai had indicated that his decision to refuse the post of Prime Minister/Foreign Minister in the Arab Union Cabinet was made under instructions from King Hussein. Hussein decided to slow down the effective integration of the two states in light of what he viewed as Iraqi reluctance to modify a number of the economic and foreign policy issues on which there were differences of opinion between Amman and Baghdad. (Ibid. Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement)

3 In telegram 1974 from Amman, May 20, the Embassy reported that a note dated May 19 had been received from the Jordanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs announcing the creation of the Arab Union Government and the formulation of a unified cabinet headed by Prime Minister Nuri Said. The note went on to state, however, that the conduct of Jordan’s foreign relations would remain as it had been until a determination was made concerning a unified foreign policy structure for the Arab Union. (Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/5–2058)

4 Chargé Wright reported, in telegram 1998 from Amman, May 22, that he had raised the points outlined in telegram 2565 to Amman in a conversation with Rifai, but Rifai had insisted that until the integration of foreign affairs was achieved under the Arab Union constitution no foreign ambassadors could be accredited to the Arab Union, and matters relating to military and economic aid would have to continue to be handled, as previously, on a bilateral basis with the countries involved. Rifai estimated that it would take several months for this integration to be achieved. (Ibid., 786.00/5–2258; included in the microfiche supplement)

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, June 12, 1958—2:33 p.m.

2730. For Amman: Together with your UK colleague you should seek urgent meeting with Nuri and jointly deliver to him following personal message from President and Prime Minister2 re financial support for Arab Union.3 UK Ambassador receiving similar instructions: “We have been informed of the Arab Union’s financial difficulties and have considered what can be done to help to meet the immediate situation.

As a result of this discussion, we are able to inform you that, in addition to the substantial support already given by the US and UK to the Jordan Government, the US Government will, subject to Congressional authority, make available to the Arab Union up to $25 million to meet the whole of the Jordanian share of the Union budget for the period July 1, 1958–March 31, 1959 in replacement of budgetary assistance to Jordan. Since Jordan’s share of the Union budget is estimated at $18.75 million, there could be available up to $6.25 million to help meet the deficit on the Iraqi side. For their part, the United Kingdom Government will make a contribution of up to the equivalent of $4 million to the Union budget. These maximum figures are based on the presently available estimates of the Union budget, and on the assumption that the Union will become operative on July 1st.

We hope that this assistance will enable the Union Government to surmount the difficulties of this first period, and give an opportunity which you can use to work out more permanent arrangements.

We hope, too, that you will regard this as a further demonstration of our continuing interest in the Arab Union and our determination to do what we can to ensure its success.

As you know, the UK Government hopes, as regards the larger problem of Kuwait,4 that something satisfactory can be worked out between the Ruler and the Union Government. We would welcome any mutually acceptable arrangements which would serve the interest of the Arab Union and Kuwait.”

You alone should convey same message separately to Rifai and speak to him in amplification along following lines: Although it is contrary to US practice to indicate to foreign governments specific amounts of assistance which US plans to make available to them in advance of Congressional authorization of the funds which would be required, in view of urgent request from Nuri for information as to amount of assistance AU might expect from US and UK in connection with Union budget for period July 1, 1958–March 31, 1959, and because of our deep interest in supporting Arab Union and aiding it to become established as constructive force in Near East, we have made exception to our practice and made above statement to Nuri. Rifai will note we have made clear to him that our plans are subject to authorization of funds by Congress.

In view fact AU assuming responsibility for military and foreign affairs portions Jordanian budget and since US plans make contribution to cover Jordanian share AU budget, this procedure will replace direct US budgetary support to Jordan. However, untransferred remaining $7.5 million of $15 million already obligated to Jordan remains obligated for use in Jordan in manner to be mutually determined. Above is convincing evidence our support for AU and for Jordan.

As HKJ already informed we intend proceed in future on assumption international agreements will be concluded only with AU Government and that consequently future US economic and military assistance will be channeled through Union Government.

For Baghdad: Jointly with your UK colleague you should convey to King Faisal message addressed to Nuri by President and Prime Minister.5

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.5–MSP/6–1258. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree, by Smith and Bell in ICA, and in substance by Dulles and Eisenhower. Also sent to Baghdad and repeated to London.

2 The substance of the message developed from a conversation between Eisenhower and Macmillan at the White House on June 10. A memorandum of this conversation, dealing with the Arab Union budget, is in Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series, Macmillan–President, 6/58–9/30/58; included in the microfiche supplement. A June 9 memorandum of conversation dealing with the situation in Lebanon is printed as Document 65.

3 Nuri Said was in Amman at the time.

4 Reference is to the desire of Iraq and Jordan to see Kuwait join the Arab Union.

5 In telegram 2153 from Amman, June 13, Chargé Wright reported that he and British Ambassador Johnston had delivered the message from Eisenhower and Macmillan to Nuri Said that morning. A “stormy session” lasting over 3 hours followed, in which Nuri expressed his bitter disappointment over the message which he said failed to live up to previous assurances. He said he planned to submit his resignation to King Faisal. Wright met separately with Hussein and Rafai, who expressed appreciation for U.S.–U.K. generosity but generally supported Nuri’s demands. Wright commented: “It now clear as it has been to Embassy for some time that AU will only become viable if US/UK, mostly US, prepared to foot the bill.” (Department of State, Central Files 786.5–MSP/6–1358) The Department responded, in telegram 2751 to Amman, June 14, that it had consulted informally with the British Embassy, and the reaction was not to accede further to Nuri’s demands. (Ibid.) This decision was confirmed in telegram 2790 to Amman, June 19, in which the Department noted that Nuri had apparently withdrawn his resignation and assumed a more reasonable attitude toward the budget problem. (Ibid., 785.5–MSP/6–1958) These telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement.

167. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 167. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, June 28, 1958—2 p.m.

2260. Although final outcome Lebanese rebellion unknown all indications point best we can expect is neutral Lebanon in place former pro-western government with definite possibility country may come under UAR domination. My opinion time has come consider politico/economic effects such change will have on Jordan. Present HKJ pro-western government headed Prime Minister Rifai lacks popular support, is maintained in power only through imposition martial law carried out by army/security forces loyal King Hussein. Both Hussein/RIFAI reluctant yield more than minimum sovereignty AU, fear they might lose direct control those forces protect own political interests. For same reason Rifai refuses delegate authority, operates virtually as dictator with every branch Jordanian Government under his personal control. Result, while his ability respected, alienation other government officials including certain number cabinet virtually complete. Mutual interdependence Hussein Rifai and latter’s astuteness protecting Jordan’s interests information of AU plus his demonstrated ability secure substantial US economic/military aid provides raison d’être his power. Since sudden death either Hussein or Rifai which is definite possibility would shatter present power structure, question arises what prospect continuance pro-Western policies by successor government. Unfortunately my opinion these not very bright because: (A) Considerable evidence exists large percentage civil service including those officials immediately below Cabinet rank are extreme nationalists if not pro-Nasser.

(B) Potential leaders among intelligentsia both ins out government are basically opposed “western influence”. Eagerly look forward to time when wealth (oil) generated Middle East will be distributed “have-not nations" thereby eliminate need aid from west.

(C) US aid, despite obvious benefits, resented because of so-called “strings” which offend Arab sensitivities. This applies not only to money and projects but equally to technical assistance wherein US advisors appear to be forcing their methods and ideas on Jordanian officials.

(D) Despite fact knowledgeable and responsible leaders in both official and private community admit Jordan can only exist through foreign subsidy majority opinion is Nasser represents “wave of future”. Look upon US support feudalistic monarchies sheikdoms as “progress to the past,” since these destined be swept away by rising tide Arab nationalism. Under these circumstances your men of “promise” reluctant cast their lot with “reactionaries” even if opportunity immediate financial reward considerable.

(E) Although on surface army appear completely loyal King there is abundant evidence considerable disaffection which highlighted by recent arrest number officers ranging from captain to colonel alleged complicity plot assassinate Hussein/RIFAI other pro-Western leaders.

In event either Hussein/RIFAI or both should be killed who would be able form new government? All indications are that no single group politicians could form a government without substantial support army/security forces. In view lack dynamic civilian leadership best guess is military junta with strong UAR ties would take over. Inconceivable Nasser would permit any independent government remain power regardless whether or not it renounces monarchy. Under these circumstances US Government position Jordan might well follow pattern developed Syria with Jordan becoming part UAR.

What are prospects achievement US policy objectives Middle East should Hussein/RIFAI continue in power but Iraq becomes subversive battleground on assumption Nasser might elect strike first at wealthier AU partner, temporarily postpone movement against Jordan? One possible, and, on basis actions Hussein/RIFAI to date, likely strategy might be HKJ cease further implementation union with Iraq, withdrawal into self-contained unit, relying strongly on US military/economic support make Jordan embattled pro-Western island in Nasser sea. Should this occur chances are Jordan able hold out considerable period because: (A) US gifts flour, fodder, wheat will mitigate effects 1958 drought.

(B) $10 million economic aid especially East Ghor canal and roads program will absorb substantial number of unemployed.

(C) Balance $7.5 of original 15 million provided as budgetary support will insure payment security forces salaries, permit retention loyalty, sufficient military defense government against defectors.

In this situation wherein Nasser threatened encirclement both Jordan/Israel possibility settlement their basic differences might appear lesser two evils, provide Jordan access Mediterranean.

In my opinion, and as such action affects Jordan, following are possible courses action US on assumption Lebanon lost to US as sphere influence and Nasser continues aggression against Jordan/Iraq: (A) Attempt reach working arrangements with UAR thereby accepting Nasser’s domination Middle East.

(B) Provide maximum assistance AU if it develops into “going concern”. If not “buy time" through support whichever partner demonstrates willing/able maintain its pro-Western posture.

(C) Make maximum effort bring about modus vivendi between Israel/Jordan, set precedent future Israel/Arab relations.

In foregoing I have deliberately confined my observations to Jordan with limited reference Iraq. Undoubtedly in broader Middle East picture Nasser’s designs other Arab states important consideration which however I do not feel competent discuss. Important US face fact Nasser unlikely deal with AU as unit, therefore any future aggression would continue present pattern attacking individual state Jordan/Iraq toward which vicious propaganda/subversion program already directed.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/6–2858. Secret. Repeated to Baghdad.

168. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 168. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, June 30, 1958—10 a.m.

2271. Prime Minister Rifai provided following information during dinner meeting last night: (1) He confirmed number army officers ranging in rank from Cadet to Colonel have been arrested in connection plot assassinate King Hussein, Rifai, other pro-western officials. Rifai said investigation continues, possibility total number arrests may reach 40 or more. In answer my question if conspirators have previous record disloyalty he replied several lower rank known to have been on fringe 1957 attempt dethrone Hussein but never apprehended because government felt they lacked necessary leadership. I asked if conspirators had penetrated higher echelons army including General Staff. Rifai replied this possible but not yet definitely established. His opinion even if some general officers implicated this not important as if regimental commanders involved. So far investigation has produced no evidence field commanders above company grade officers implicated. Rifai expressed confidence government could deal effectively with situation but admitted Beni Khalid tribe which straddles Jordan/Syrian border now providing communication channel for conspirators with former Jordan military who fled to Syria last year. Rifai added this further evidence Nasser already conducting type subversive campaign against Jordan which prompted him to tell UNSYG Hammarskjold during his recent visit Amman2 that Jordan would not “act like lamb in the pen" to be eaten by wolf at time its own choosing. Once HKJ convinced UN either unwilling/unable resolve Lebanon situation it will launch counterattack against UAR on its own initiative.

(2) Re Lebanon, Rifai said both he and Hussein were extremely pessimistic lack forthright action UNSYG following his return New York. Rifai reiterated his concern which he said shared by Hussein unless UN or US/UK provided necessary police force seal Syrian-Lebanon border, Chamoun government doomed. Nasser will then emerge in eyes Arab world as victor, encourage malcontent Jordan, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia attempt overthrow present government with definite probability entire Middle East will be lost free world.

(3) Rifai said he wished inform me result his discussion UNSYG re subject AU dual representation in UN. He said Secretary General told him when matter first raised he had serious doubts its legality, requested UN legal staff make thorough study problem. On basis their report and in view position taken both Jordan/Iraq that neither one had lost its international status nor surrendered its international sovereignty to AU he was prepared accept their claim retention individual seats as valid. He advised Rifai write him letter setting forth in precise terms how individual states retain “full and continuing” responsibilities on international undertakings entered into prior union, at same time pointing out such obligation not binding on other AU partner. SYG said in his opinion this constituted proof neither state had abdicated its international status. I asked Rifai when he intended submit letter. He replied since SYG cautioned him it essential identical letters be submitted both Iraq/Jordan he proposed take matter up with Foreign Minister Tawfig Suwaidi when latter comes Amman this week. He added there are several other matters which he wishes discuss with Suwaidi.

(4) Hussein upset Prime Minister Nuri Said statement AU will assume control all foreign affairs including relations Israel/Baghdad Pact. Hussein has directed Rifai make clear Jordan will not tolerate either Nuri or Suwaidi acting their capacity AU officials to participate Baghdad Pact meeting.

I invited Rifai attention circular note sent Embassy Baghdad3 re assumption responsibility foreign affairs by AU as of July 1. Rifai explained this done in order AU qualify $29 million aid offered by US/UK without which AU officials could not be paid. We said actual implementation foreign affairs program will require considerable time since necessary foreign service has not yet been enacted. Therefore AU diplomatic appointments not possible. I inquired if he had further information on his brother’s (Abd-Al Munim) appointment Ambassador US. He replied his brother will return from London about July 24. In meantime Haikal will remain Washington while Iraqi Ambassador will return Baghdad. Rifai expects his brother will arrive Washington during first week August. He said this will enable him (RIFAI) keep Jordan needs, views before US officials much better than in past. I remarked that his brother would not be representing Jordan alone but AU whereupon Rifai launched into a long dissertation on just how he expected relations between US/Jordan be conducted. In essence both he and Hussein apparently are going to insist that all matters directly affecting Jordan are to be handled through whatever US representation located Amman with communication being addressed to AU Foreign Minister but actually delivered, processed through Khususy Khairy’s office as Minister State Foreign Affairs with Rifai making all but routine decisions.

Comment: Failure UNSYG visit produce “magic formula” at least authorize formation UN police force use Lebanon is heavy blow Jordan. I know from personal talks both Hussein/RIFAI convinced in absence outside police force time is on rebel side which can only result defeat for west with at least propaganda victory for Nasser. This almost certain be followed by stepped up subversive drive against Jordan/Iraq. Decision SYG accept “principle” dual representation AU has given considerable weight Rifai’s argument “we haven’t surrendered any sovereignty so US Government can continue do business with Jordan just as before.” I perceive unabated tendency Hussein/Rifai treat AU more as confederation than union which they can use as device on which unload cost defense establishment, at same time reserving maximum rights, prerogatives to local government.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/6–3058. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, London, and Beirut.

2 See footnote 2, Document 96, and footnote 4, Document 98.

3 Not found.

169. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 169. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, July 10, 1958—7:02 p.m.

68. View situation described Emptel 47,2 Department [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Washington desire urgent cabled coordinated evaluation by Embassy [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Amman of domestic security situation with particular reference to current military attitude toward regime and UAR and likelihood of successful coup. Evaluation should contain your recommendations as to steps US might appropriately take to help prevent deterioration regime’s position and promote confidence in relationship between regime and military.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–958. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and approved by Berry. Repeated to Baghdad and London.

2 In telegram 47 from Amman, July 9, Wright reported on a conversation with Rifai in which Rifai discussed problems of morale in the army occasioned by the “witch hunt” being conducted by several of the King’s advisers to arrest those officers suspected of conspiracy to overthrow the government. Rifai was concerned that at least one of these Royal advisers was working with the Syrian Minister of the Interior, Colonel Sarraj, to overthrow the Rifai government and assassinate King Hussein. On Rifai’s advice, Hussein had arrested the adviser, Colonel Radi Abdullah, and was considering Rifai’s suggestion that those officers arrested by Abdullah be released or brought quickly to trial in order to restore morale and support for the government within the army. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

170. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 170. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 11, 1958—6 p.m.

65. Re Deptel 68.2 Following is Embassy [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Amman evaluation domestic security situation after events described Embtel 47.3

1. A conspiracy exists in the army among group non-Beduin officers sympathetic to aims of Baath party of Jordan. Although aims of the conspiracy are reported as assassination of Hussein and creating pro-UAR Government, a number of conspirators appear primarily interested in more limited objectives, personal advancement. A cause of disaffection among these officers is precedence given Beduin elements by loyal but not brilliant CGS Habis Majali. Non-Beduins have looked chiefly to Major General Sadiq Ash-Shara for leadership. With Shara’s rustication to assignment in Baghdad, non-Beduin group has been left at least temporarily without a patron. Embassy has not yet received conclusive evidence Shara’s complicity plot overthrow monarchy.

2. According to the military attaché, the army will remain loyal. CGS Majali is faithful to Hussein, has courage to take necessary steps insure royal control, and principal weapon in army, the first armored brigade, is controlled by Bani Sakhr tribe which strongly supports King. Dissident elements in army unlikely to strike as long as armor not under their control.

3. In opinion [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] military attaché political direction of conspiracy comes from outside army and undoubtedly from UAR, probably through Colonel Serra in Syria. There does not yet appear to be organization in Jordan capable of carrying out a coup d’etat on its own and without foreign support and direction. Present regime’s policy of suppression opposition elements by arrest, curfew, censorship and other Draconian means has paid off to extent that opposition, including subversives, not yet able organize.

4. In broader sense, however, situation is grave because Jordan more susceptible now than at any other time in past year to threat of internal disturbances brought on by UAR. Condition results from prolonged crisis in Lebanon which could easily produce sympathetic reaction in Jordan in form extremist nationalist demonstrations, mob disturbances. Psychological effect of possible defeat Chamoun discourages loyalists and, conversely, gives extremists opposition elements first opportunity take heart since April 1957.

5. [51/2 lines of source text not declassified] Most salient character Hussein is physical courage, of which he has almost too much. With guidance shrewd heads, such as Rifai, Hussein likely persevere against opponents.

6. HKJ should be urged proceed quickly with investigation of conspiracy releasing those against whom there is insufficient evidence and prosecuting guilty without delay. Also, HKJ should be encouraged reorganize intelligence and security services to insure that responsible officials outside palace have accurate and timely information on subversive activities. Provision of US economic aid on spot basis, such as drought alleviation through surplus wheat shipments, has important effect in minimizing threat to regime. Machinery must be created for rapid transmission aid to Jordan when necessary (A) to overcome economic crisis and (B) give needed support Jordan security force in terms its internal security function.

Beyond this, however, there is little immediate action US can take other than give moral support Hussein-RIFAI. Solution Lebanese (or better yet, Palestine) situation would have more benign effect than any action we could take inside Jordan.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1158. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad and London.

2 Supra.

3 See footnote 2, supra.

171. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 171. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 14, 1958—3 p.m.

79. Palace telephoned 10 a.m. this morning2 saying King Hussein/RIFAI wished see me immediately. Following are highlights meeting at which Bahjat Talhuni, Rais Diwan, Prime Minister Rifai present although King did most talking: (1) Hussein asked I inform my Government he counting on US stand by Jordan as “our good and trusted friend.” Expressed hope we would demonstrate our friendship in every respect through public statements and actions.

(2) King said he believes fate has placed responsibility on him defend freedom Arab States. Under circumstances wherein King Faisal as head AU is incapacitated he (Hussein) intends assume authority as President AU acting under provisions constitution which establishes him as legal “chief of state” in absence Faisal. Proclamation to this effect made 2:30 local time.

(3) Prime Minister Rifai has been directed take charge all AU Foreign Affairs for temporary AU cabinet.

(4) In view crucial role petroleum products Jordan army has seized control all POL in country. Hussein asked that I urgently request my Government supply necessary tankers, emergency (army field type)pipelines permit importation via Aqaba. He stressed urgency situation adding it might be necessary inaugurate airlift insure sufficient supplies meet needs security forces.

(5) King Hussein has assumed titular leadership Jordanian army which together such Iraqi units still loyal will constitute AU defense forces. Appointed General Habis Majali COS. [3 lines of source text not declassified]

[Numbered paragraph (6) (61/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

(7) Re intervention by UAR across Syrian-Iraqi border both Hussein/RIFAI said they would appeal UN but added had little faith action would be rapid enough deal with problem. Therefore were prepared invoke Article 5 UN Charter make appeal US/other friendly powers for direct military intervention. At this point Hussein/Talhuni/RIFAI engaged in spirited conversation in Arabic after which Hussein said “on advice my Prime Minister, in view serious situation AU I ask that USG give me assurances it prepared come to our side insure independence/integrity Jordan.” I replied I would convey request my Government soonest.

(8) Rifai commented in view situation Iraq likelihood considerable instability some time to come HKJ would have to review membership all AU Cabinet posts, proposed diplomatic assignments, designation army commanders, et cetera. He pointed out this would be necessary whether or not revolt put down. I asked what effect Iraqi revolt likely have on security situation within Jordan and whether Iraqi army coup connected Radi Abdullah case. King replied he received this morning personal pledge loyalty troop commanders; he confident no serious disturbances will take place. Army now on alert, maximum security measures already enforce. [21/2 lines of source text not declassified]

(9) Hussein expressed great concern Lebanon situation which he thinks may rapidly deteriorate as opposition takes cognizance events Iraq. [21/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Comment:

King seems much more calm than either Rifai/Talhuni although he showed strain events last few days, climaxed by Iraqi coup. Prompt importation petroleum products particularly gasoline, kerosene, black oil (electric power station) most urgent requirement. Hussein decision take over control AU rather than withdraw behind geographic boundaries Jordan significant; although my opinion if Iraqi military goes over en bloc to rebels practical implementation his idea highly improbable. Despite fact British Embassy has put out official warning to British stay off streets I do not propose follow suit believing now is time demonstrate confidence Hussein/RIFAI government which would be undermined if word circulated Americans “taking cover”. I strongly recommend we meet Hussein’s request for emergency petroleum requirements as well as give him assurances we stand by his side should it appear Jordan independence in jeopardy. To do less would destroy our influence in the Middle East. Re our proposed withdrawal $7.5 million budgetary support HKJ I am convinced such action would have devastating effect present pro-western government which very likely would fall as result cut-back government projects being financed these funds we have already promised.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Received at 5:51 p.m. Repeated to Baghdad, London, Beirut, Cairo, and Damascus.

2 Telegram 75 from Amman, July 14, reported that news of the coup d’etat in Baghdad that morning was widely known in Jordan by 10 a.m., and that land communications between Jordan and Iraq were cut. (Ibid.)

172. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower 172. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower1

London, July 14, 1958.

I have just read a telegram saying that the King of Jordan has specifically asked for an assurance both from your Government and from ours, that we will come to his assistance militarily if he thinks this necessary to preserve the integrity and independence of Jordan. I very much hope that you will agree that we ought both to give this assurance at once. But I think it would be to our advantage not to let the situation drift, as it has done in the Lebanon. We ought, in my opinion, to urge the King to make his request at once, since if our military support is to be effective and have a real impact upon the whole situation in the Middle East, it will have to be given promptly. Moreover, we ought to act before disorder develops, and while we can be sure that the airfields are in friendly hands. If we are asked to send British forces, we should use for this purpose the forces now earmarked for the Lebanon. It would help us to know what forces you would be able to make available. Here again, we should have to deal with the United Nations, and all the public presentation, on the same lines as for the Lebanon. There has been an attempt to subvert the Jordanian Army and the revolution in Iraq is clearly fostered and supported from Cairo.

2. I should be grateful to have your views urgently. I hope you will feel with me that this action is the necessary complement to what is proposed for the Lebanon.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series, Macmillan-President 6/58–9/30/58. Top Secret. For additional information on this message, see footnote 1, Document 132. Regarding the British decision to intervene militarily in Jordan, see Documents 131 and 134.

173. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 173. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 15, 1958—3 p.m.

101. Pass Defense. King Hussein called me from palace few moments ago, said petroleum situation desperate. Less than one-day supply gasoil needed as fuel both electricity generating plant and municipal pumping stations. Only three-day supply gasoline, six-day supply kerosene. He requested USG airlift sufficient fuel maintain power and water supply, enough gasoline meet emergency transport requirements. In addition Minister Economy has urgently requested USG arrange diversion US flag tanker Aqaba loaded 40% gasoline, 40% gasoil, 20% kerosene. Port facilities permit vessel up to 10, 000 tons, shore storage 2, 000 tons only. Estimated turn-about time ten days/two weeks due slow rate discharge. Advise soonest.2

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 885.2553/7–1558. Confidential; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, Rome, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Damascus, and Jerusalem. Received at 11:30 a.m.

2 The Department responded, in telegram 104 to Amman, July 15, that efforts were underway to meet the urgent petroleum requirements of the Jordanian Government. (Ibid.) On July 16, the Department confirmed that an airlift of fuel from Bahrein had been arranged and would commence shortly, and that tanker supply through Aqaba was being organized by the Department of Defense. (Ibid., 885.2553/7–1658)

174. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 174. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 15, 1958—4 p.m.

107. Pass Defense. Reference Embtel 79 NOTAL.2 King Hussein asked me come palace again this evening. Prime Minister Rifai who was present opened conversation saying they had just finished stormy session British Charge Mason over UK attitude toward Iraqi revolt.

According Rifai British were asked yesterday what action they propose take conjunction Baghdad partners Turkey/Iran crush rebellion restore pro-western government. So far British have failed make reply which Hussein/RIFAI interpret as indication their inability make firm decision intervene. Hussein said he hoped his request “assurances USG would stand at Jordan’s side if it’s independence/integrity in jeopardy” (see Embtel) would have been answered by now. I replied in light our action Lebanon felt sure he had no cause concern. He said while this probably true he would appreciate firm statement our support.

[2 paragraphs (131/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Meeting interrupted by long distance telephone call from Jordanian Embassy London asking Hussein call in US/UK Charges Amman instruct them notify their respective governments immediately all funds AU diplomatic missions London/Washington are property AU, cannot be withdrawn by Iraqi Ambassadors as now being attempted. Hussein asked I cable Washington at once, request USG freeze all AU bank deposits, other funds except when withdrawal made by Ambassador Haikal acting on instructions Hussein as legal head AU. Rifai explained considerable sums involved which rebel government Iraq anxious lay its hands on. I explained matter freezing of funds something which involves complicated procedure, however, I would pass on request immediately and would advise him (Hussein) as soon as answer received.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1558. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Dhahran, Jerusalem, Jidda, Tehran, Tel Aviv, Paris, and London. Received at 7:41 p.m. and passed to the Department of Defense at 11 p.m.

2 Document 171.

175. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1958 175. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1958 1

Washington, July 15, 1958

SUBJECT

Meeting in Secretary’s Office re Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

The Under Secretary

Mr. Murphy

Mr. Henderson

Mr. Reinhardt

Mr. Rountree

Mr. Rockwell

Mr. Greene

There was some discussion of the urgent need for the United States forces in Lebanon to have a political adviser attached to the Commander. The Secretary asked Mr. Herter to follow up in selecting someone; he was not disposed to think Julius Holmes should be spared from his imminent duties as Assistant Secretary and agreed that while the officer chosen should have appropriately high rank, Ambassador McClintock’s position must be preserved.

Lengthy discussion of King Hussein’s request for assurance of U.S. and U.K. support, and of British importunities that we join in giving this assurance (the Prime Minister’s message to the President of July 14,2 and two additional Foreign Office messages3 which Lord Hood had brought Messrs. Reinhardt and Rountree earlier in the day) led to the conclusion that Jordanian and British motives were both too unclear to permit any conclusions by us. It was noted that not only these questions of motives but of the adequacy of British resources to mount and sustain the dispatch of military forces to Iraq without military or at least logistical as well as financial assistance from us was in serious question. The Secretary concluded that for the moment only an interim holding reply to Hussein could be sent (he signed the telegram),4 and that he would give Lord Hood an outline of the difficulties we have in reaching any conclusion about assistance to Jordan and in this context respond affirmatively to Selwyn Lloyd’s offer to come to Washington to discuss the Iraq and Jordan situations.

The Secretary felt that if the French inquire about Lloyd’s coming they could be told that it is only to discuss Iraq and Jordan and that, as France has little interest in these two countries, this should satisfy them.

JG

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1558. Secret. Drafted by Greene.

2 Document 172.

3 An apparent reference to copies of British messages to and from Amman; none found.

4 Infra.

176. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 176. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, July 15, 1958—7:25 p.m.

100. Embtel 79.2 You may inform Hussein US appreciates King’s forthright stand in face tragic events Iraq and serious developments in area. US stands by previous pledges assist HKJ to insure its independence and integrity. Our action Lebanon indicative our concern.

We now studying means assist HKJ with POL and will advise soonest.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1458. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Parker and Newsom and cleared by Rountree, Deputy Under Secretary Loy W. Henderson, and Dulles.

2 Document 171.

177. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Department of State, Washington, July 15, 1958 177. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Department of State, Washington, July 15, 19581

Washington, July 15, 1958

SUBJECT

Jordan and Iraq

The Secretary said that it was not clear to him from the British messages we had seen how the British thought the problem of Jordan and Iraq should be played and what were their concepts and plans. Mr. Selwyn Lloyd had indicated he might be able to come to Washington. If there were time, the Secretary thought this would be a good idea and he said that the President was agreeable. Lord Hood replied he believed London’s belief that unless something were done quickly in Jordan and Iraq, it would be too late. To this the Secretary agreed and added that there was a great absence of information. It was clear the landing in Lebanon today had had a good effect but the big question was Iraq. Whoever came over from London should come over if and when he was ready to discuss this problem seriously and perhaps he should bring some technical people with him. We had thought about many contingencies but the Iraq development was a new one. We had sent a brief holding message to King Hussein2 but had no clear idea as yet on the desirability of putting troops into Jordan. We were studying these problems and would try to be ready by Thursday.3 The Secretary said we might probably want to have a working party on this subject, which perhaps should be set up in London, but first the top people should determine what was to be done. The Secretary said that he could probably make all day Thursday available and part of Friday morning for meetings with Mr. Lloyd. Friday afternoon he would be taken up by Mutual Security hearings on the hill.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1558. Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt.

2 Supra.

3 July 17.

178. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State 178. Telegram From the Embassy in Turkey to the Department of State1

Ankara, July 16, 1958—1 a.m.

207. Following text (unnecessary words omitted) delivered to me 22:40 local time July 15 by Foreign Minister as message from Bayar, Shah and Mirza to President Eisenhower with deep appreciation of US aid in their hour need (Embassy telegram 201).

1. Bloody events which have taken place in Baghdad have, no doubt, greatly distressed free world. The legitimate head of state and the Government of Iraq, our ally within BP, have been overthrown as result of revolt of some army elements working for foreign powers, namely Egypt and Communist world. Thus, this situation which is result of external subversive activities, has created conditions which are seriously injurious to both Iraq and AU, our friend and ally. As result of this revolt, jointly prepared by Nasserism and Communism, the vital interests and security of regional members of BP, namely, Turkey, Iran and Pakistan, have been seriously shaken and breached and security and stability of entire free world has now been more exposed to danger of Communism.

2. As is known, following tragic events which have taken place in Iraq, King Hussein has assumed powers of legal head of state of AU in accord with constitution, and has requested powers accredited to AU not to extend official recognition to the rebels who have taken control of Baghdad and to address all communications to Amman.

3. Bloody and inhuman acts perpetrated in Baghdad following annexation of Syria and rebellion initiated in Lebanon are clear indication of extent of the aggressive policy pursued by Nasserism acting in unison with Communism. In fact, instigations of Egypt among Kurds in region through USSR encouragement, which have been undertaken even before attempts at subjugating Iraq, prove clearly that true objectives of both Nasser and international Communist are to create common frontiers between Soviet Russia and Egypt, in other words, to place entire ME under Soviet domination.

4. In fact, regional pacts among which figures BP covering our region have been established with the support, and later, the physical participation of US, because of designs of USSR to dominate ME coupled with inability of UN to ensure fully security of its members as a result of Soviet veto.

5. It is again for same reason that, following the Canal incident, US has proclaimed Eisenhower Doctrine which has been gratefully welcomed. Following Syrian events, and uprisings in Lebanon, bloody incidents in Baghdad are now taking place in our region which we believe is being defended against Soviet infiltration and subversive activities by BP on one hand and Eisenhower Doctrine on other.

6. Turkey, Iran and Pakistan, allies of US and aligned with free world, are following above events and are intently watching whether Eisenhower Doctrine will operate in this instance or not. For, action taken by US in order preserve AU and Lebanon’s independence and territorial integrity which are at present jeopardized because of above-mentioned subversive activities, will not only indicate a measure of the guarantee of our own defense, in event it should become necessary, but also to such proportionate extent would cause either increase or decrease of audacity of Soviet Union and its partner Nasser.

For this reason, Turkey, Iran and Pakistan deem it necessary to state that, following gratifying decision taken by their friend and ally US, in order safeguard independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon, the implementation of Eisenhower Doctrine in case of the Iraqi-Jordanian Union’s situation is of vital importance for them.

At same time, all three countries stand ready to support with all means at their disposal decisions to be taken by the US for preservation of independence and territorial integrity of AU, as well as these already taken by US in case of Lebanon, Turkey, Iran and Pakistan, urge US to proceed with utmost vigor to take all such measures which may be considered necessary in light of such situations which may arise.

Comment: Message was originally drafted in Turkish before delivery our advice re landing in Lebanon. Later revised in part no doubt after being informed our intended aerial support movements. Then translated to English and submitted to heads of state. After latter’s approval, it was subject of consideration by Turkish Cabinet meeting after my arrival at Presidential Palace.

Joint message addressed by heads of state to Turkish Ambassador Washington will instruct latter express their gratitude to President.

They will await in Istanbul next one or two days President’s reply to their declarations.3

Hall

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series. Top Secret; Niact; Presidential Treatment. Also sent to Istanbul. Received at 10:34 p.m. on July 15 and passed to the White House.

3 Eisenhower replied in a personal message to Ankara on July 16, indicating that “Developments in Iraq have been receiving our closest attention and we have declared to His Majesty King Hussein our support for him in his forthright attitude in this crisis.” He added: “I have received with deepest gratification the statement of full support by your countries for measures which may be taken by the US on behalf of the Arab Union.” (Telegram 182 to Ankara; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series)

179. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 16, 1958,11 a.m. 179. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 16, 1958,11 a.m.1

Washington, July 16, 1958, 11 a.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

Secretary Dulles, Mr. Murphy, Mr. Reinhardt, Mr. Rountree, Mr. Cumming, Mr. Allen Dulles, Secretary McElroy, General Twining, Mr. Sprague, General Persons, General Goodpaster

[Here follows discussion of the decision to send Deputy Under Secretary of State Robert Murphy to Lebanon as the President’s Political Representative.]

Mr. Dulles then went on to say that the Jordanian situation is rapidly becoming extremely dangerous. We have information of a planned attack against King Hussein on July seventeenth.2 A severe petrol shortage exists, because the Jordanians are not getting their normal supplies from Iraq, and have no storage. Mr. Rountree said we are studying the airlift of packaged POL, but are unsure whether we will get Saudi Arabian clearance to fly it in from that direction. We will plan to use the Aqaba base, but this will be slow in developing. The suggestion was made of obtaining POL for Jordan from Israel; he said this would be very dangerous, and would have to be approached most carefully. Mr. Allen Dulles suggested that Israel might turn it over to the United States or United Kingdom who in turn could convey it to Jordan.

The President said he is concerned that, if the Armed Forces we are supporting in the area are unreliable and seditious, we really seem to have nothing on which to base our action. He emphasized the need for one or more good radio stations in the area. Mr. Murphy suggested setting up a “black Iraqi” radio in Turkey. Mr. Rountree thought a short-wave station could be opened in Jordan, and that it might be possible to move the USIA radio ship up to Beirut. The President stressed the need to identify ourselves in the area with nationalism. We need to get some clever and convincing people from the populations and to carry the message that their progress lies in association with the West. Allen Dulles said he would get some of his people to work on this.

The President referred to a report from a Senator earlier in the day that the Voice of America had sought a statement from him, and might well be seeking statements from others opposing the President’s action. He thought this was very unwise and asked Secretary Dulles to look into the matter. He stressed that he feels the Voice of America should be used to put out our official story.

Secretary Dulles informed the group that Selwyn Lloyd would be arriving the following day; the question was whether the situation in Jordan would hold until his arrival.

[Here follows discussion of support for Iran and Turkey.]

General Twining said that if there is any military action contemplated with respect to Jordan, either by ourselves or the British, the Defense Department needs to be advised. The President said he knew of no basis on which we could move in, and Mr. Dulles thought we should wait to see what the British are doing, and talk to Selwyn Lloyd. The President commented that the British may be planning to move in light of the threat to Hussein. Secretary Dulles said this intelligence came from the British who gave a digest of it to Hussein. He said he assumed the British would go in by air, and Mr. Reinhardt confirmed this, adding that they will need logistic reports from us. General Twining thought the British should get their forces in at once, but Secretary Dulles said he had no enthusiasm for British forces going in. Lebanon has not been swept by pan-Arabism, but in Jordan and Iraq, pan-Arabism could sweep the country very quickly. To his question as to whether Jordan would welcome the British, Allen Dulles thought there were ties going back to the old Arab Legion which would tend to create a good relationship, even though the legion has been scattered. (At this point Mr. Macomber and Mr. Dillon joined the group.)

Secretary Dulles next took up the point as to whether we should press Hussein to make a call for the British to come in. Mr. Allen Dulles thought we should not do so. Secretary Dulles believed that if any troops were sent in they should be British, although we might provide air logistical support. Mr. Allen Dulles wondered if we could send a couple of planes into Amman from Dhahran so as to be able to pick up the King if that should be necessary. General Twining agreed to make this arrangement.3

The President said that the strategic action in the circumstances would be to turn Israel loose on Egypt, thus going for the head of the snake. This did not seem possible, however. He thought we should strengthen Turkey and Iran but did not feel we could send our troops further than Lebanon. Secretary Dulles said that if Iraq were to drop out of the Baghdad Pact, he thought there would be good reason for our joining. It would be premature to do this today, but the action should be considered soon.

[Here follows discussion of the pending Mutual Security appropriation and the broad implications of the Middle East crisis.]

G
Brigadier General, USA

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster. The full text of this memorandum is scheduled for publication in volume XII. Another memorandum of this conversation was prepared by Reinhardt. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1658)

2 Two reports were received on July 16 indicating that Nasser had instructed his agents in Jordan to assassinate Hussein and overthrow the Jordanian Government on July 16 or 17. (Telegrams 47 and 54 from Tel Aviv, July 16; ibid., 785.00/7–1658) Secretary Dulles characterized this intelligence as important in a conversation with Allen Dulles on the morning of July 16, and Allen Dulles indicated that a flash warning had been sent to King Hussein. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 At 11:05 p.m. on July 16, Admiral Burke, Chief of Naval Operations, cabled the Commander of the Sixth Fleet: “Stand by to evacuate King Hussein from Amman with two COD planes and appropriate air cover.” (CNO telegram 29527 to COMSIXFLT, July 16; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files; included in the microfiche supplement)

180. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 180. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 16, 1958—5 p.m.

122. Pass Defense. Called upon Prime Minister Rifai his request this morning. He appeared much more rested, quite chipper. I conveyed reaffirmation USG previous pledge protect Jordan independence/integrity (see Deptel 100),2 same time pointing out need insure Iraqi Army officers now in Jordan being kept under surveillance, not permitted return Baghdad.3

RIFAI said Hussein, General Habis Majali very pleased with internal security situation. All intelligence/CID sources report landing US Marines received very calmly by public. Majority seem relieved that uncertainty which prevailed during last two months as result Lebanese situation now removed. Christian groups particularly well pleased although more thoughtful people concerned that US intervention might touch off World War III.

[1 paragraph (11 lines of source text) not declassified]

In order insure legality Rifai’s action as AU official Hussein in capacity AU chief of state issuing presidential orders this afternoon vesting in person Rifai all rights, authority, responsibility, offices AU Prime Minister/Foreign Minister/Defense Minister. Rifai taking paper from his desk drawer said in view confused state of affairs Iraq with prospect condition would continue indefinitely wherein Iraqi sector AU unable comply provisions AU constitution, Jordan must assume responsibility/conduct AU affairs particularly Defense/Foreign Relations. He therefore proposed in his combined AU capacity as Prime Minister/Foreign Minister call upon US/UK honor their pledge $25 million, $4 million respectively defray costs AU Government. He requested that half this amount be made available during period July-November with initial installment payable prior July 25 when $5.6 million needed meet army/civilian requirements mostly payrolls. In addition cost maintenance diplomatic missions abroad must be met. He said Iraqi Minister would be made AU Chargé d’Affaires London with Ambassador Haikal taking over Washington post temporarily. Since loyalty some Iraqi diplomats questionable majority acting chiefs of mission/chargés likely be Iraqis.

He said foregoing would be confirmed by formal note to British and ourselves on July 17 but in view present situation advisable we transmit request Washington/London soonest.

Re Turkish aircraft which arrived yesterday, Rifai said it had only colonel on board with message for Hussein substance of which had already been overtaken by events. [3½ lines of source text not declassified]

Comment: Hussein/RIFAI reaction British proposal guarantee maintenance internal security Jordan while Jordanian army engaged suppression Iraqi revolt most interesting since this is exactly role they envisioned for US troops. Re request US/UK honor financial commitment AU, no doubt money required meet payrolls, other urgent expenditures if Hussein/pro-western government be kept in power. I strongly recommend despite unorthodox nature request and/or technical obstacles encountered we leave no doubt HKJ can count on our support during this crucial period. To do otherwise would make US position Jordan/Middle East untenable.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1658. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Tehran, Tel Aviv, Damascus, Dhahran, Jerusalem, London, and Paris. Received at 2:32 p.m.

2 Document 176.

3 In telegram 105 to Amman, July 15, the Embassy was instructed to inform Hussein orally as soon as possible of U.S. concern over the possibility of UAR attempts to subvert the Iraqi forces in Jordan, and to urge that every effort be made to maintain close and discreet surveillance of senior Iraqi officers. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1558; included in the microfiche supplement)

181. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 181. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 16, 1958—10 p.m.

132. Rome for McSweeney. McSweeney pass to CINCSOUTH. At 1900 hours local time King Hussein summoned British Charge Mason, myself to Palace where in presence Prime Minister Rifai he announced “in view critical situation facing Jordan as result Lebanese crisis, rebellion in Iraq and on basis information obtained from most reliable sources that UAR inspired coup d’etat scheduled take place within 24 hours, I have decided on advice Prime Minister and Commanding General Jordan Army to formally request that Governments US/UK in accordance with their pledges previously given and in order guarantee Jordan’s independence/integrity [3 lines of source text not declassified.]”2

When Hussein finished Rifai asked if Mason or I had any questions. I inquired whether decision request US/UK military intervention based on information I knew had been provided from American sources or was there other evidence impending uprising.

Mason interrupted to say that he had given King information from what HMG considered “most reliable source” indicating UAR agents had penetrated not only bank refugee camps but also considerable portion East Jordan, that they had responsive groups within security forces including Army who in all probability would not “fire on their brothers” once mob action began. Mason said his information fixed date of coup as July 16/17. Rifai added as result arrest important Communist leader yesterday HKJ had uncovered subversive network geared to Syrian and Iraqi apparatus which had definite plans attempt uprising using civilians as instigators, relying on emotional influence Iraqi revolt particularly among Palestinian refugees.

I asked whether or not HKJ intended use foreign troops as internal security force in which role they might be called on crush civil disorders result shooting Arab civilians. Hussein/RIFAI stated most emphatically “no” US/UK troops would only be used repel external aggression, back up security forces, prevent outside subversive elements from taking over country. [41/2 lines of source text not declassified]

I pointed out time factor made it unlikely US troops could be positioned Jordan for at least 24 hours even if all requirements their dispatch be expedited soonest. Hussein said “we need them now, can’t your Sixth Fleet fly them in as British propose to do from Cyprus?” I said my opinion we were intruding into military field, suggested Mason/myself could serve best by processing Hussein request to Washington/London as quickly as possible since that is where decision must be made. Hussein said he has summoned Parliament into night session in order advise them his decision. Expressed determination make Jordan “freedom fortress Middle East with help his trusted friends US/UK.”

Mason and I left together and I took opportunity get his reaction which was enthusiastic approval his opinion probably only such action can save Jordan from similar fate Iraqi.3

Comment: Although I do not question some evidence probably uncovered by Jordanian police/intelligence my opinion information supplied by ourselves and British re Syrian inspired coup via west bank and refugees together complete lack any evidence existence sizeable loyal opposition to rebel government Iraq cought [caused?] both Hussein/RIFAI emotional, physical depression in which outside intervention appear as last chance save both themselves and Jordan from engulfment tidal wave Nasser brand Arab nationalism. In view possibility troops may not arrive in time prevent revolt Embassy taking all necessary precautions protect American lives/property but in quiet orderly way carefully avoiding any impression we expect any more trouble than general conditions this area would warrant.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Tehran, Tel Aviv, Damascus, Jerusalem, USUN, London, Paris, and Rome. Received at 6:14 p.m. and passed to Defense at 7:45 p.m.

2 Prime Minister Rifai confirmed this oral request with a formal note presented to the Embassy on July 17. The text of the note was transmitted to the Department in airgram G–5 from Amman, July 17. (Ibid., 785.00/7–2858; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 The Department responded at 9:13 p.m. on July 16: “Tell Hussein we are giving his request most urgent consideration in consultation with UK.” (Telegram 132 to Amman; Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1658; included in the microfiche supplement)

182. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Prime Minister Macmillan in London and Secretary of State Dulles in Washington, July 16, 1958, 6:20 p.m. 182. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Prime Minister Macmillan in London and Secretary of State Dulles in Washington, July 16, 1958, 6:20 p.m.1

Washington, July 16, 1958, 6:20 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM PRIME MINISTER MACMILLAN

M referred to some telegrams.2 The Sec said ours are being decoded but we have a copy of theirs. M asked what does the Sec think we ought to do? The Sec said he just told Hood the little maneuver we are making by air first thing tomorrow a.m.3 as a show which in the light of info we have we think might hold the situation for the time being. The Sec is inclined not to do anything more tonight. M asked if they should send their people in. The Sec said not tonight. M said we want to do it together. The Sec said we told Congress Tuesday nothing beyond what was explained to them then would be done and we can’t alter it without consultation. M is unhappy doing it alone tonight—we may get separated when we are beautifully together. The Sec said we can make clear verbally our approval but can’t do more. There is an indication the wrong people are getting jittery. The Sec agreed to think about it. M suggested an airplane or two to show we were together. The Sec said we could supply at least some air logistics. They sort of left it the Sec would call at 11 tomorrow. M repeated re holding off thinking the demonstration will hold it. The Sec said his own disposition is not to move tonight but it is an awful close choice. They agreed the whole thing is terrible. M repeated again re our show tomorrow a.m. and then if his govt wants to go along we will give moral support and then maybe come along later. The Sec said through globemasters we could give logistic support. M mentioned the UK would report to the UN that we answered the call. The Sec said that is his feeling but it won’t hurt his feelings if you do otherwise.

They mentioned seeing Lloyd here tomorrow. The Sec said we are sending a plane up for him. The Sec said they are so well alerted and have loyal forces and we know the opposition is a bit uncertain. M will let us know what they decide.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 Apparent reference to British telegrams transmitting the Jordanian request for military support.

3 See infra.

183. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 183. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, July 16, 1958—6:42 p.m.

131. Inform King immediately we examining feasibility sending flight US military aircraft over Jordan tomorrow morning, including West Bank, Amman, and North Jordan.2 Planes would enter Jordan from North and intended as demonstration support in light information re possible developments tomorrow passed to King [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Please ask King take necessary steps preclude fire on aircraft by Jordanian forces.3

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1658. Top Secret; Niact; [distribution indicator not declassified]. Drafted in INR by Cumming and cleared in NEA by Berry, in C by Reinhardt, and by the Secretary in substance.

2 Telegram 35 to Tel Aviv, July 16, instructed the Embassy to inform the Israeli Government of this flight and to add that the United States presumed that Israel would have no objection. (Ibid.)

3 Wright reported at 7 a.m. on July 17, in telegram 138 from Amman, that he had conveyed the message in telegram 131 to Amman to Hussein and Rifai “both of whom directed me express their deep appreciation USG support.” Hussein issued orders that the U.S. planes should be permitted free entry to Jordan over all borders. (Ibid., 785.00/7–1758; included in the microfiche supplement)

184. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Prime Minister Macmillan in London and Secretary of State Dulles in Washington, July 16, 1958, 8 p.m. 184. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between Prime Minister Macmillan in London and Secretary of State Dulles in Washington, July 16, 1958, 8 p.m.1

Washington, July 16, 1958, 8 p.m.

Mr. Macmillan called at 8 p.m. EDT. He said they were probably going in tonight; dared not risk a day’s delay. He wanted to confirm that we would: 1) Give moral support

2) Give support in UN

3) Give, if needed, logistic support

4) Would, in the light of events and after Congressional consultation, consider what combat potentiality we would supply if needed.

I confirmed the above. He said he would cable the final decision within an hour or two.

He said that he thought that our air display, planned for early tomorrow, should avoid Amman lest there be possible confusion in the two operations. I said we should call it off. He said no, only avoid Amman.

I then called the President and reported the foregoing to him. He concurred. However, we both said we had some reservations—which I had expressed earlier to Macmillan—as to the need of the operation and its desirability. I said, however, that the decision seemed such a close one that I had not felt like trying to impose that view. The President said that he felt this was correct.

JFD

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Secret; Personal and Private; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Dulles.

185. Editorial Note 185. Editorial Note

At 8 a.m., July 17, Charge Wright reported from Amman that British Chargé Mason had been instructed to deliver a message to King Hussein informing him that the British Government had acceded to Jordan’s request for military intervention. The troops arriving later that morning from Cyprus would be used to protect the capital city, the person of King Hussein, and Western interests in Jordan. (Telegram 139 from Amman, July 17; Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1758)

The first elements of the British Sixteenth Parachute Brigade began arriving at Amman airport at approximately noon, and took up positions around the airfield. The remainder of the brigade, however, was turned back to Cyprus by Israeli fighters which fired on the British transports crossing Israeli airspace without permission. The British request for permission was still pending in Tel Aviv at the time, and the remainder of the brigade was delayed on Cyprus for over 5 hours until the United States, at British request, intervened with the Israeli Government and secured permission for the overflight of British forces into Jordan. (Telegram 57 from Tel Aviv, July 16; telegram 37 to Tel Aviv, July 17; telegram 58 from Tel Aviv, July 17, and telegrams 358 and 371 from London, July 17; ibid., 785.00/7–1658 and 785.00/7–1758; all included in the microfiche supplement)

186. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 17, 11:30 a.m. 186. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 17, 11:30 a.m.1

Washington, July 17, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

U.S. Statement in Support of British Troop Move to Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

UK Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd

Admiral Denny, NATO Standing Group

Marshal of the RAF Dickson

Sir William Hayter, Foreign Office

Lord Hood, British Chargé d’Affaires

Mr. Roger Jackling, British Embassy Mr. Willie Morris, British Embassy

Mr. Denis Laskey, Private Secretary to FM

Mr. Donald Logan, Foreign Office

US Secretary of State

Secretary of Defense

General Nathan Twining

Mr. Allen Dulles

General W. Wisenand

Under Secretary Herter

C—Mr. Frederick Reinhardt

NEA—Mr. William M. Rountree

EUR—Mr. C. Burke Elbrick

IO—Mr. Francis Wilcox

NE—Mr. Stuart Rockwell

NE—Mr. David Newsom

The Secretary and Mr. Lloyd agreed upon the following statement to be given out by the State Department spokesman: “The United States Government supports the action of the Government of the United Kingdom in responding affirmatively to the urgent appeal of Jordan for assistance in the defense of Jordan’s independence and integrity. The United States believes that this is a justified exercise of the inherent right of nations to call for assistance when threatened.”2

In the course of drafting the statement, there was considerable discussion of the final sentence. The Secretary said, in discussing the “inherent right of nations to call for assistance,” he was thinking of Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.3 He said other arrangements by which the U.S. had troops in foreign countries were not reported to the United Nations, although generally the bilateral agreement on which the arrangements were based were reported to the United Nations. In emphasizing the threat to Jordan in the statement, he said he was conscious of the possibility of Soviet troops being sent to Syria at the request of the UAR and wanted to differentiate between action taken when a nation was threatened and that taken when there was no threat.4

1 Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1758. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Newsom. The conversations at 11:30 a.m. on this and other aspects of the Middle East crisis were the first conversations of Lloyd’s visit, which began on July 17 and continued until July 20. For additional information on Lloyd’s visit, see footnote 1, Document 153.

2 In addition to releasing this statement through the Department Spokesman, the Department sent a circular of the announcement to the principal posts in Europe and the Middle East for immediate release in those countries. (Circular telegram 62; Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1050)

3 See footnote 4, Document 106.

4 Later in this meeting, the group discussed the necessity to present to the U.N. Security Council that afternoon the British case for intervening in Jordan, and U.S. support for the British intervention. Dulles agreed that Lodge should provide a strong statement of support, but felt that an effort should be made to keep the Lebanon and Jordan matters separate. (Memorandum of conversation; Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1758; included in the microfiche supplement) When the Security Council convened at 3 p.m., U.K. Representative Sir Pierson Dixon reported the dispatch of U.K. military forces to Jordan in response to a request from the King of Jordan. U.S. Representative Lodge expressed strong support for U.K. military assistance to Jordan, which he said pointed up the need for the United Nations to cope with the serious problem of indirect aggression in the area. Texts of these statements are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 982–987.The group also discussed U.K. military objectives in Jordan, which were described as limited to establishing security in the region in and around Amman, and in a related discussion considered the urgent need for increased fuel supplies for Jordan. (Memoranda of conversations; Department of State, Central Files, 785.58/7–1758 and 885.2553/7–1758, respectively; included in the microfiche supplement)

187. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 17, 2:30 p.m. 187. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 17, 2:30 p.m.1

Washington, July 17, 2:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

U.S. Assistance to British Forces in Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

UK Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd

Admiral Denny, NATO Standing Group

Marshal of the RAF Dickson

Sir William Hayter, Foreign Office

Lord Hood, British Chargé d’Affaires

Mr. Roger Jackling, British Embassy Mr. Willie Morris, British Embassy

Mr. Denis Laskey, Private Secretary to FM

Mr. Donald Logan, Foreign Office

US Secretary of State

Secretary of Defense

General Nathan Twining

Mr. Allan Dulles

General W. Wisenand

Under Secretary Herter

C—Mr. Frederick Reinhardt

NEA—Mr. William M. Rountree

EUR—Mr. C. Burke Elbrick

IO—Mr. Francis Wilcox

NE—Mr. Stuart Rockwell

NE—Mr. David Newsom

In response to a question from Mr. Lloyd on the assistance the U.S. was prepared to render to British forces in Jordan the Secretary of State confirmed that the U.S. was prepared to provide logistic assistance. Secretary Dulles said he did not expect to provide U.S. operational help unless the situation developed to a critical point. He said he was not immediately inclined to favor a combined operation but that if the Jordan operation should require further operational assistance the U.S. would study the possibility with an open mind.

Secretary Dulles added that the United States recognized the dangers in the positions in both Lebanon and Jordan. Lebanon, he said, had the advantage of a large group of Christians who welcomed U.S. intervention. In Jordan, however, the mass of people were not loyal to the King and if the refugees were turned loose the problem would be particularly difficult. It would be a serious matter if the British forces were required to shoot the refugees or other civilians.

Mr. Lloyd said that the British by going into Jordan had put themselves in an extremely vulnerable position. He said he would feel much more certain of the security of the British position if the United States also had troops in Jordan. While the public position adopted by the United States and the logistic support demonstrates U.S. support for the British action, the success of this enterprise as a deterrent to further UAR interference in Jordan might be greater if U.S. troops were also in the country. He added that he was not however authorized to request U.S. participation at the moment.

The Secretary said that he doubted the presence of U.S. troops would materially alter the course of events. He said that at the moment the United States was inhibited because he had told Congress that the U.S. did not intend to put troops anywhere but in Lebanon. If the presence of U.S. troops would do good, however, the Secretary said he was willing to consider it.

Mr. Lloyd said it was important to avoid any appearance of division between the U.S. and the U.K. on this matter. Marshal Dickson pointed out that Jordan had also asked the United States for help.

The Secretary promised to think further about the matter.

1 Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63D 123, CF 1050, Memoranda of Conversation, Lloyd’s Visit July 17–20. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Newsom.

188. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, July 17, 3:30 p.m. 188. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, July 17, 3:30 p.m.1

Washington, July 17, 3:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Foreign Secretary Lloyd’s Visit

PARTICIPANTS

United States The President

Secretary of State Dulles

G. Frederick Reinhardt

United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Lloyd

Lord Hood, British Minister

The Secretary reported on the progress of his conversations with Mr. Lloyd.

United Nations—The Secretary said he and Mr. Lloyd had agreed that the United Kingdom and Jordan should make a statement in the Security Council with respect to the British response to King Hussein’s request for military assistance but they hoped that it would not be necessary to table a resolution and thus avoid a debate with Egypt.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated matters.]

Jordan—Mr. Lloyd said he had been asked by Mr. Macmillan to say how very grateful they were for U.S. support with respect to Jordan. The Secretary had given something to the press, we were to make a statement in the Security Council, and our experts were looking into the problem of logistical support. This was all to the good but the British Government would be particularly happy if the Jordanian exercise could be a truly joint operation. This would in effect make it a kind of deterrent. The President pointed out that we did not have the advantages of a parliamentary form of government and that our operation in the Mediterranean had been presented as being limited to Lebanon. We would surely stand shoulder to shoulder with the British but as in the Torch Operation2 there were occasions when it was well to have a division of effort. There was a brief discussion of the progress of the British troop movement into Amman, concerning which information was very meager, as well as regarding the plot against King Hussein. The Secretary reported that he had been called at 2 a.m. because the Israeli insisted that we support the British request for overflight commission. He had agreed to this but the timing has been very late.

Mr. Lloyd said the British were putting 2200 paratroopers into Amman and the Guards Brigade would be behind. They did not want to put in too many forces because of the supply problem which had to be carried out by air.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated matters.]

Jordan—At the end of the meeting Mr. Lloyd again raised with the President British hopes that there might be a U.S. participation in Jordan. The President gave him no encouragement but said that we would of course not permit the British to get into a jam there.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series. Top Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt. The full text of this memorandum is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

2 Reference is to the Allied invasion of North Africa in 1942.

189. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 189. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, July 17, 1958—8:36 p.m.

159. Embtel 132.2 Please inform Hussein in response to his request for US military intervention that US immediately upon receipt request consulted with UK at highest level. UK has already responded by dispatch of troops and US has indicated its full support for this action by flying military planes over Jordan this morning and statement of strong support issued today.3

We trust these actions will give the necessary support to His Majesty in his courageous and forthright efforts to maintain the independence and integrity of HKJ. We will continue to keep the situation under closest observation to determine whether further measures are necessary.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1658. Top Secret; Niact. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and Reinhardt. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Document 181.

3 See Document 186.

IV. Diplomatic Efforts to Resolve the Crisis in Jordan, July 18–August 21, 1958: Jordanian Request for U.S. Troops; The Murphy Mission; U.S. Response to a Soviet Proposal for a Heads of Government Meeting; The Lebanese Presidential Election; Jordanian Request for Additional Military Aid and a Mutual Defense Treaty; Negotiations with the United Arab Republic; Emergency Session of the U.N. General AssemblyIV. Diplomatic Efforts to Resolve the Crisis in Jordan, July 18–August 21, 1958: Jordanian Request for U.S. Troops; The Murphy Mission; U.S. Response to a Soviet Proposal for a Heads of Government Meeting; The Lebanese Presidential Election; Jordanian Request for Additional Military Aid and a Mutual Defense Treaty; Negotiations with the United Arab Republic; Emergency Session of the U.N. General Assembly

190. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 18, 1958—10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1858. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Baghdad, London, Paris, and USUN.

191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, July 18, 1958—8:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/7–1858. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Newsom and cleared by Rockwell and Frederick W. Jandrey in EUR.

192. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 18, 1958—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1858. Secret; Priority.

193. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower

London, July 18, 1958.

194. Letter From President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Macmillan

Washington, July 18, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/7–1858. Secret; Presidential Handling. Drafted by Dulles, cleared by Rountree and Eisenhower. Transmitted to London in telegram 597 with instructions to deliver to Prime Minister “soonest.” Telegram 597 is the source text.

195. Editorial Note

196. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 19, 1958, 10:04 a.m.

Washington, July 19, 1958, 10:04 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

197. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 19, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1958. Secret; Niact.

198. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, July 19, 1958, 4 p.m.

Washington, July 19, 1958, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1958. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Secretary’s residence. A summary of this conversation was sent to the principal concerned posts in Europe and the Middle East, and to USUN. (Circular telegram 78, July 19; ibid.)

199. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 19, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–1958. Secret; Priority.

200. Editorial Note

201. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 19, 1958, 4:57 p.m.

Washington, July 19, 1958, 4:57 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

202. Memorandum of a Conversation, British Embassy, Washington, July 19, 1958, 6 p.m.

Washington, July 19, 1958, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.4111/7–1958. Top Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt.

203. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, July 19, 1958—10:48 p.m.

source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1958. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Ankara, Tehran, Karachi, Tel Aviv, London, Paris, Damascus, and USUN. Drafted by Rockwell, cleared in draft by Rountree, and approved and signed by Dulles.

204. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, July 20, 1958, 10:30 a.m.

Washington, July 20, 1958, 10:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.4111/7–2058. Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at a breakfast meeting at the Secretary’s residence.

205. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 20, 1958, 3:45 p.m.

Washington, July 20, 1958, 3:45 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster on July 21. The full text of this memorandum is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

206. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 21, 1958—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320.5783A/7–2158. Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

207. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 21, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2158. Secret. Priority. Repeated to USUN and London.

208. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 21, 1958

Washington, July 21, 1958

source: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2158. Confidential. Drafted by Kohler.

209. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 21, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2158. Secret; Niact; No Distribution Outside the Department.

210. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, White House, Washington, July 21, 1958, 5:05 p.m.

Washington, July 21, 1958, 5:05 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings With the President. Secret; Personal and Private. Drafted by Reinhardt.

211. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 21, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2158. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Karachi, London, Paris, Tehran, Tel Aviv, and Damascus. Received at 8:28 p.m. and passed to the Department of Defense at 11 p.m.

212. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 22, 1958—1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2258. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Karachi, London, Paris, Tehran, Tel Aviv, and Damascus. Received at 12:55 a.m. and passed to the Department of Defense.

213. Letter From the President to George M. Humphrey

Washington, July 22, 1958.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Personal and Confidential. Humphrey resigned as Secretary of the Treasury in May 1957.

214. Letter From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower

London, July 22, 1958.

215. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Permanent Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) in New York, July 22, 1958, 5:54 p.m.

New York, July 22, 1958, 5:54 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau. The source text indicates that Lodge placed the call.

216. Message From Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Secretary of State Dulles

London, July 22, 1958.

217. Editorial Note

218. Editorial Note

219. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 22, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–2258. Secret.

220. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 23, 1958, 11 a.m.

Washington, July 23, 1958, 11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2358. Top Secret; Presidential Handling. Drafted in S/S–RO by R.A. McKinnon and approved as accurate by Reinhardt.

221. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 23, 1958, 3 p.m.

Washington, July 23, 1958, 3 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster. The full text of this document is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

222. Letter From President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Macmillan

Washington, July 23, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2358. Secret; Presidential Handling. Transmitted to London in telegram 884 with instructions to pass to the Prime Minister from the President. Telegram 884 is the source text. Drafted by Dulles and cleared by Eisenhower. a draft of this letter, with Eisenhower’s handwritten revisions, is in Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President.

223. Editorial Note

224. Message From Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Secretary of State Dulles

London, July 24, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret. The text of the message was conveyed to the Department on July 24 under a covering note from Hood to Dulles.

225. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 24, 1958—2 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2458. Secret; Priority. Also sent to Ankara and repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, London, and Paris.

226. Memorandum of Discussion at the 373d Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, July 24, 1958

Washington, July 24, 1958

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Boggs on July 25. The full text of the discussion of item 2 is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

227. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut July 24, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–2458. Secret.

228. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of State’s Staff Assistant (Boster)

Washington, July 24, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2458. Confidential.

229. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut July 24, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

230. Editorial Note

231. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of State’s Staff Assistant (Boster)

Washington, July 25, 1958.

source: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2558. Confidential; Eyes Only.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 25, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2558. Secret; Niact. Holloway sent a separate report on this meeting to Admiral Burke in CINCSPECOMME telegram 6238 to CNO, July 25. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 4; included in the microfiche supplement)

233. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, July 25, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2558. Top Secret; Niact.

234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, July 25, 1958—10:38 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–2558. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Bergus and cleared by Rockwell, Rountree, Sisco, Walmsley, and Dulles. Repeated to USUN.

235. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Delegation at the Baghdad Pact Council Meetings, at London

Beirut, July 26, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2658. Secret. Repeated to the Department of State. The source text is the Department of State copy.

236. Telegram From the Department of State to the Delegation at the Baghdad Pact Council Meetings, at London

Washington, July 26, 1958—4:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2558. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Herter and in substance by Irwin in Defense.

237. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State

London, July 28, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Top Secret; Priority. The telegram was marked in the Department of State for Presidential handling, which indicates that it was sent to the White House for Eisenhower.

238. Editorial Note

239. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 28, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2858. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

240. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 30, 1958—noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–3058. Secret; Priority.

241. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 30, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–3058. Secret; Priority.

242. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 30, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–3058. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Amman.

243. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State

Tel Aviv, July 31, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–3158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Amman. Murphy arrived in Amman on the afternoon of July 30 and departed for Tel Aviv on the evening of July 31.

244. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, July 31, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–3158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

245. Editorial Note

246. Letter From Secretary of State Dulles to Prime Minister Macmillan

Washington, August 1, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–258. Top Secret. Drafted in C by G.M. Godley and cleared by Frederick W. Jandrey in EUR, Berry in NEA, Dillon, Dulles, and in Defense by General Picher, Captain Costello, and Irwin. Transmitted to London in telegram 1398, August 2, for delivery to the Prime Minister. Telegram 1398, which is the source text, was repeated to Amman and to Beirut for Murphy.

247. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, August 1, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

248. Editorial Note

249. Telegram From the Embassy in Iraq to the Department of State

Baghdad, August 2, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–258. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Beirut and USUN.

250. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, August 3, 1958, 10 a.m.

Washington, August 3, 1958, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786B.54/8–358. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Secretary’s residence on Sunday morning.

251. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, August 3, 1958, 3 p.m.

Washington, August 3, 1958, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Secretary’s residence on Sunday afternoon. A longer version of the conversation was transmitted to Tel Aviv in telegram 111, August 3. (Ibid., Central Files, 785.00/8–558; included in the microfiche supplement)

252. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, August 3, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5/8–358. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell, Rountree, and Dulles.

253. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 4, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5/8–458. Top Secret; Niact.

254. Editorial Note

255. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut August 5, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–558. Secret. Repeated to Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

256. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 6, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–658. Top Secret; Niact.

257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt

Washington, August 6, 1958—5:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–658. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree. Also sent to Amman, Tel Aviv, and Damascus.

258. Editorial Note

259. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut August 7, 1958—11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–758. Secret; Priority.

260. Telegram From the Embassy in Ethiopia to the Department of State

Addis Ababa, August 8, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/8–858. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo. Murphy traveled from Beirut to Cairo on August 6 and left Cairo for Addis Ababa on August 7. For his own account of the background to and meeting with Nasser, see Diplomat Among Warriors, pp. 498–506.

261. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1958, 11:30 a.m.

Washington, August 8, 1958, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–858. Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt. Lord Hood was Chargé d’Affaires.

262. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, August 9, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–958. Top Secret. Repeated to London.

263. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 9, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–958. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, Jidda, Karachi, Tehran, Tel Aviv, USUN, London, Paris, and Rome.

264. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, August 11, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–1158. Secret; Niact.

265. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, August 11, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/8–1158. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Paris.

266. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 12, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–1258. Secret; Niact. Also sent to USUN.

267. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 12, 1958, 3–4:30 p.m.

New York, August 12, 1958, 3–4:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1087. Secret. Drafted by Bergus. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite in the Waldorf Towers.

268. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 12, 1958

New York, August 12, 1958

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1087. Secret. Drafted by Freers. A handwritten note on the memorandum reads: “Sec saw.” The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Soviet Delegation headquarters.

269. Editorial Note

270. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 14, 1958

New York, August 14, 1958

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1087. Secret. Drafted by Bergus. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite in the Waldorf Towers.

271. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in New York and the Under Secretary of State (Herter) in Washington, August 14, 1958, 12:54 p.m.

Washington, August 14, 1958, 12:54 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in New York by Phyllis D. Bernau. Dulles placed the call to Herter.

272. Telegram From the Delegation at the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, August 14, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–1458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

273. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in New York and the Under Secretary of State (Herter) in Washington, August 15, 1958, 1:04 p.m.

Washington, August 15, 1958, 1:04 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in New York by Phyllis D. Bernau. Dulles placed the call to Herter.

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut August 15, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–1558. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Damascus, Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

275. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy) to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, August 15, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.80/8–1558. Top Secret. The full texts of the attached memorandum by Murphy, and the assessments of the memorandum by Dulles and Berry, cited below, are scheduled for publication in volume XII. An August 22 memorandum from Hanes to Herter summarized IO’s comments on the Murphy memorandum, and an undated memorandum, attached to the source text, contains an assessment prepared in S/P of Murphy’s recommendations. (Both ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

276. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 16, 1958

New York, August 16, 1958

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199. Secret. Drafted by Bergus. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite in the Waldorf Towers.

277. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 17, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–1758. Top Secret; Niact; Noforn. Repeated to USUN.

278. Telegram From the Delegation at the United Nations to the Department of State

New York, August 18, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320/8–1858. Confidential; Priority.

279. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 18, 1958, Noon

New York, August 18, 1958, Noon

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1097. Confidential. Drafted by Rountree and Lodge. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite in the Waldorf Towers. The text of this memorandum of conversation was transmitted to the Department in Delga 655, August 18. (Ibid., Central Files, 320/8–1858)

280. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 18, 1958, 3 p.m.

New York, August 18, 1958, 3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1097. Secret. Drafted by E.L. Freers. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the U.N. building.

281. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 19, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5/8–1958. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution; Noforn. Repeated to USUN.

282. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 20, 1958—11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–2058. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution; Noforn. Repeated emergency niact to USUN.

283. Telegram From the Delegation at the United Nations to the Embassy in Jordan

New York, August 20, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2058. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to the Department as Secto 11. The source text is the Department of State copy.

284. Editorial Note

285. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 21, 1958

New York, August 21, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2158. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the U.N. building.

286. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel

Washington, August 21, 1958—7:24 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2158. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Berry and with C and JCS. Repeated to Amman, USUN, London, and Beirut.

287. Editorial Note

190. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 190. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 18, 1958—10 p.m.

169. Re Deptel 1592 not to all addressees. Conveyed content reftel Prime Minister Rifai who accompanied me palace, informed King Hussein.

RIFAI was furious when he learned [garble] dispatch troops [garble]3 launched into tirade accusing USG having failed fulfill its commitments. Contrasted our attitude with British who had “rushed to our side in moment of peril.” In response I reminded him rather forcefully of very substantial economic [garble—and?] military support already given Jordan totaling approximately $50 million and our pledge provide $25 million additional pay in full Jordan’s share AU budget. I pointed out heavy concentration US land/sea/air power in Lebanon other nearby countries effectively guaranteed Jordan from external attack. Seemed to me placing additional token force within country would therefore not appreciably increase its defensive capability. Rifai in fit of anger shouted “King and I are not concerned with outside aggression, it is the psychological effect of having only British troops in Jordan that we wish to offset.” I replied that if this were the case, why hadn’t the danger been perceived before the request was made for US/UK intervention.

[6 lines of source text not declassified] Rifai referred to our conversation noon July 164 at which time he assured me internal security situation well under control with army units strategically placed in/around refugee camps, officers doubtful loyalty under close surveillance. [13½ lines of source text not declassified] I told Rifai in view what he had already said I would appreciate frank answers following questions: (A) Had arrival British troops materially changed internal security picture? He replied we intend use foreign troops keep things under control when Hussein reorganizes Jordan army into attack force marches into Iraq restore rightful government.

(B) How many US troops does Hussein expect, what role are they intended play maintenance internal security? Rifai indicated aside from performing occupation duty they would “take sting out of presence British troops in Jordan”.

(C) On basis preliminary public reaction had arrival British forces created any new problems for present regime? Rifai admitted latent hostility “mandate days" now emerging with considerable evidence many Jordanians fear once British get back they will never depart. This connection Rifai said American troops required otherwise Jordan Army could not be sent fight against Iraq leaving only British in Jordan since do so would invite charge from anti-government groups that Hussein/RIFAI trying “pick British chestnuts out of Iraq fire”.

(D) I said in other words if disorders broke out and American troops were stationed in Jordan there is a distinct possibility they might be called upon to shoot down Arab civilians. Rifai admitted this possible [11/2 lines of source text not declassified].

I ventured opinion this type duty not suitable combat troops expressed doubt my government would be willing use members its armed forces in any such home guard function. Rifai insisted American troops needed flavor foreign contingent although admitting difficult to justify their presence on anything but psychological basis. My meeting with King Hussein was similar that with Rifai except King was appreciative compliments paid him by USG. [41/2 lines of source text not declassified]

[211/2 lines of source text not declassified] It seems to me in light adverse reaction presence British troops USG should concentrate on humanitarian side in such activities as POL airlift, importation free flour, stock feed, wheat together financial/economic support HKJ insure better standard living particularly among Bedouins, thereby keeping to minimum potential sources discontent. I heartily endorse country team opinion sending US troops Jordan this time would impair US prestige limit influence. I have no doubt British will seek suck us into occupation but I am firmly convinced any such course would be less than productive in achievement US objectives not only Jordan but throughout Arab world.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–1858. Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Baghdad, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Supra.

3 A probable reconstruction of the affected portion of the telegram would read: “learned that the United States had declined to dispatch troops to Jordan as requested. He”.

4 See Document 180.

191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 191. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, July 18, 1958—8:30 p.m.

600. Following summary July 18 Lloyd–Secretary meeting based on uncleared memoranda conversation.2

Lloyd opened meeting expressing doubts HMG and UKDel wisdom holding General Assembly meeting re Lebanon and Jordan. Secretary acknowledged UNGA meeting might present difficulties but expressed feeling US could not oppose if Soviets prepared request meeting under Uniting for Peace resolution Secretary feared US refusal might imply US case weak. Ensuing discussion indicated general desire differentiate between actions Lebanon in which UN already involved and Jordan which simple case of state requesting help from friendly nation. Discussion also considered possibility introducing Hungarian question into same special session UNGA but doubts expressed concerning feasibility this move. Final decision US–UK action referred UN experts.

Lloyd and Secretary in agreement Turkish proposal to intervene Iraq unwise (Ankara’s 245 to Department rpt London 61).3 Such Turkish action would not have approval world opinion in view absence resistance new Iraq Government and might bring not only consolidation support for new Government but also dangerous Soviet reaction. Department preparing separately appropriate reply to Turks.

Strong protest received from French over absence consultation prior Lebanese and Jordanian actions considered. At Lloyd’s suggestion French Foreign Minister will be invited meet Lloyd and Secretary New York prior UNGA meeting if such meeting materializes. (Subsequently decided also invite Fanfani if UNGA meeting held.) Consideration also given German desire for consultation and message by Secretary will subsequently be sent Adenauer.

Brief note taken serious situation Sudan but no decisions reached.

US–UK Working Group Washington will undertake study decided upon previous session of political implications possible placement UK troops Persian Gulf Sheikhdoms and US troops Eastern Province Saudi Arabia. Military representatives discussing matter separately.

Formal talks appear to be concluded in absence dramatic new developments although Lloyd may remain for GA meeting. Secretary holding business dinner tonight with Alphand, Lloyd, and Sidney Smith, Canadian Minister External Affairs.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/7–1858. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Newsom and cleared by Rockwell and Frederick W. Jandrey in EUR.

2 Separate memoranda of conversation were prepared on “Possibility of General Assembly Meeting on Lebanon and Jordan,” “Turkish Intervention in Iraq,” and “Message from the French Government.” (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1050, Memoranda of Conversation, Lloyd’s Visit July 17–20; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Dated July 18. (Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1858)

192. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 192. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 18, 1958—8 p.m.

496. From Murphy. After witnessing landing this morning of additional marine contingent at Yellow Beach McClintock and I had thorough discussion all aspects situation with Admirals Holloway and Brown. I can assure Department excellent coordination is established between Embassy and military command. Holloway could not be more cooperative and understanding. He expresses complete confidence in McClintock whose advice he seeks.

Ambassador and I then called upon Osseiran, President of Parliament. I vigorously contested misstatements of fact in his message to press and SC as well as his own private assumption that Lebanon Parliament is sole representative of Lebanese people. I pointed out US Government had responded to an appeal from the duly constituted government and President of Lebanon for friendly aid. It was invidious for Osseiran to charge President of US with having violated Lebanon’s sovereignty by our landing of troops when we had acted only in response to an appeal from the constitutionally responsible authorities in Lebanon.

All Osseiran could summon as an answer was that he thought most of Parliament was against our landing and that in any case Lebanese Government should have consulted Parliament before it requested US intervention. I expressed respect for his opinion but said I understood this as his personal opinion rather than that of the Parliament. We pointed out for record that present Lebanese Government enjoys a vote of confidence from all of Parliament; that Cabinet by a unanimous vote on June 16 authorized Chamoun to ask for friendly military assistance; and that we had responded accordingly. I urged that he qualify his message to President and retract the charge that there has been a violation of Lebanese sovereignty.

Because of other appointments Osseiran’s lengthy review of situation had to be suspended but he is calling on me at 6 p.m.

We next called on Prime Minister Solh, who gave a lengthy review of how Chamoun in particular and pro-western elements in Lebanon in general had arrived at their present crisis. Solh in our presence gave a directive for a message which Malik should file with SC setting forth constitutional right of Lebanese Government to ask for our landing here. He ridiculed the Osseiran charge of violation of Lebanon sovereignty.

At one p.m. I received General Chehab. He gave me a frankly oriental expose of Lebanese politics and of his concept of Lebanese army role in keeping Moslem and Christian factions from fighting one another. General was frank to admit there had been extensive intervention from UAR and for first time in McClintock’s experience, gave details of how in past few days direction of revolt comes from Damascus. (Chamoun has also given us Arabic text of telephonic intercepts2 showing that Damascus is giving direct orders in clear to Saeb Calaam and other rebel leaders in the Basta.)

General Chehab was in complete ignorance of US resolution filed with SC,3 saying that opposition elements had told him they hoped US forces could withdraw from Lebanon in favor of a UN police force. I told General this is exactly what our resolution meant. Chehab said this would be of utmost use to him not only with opposition leaders but in enlightening his own troops. We suggested he pass word to opposition that they should get in touch with their Syrian-Egyptian-Russian clients to forestall a Soviet veto on our resolution. I doubt if this will have any effect on USSR; it has already had effect on Chehab and will, I think, have effect on Lebanon military.

I am glad to report that liaison arrangements between General Wade of Marine Corps and General Chehab are progressing satisfactorily. Wade has informed Admiral Holloway that all of Chehab’s military advice has been sound. Chehab told us he was now sure his officers and men would cooperate with US forces and proposed on his own initiative he arrange a social reception between his staff and Holloway’s staff.

Last night we had discussed with Chamoun possibility of removing certain traitorous officers from Chehab’s “état-major.” This morning Chamoun told McClintock he had discussed this with Chehab who swore he would undertake personal responsibility for future conduct of all his officers. Chamoun himself suggested advisability of going slow on grounds that a rapid removal of general staff would be expedited by enemy propaganda as under American instigation. Chehab told me incident day before yesterday4 did not reflect a conspiracy but was a “spontaneous movement” with confidence of some Christian officers but motivated largely by Moslems who were quite prepared to die at their guns as a symbolic gesture of defiance. He insisted, however, this was now a flash-in-the-pan and that future there would be no recurrences of such in subordination. (Fact is Chehab himself did not know how far his staff and subordinates had gone in preparation to fire on American column. First he knew was when McClintock requested him—Embtel 4285 —to go out to the guns.)

Chehab said he wished very much US units could be accompanied by Lebanon units and gave every appearance sincerity in saying there would be complete cooperation with our military. As a sign of progress, he did not flinch when we told him an army battle group would arrive by air tomorrow.

We pressed him for action quelling revolt, Chehab was not optimistic. Prime Minister had asked me to intervene with General to crush resistance in the Basta by indigenous means. Chehab’s reply was a shrug of the shoulders and a long disquisition on how his army would disintegrate if he used violent means against the rebels. It was clear this General contemplates no decisive military action and looks hopefully for some internal political solution.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1858. Secret; Priority.

2 Not found.

3 See Document 138.

4 See Document 147.

5 Document 147.

193. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower 193. Message From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower1

London, July 18, 1958.

Events moved so quickly yesterday that I had no time to communicate with you, but it was immensely heartening to have two conversations with Foster.2

I only wish that it had been possible to defer the decision about Jordan until after the Foreign Secretary had had his talks in Washington. Clearly this is a situation in which we ought ideally to have had a proper joint long-term plan before embarking on any operations. And of course, as Foster rightly said in his message, it is not really Jordan but Iraq which is the real problem. Furthermore I very much dislike from the military point of view the sort of operation to which we are now committed in Jordan, where our troops will have no port, no heavy arms, and no real mobility. Without your help our logistic support passing over a country at least nominally neutral would be tenuous. If the gamble with the Jordan army does not come off, our troops will indeed be in a difficult position. Despite these difficulties I believe that you agreed with me that in the face of King Hussein’s appeal and the plots which we knew would otherwise be sprung in Jordan today, it seemed to us even more dangerous to do nothing than to try the operation on which we are now engaged. My great consolation is that we are together in these two operations in Lebanon and Jordan. We must at all costs not be divided now when we have been forced to play for such high stakes. I am sure that Foster and Selwyn will be able to work out together a joint plan for the future. Now that we have started on this difficult road, I do not see how we can withdraw until we have somehow restored stability and strength, in at least some areas of the Middle East. If we hesitate now, we shall indeed get the worst of all worlds, but what we do will require the most searching and careful weighing.

I am certainly not despondent. I refuse to believe that our close and intimate cooperation together will not in the end produce the results for which we both hope.

With warm regards,

as ever,

Harold Macmillan3

1 Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series. Secret. The text of this message was conveyed to the White House on July 18 under cover of a note from Lord Hood which indicated that the message was personal for the President from the Prime Minister.

2 See Documents 182 and 184.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

194. Letter From President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Macmillan 194. Letter From President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Macmillan1

Washington, July 18, 1958.

Dear Harold: Your cable of July 182 just reached me. Foster and Selwyn have had useful talks and I believe that our thinking on common problems is identical. Our operations seem to be satisfactorily coordinated. I recognize that your decision as regards Jordan was a very close and difficult one. We have of course fully supported your decision.

What the immediate future will bring we cannot tell. We can however face it together with the consciousness, I believe, that we have responded in a manner befitting our traditions. Whatever happens in Iraq and other parts of the area, we must, I think, not only try to bolster up both loyalties and the military and economic strength of Lebanon and Jordan, we must also, and this seems to me even more important, see that the Persian Gulf area stays within the Western orbit. The Kuwait–Dhahran–Abadan areas become extremely important and Turkey and Iran have become more important. We shall seek ways to help them be sturdy allies, first in quality and second in quantity, insofar as that quantity can be usefully provided and maintained.

Pakistan is important but the fears of India compel some caution in the extent of giving more military help there.

One factor that has helped to create for us the serious Mid East problem has been the Western inability to counteract or effectively neutralize the Nasser propaganda in that region. Of course, we cannot match his extreme positions. We cannot, like the Russians, support anti-Israel propaganda nor can we, like the Russians, support programs for confiscating the oil properties and the like. These are themes which appeal to the Arab masses and seem to win for Nasser the enthusiastic, even idolatrous, support of the largely illiterate populations in the region.

We shall, however, have to try to do a better propaganda job than we have done up until now. Particularly we should be able to do so in regions where the particular theme of extreme Pan Arabism and anti-Israelism does not carry much weight, and where more emphasis can be put upon nationalism which, in fact, Soviet Communism tries to destroy.

Of course, the foundation for all that we do is understanding here at home. I am struggling hard these days to overcome the reluctance of Congress to appropriate money for information programs and mutual security costs and the economic development of the less developed nations.

The problems are immense and we are not free of danger. We can, I think, however, recognize that the danger is not here because of what we have done. What we have done has made apparent and overt a danger that was always there.

Let us together face these dangers with such wisdom as the Lord gave us to bring about a more prosperous and peaceful world.

With warm regard,

As ever,

Ike3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/7–1858. Secret; Presidential Handling. Drafted by Dulles, cleared by Rountree and Eisenhower. Transmitted to London in telegram 597 with instructions to deliver to Prime Minister “soonest.” Telegram 597 is the source text.

2 Supra.

3 Telegram 597 bears this typed signature.

195. Editorial Note 195. Editorial Note

On July 18, the U.N. Security Council considered the resolution submitted on July 17 by U.S. Representative Lodge calling for “additional measures, including the contribution and use of contingents, as may be necessary to protect the territorial integrity and independence of Lebanon.” (U.N. doc. S/4050/Rev. 1; printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 980–981) The resolution was supported by nine members of the Council, but was vetoed by the Soviet Union. (Ibid.) Lodge followed with a statement noting that the Soviet Union had effectively frustrated the Security Council’s efforts to respond to the crisis, and he introduced a resolution calling for an emergency session of the General Assembly to consider the Lebanese complaint of aggression by the United Arab Republic. (USUN Press Release 2967, printed ibid., pages 990–991) The Soviet Representative Sobolev countered with a draft resolution calling for an emergency session of the General Assembly to consider “The Intervention of the United States of America and the United Kingdom in Lebanon and Jordan.” (U.N. doc. S/4057, printed ibid., page 992)

Votes on these two resolutions were deferred until the Council had an opportunity to consider a resolution also introduced on July 18 by Japanese Representative Matsudaira requesting the Secretary-General to take the steps necessary to enable the United Nations to fulfill

the purposes outlined in the resolution adopted on June 11 and thereby facilitate the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Lebanon. (U.N. doc. S/4055, printed ibid., pages 991–992)

196. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 19, 1958, 10:04 a.m. 196. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 19, 1958, 10:04 a.m.1

Washington, July 19, 1958, 10:04 a.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT

The Sec and the Pres discussed changes in the statement the Pres will make to the men in Lebanon.2

The Sec said he will be seeing Lloyd this p.m.3 and thinks we have to make clear to the Br we are not looking on this as a long-term operation. Our rationale was that this was not going to help but would prevent our friends from losing faith in us. Now the problem is to get out. Murphy is talking about getting out. If the Br feel we are deserting them in Jordan we may have to send a small token force to Jordan so as to show we are not abandoning the Br. We have to give logistic support anyway. The POL is bad because the Saudis won’t let us fly over it. The Sec explained how the Br situation in Jordan is different. We are hooked for 30–40 million a year to pay the budget deficit of Jordan—the Sec would rather Nasser or the Soviets do that. The thing we want to preserve is that Persian Gulf position the Pres spoke of.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 On July 19, the President recorded a message which was broadcast to U.S. forces in Lebanon over Armed Forces Radio on July 19 and July 20. The message assured the troops of support for their mission of “helping the Lebanese people to remain free.” For text, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, pp. 559–560.

3 See Document 202.

197. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 197. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 19, 1958—5 p.m.

528. Eyes only Secretary from Murphy. Here follows my very preliminary assessment of the political situation in which we seem to find ourselves. This is after what so far is a successful military intervention in Lebanon—successful in that it has worked smoothly, our forces and equipment are ashore and not a shot has been fired.

The local political result is dubious. During the two days I have been here I have discovered among other things that (1) Chamoun has been a self-constituted prisoner in his residence for 67 days. He has apparently not dared to look out of the window of his house during that period. (2) Ambassador McClintock was opposed to our compliance with Chamoun’s request for military support even after the events in Baghdad, so far as it related to Lebanon alone (last paragraph Embtel 366).2

Taken in isolation our military operation here obviously does not provide a solution of the political problem weighing upon us in the Middle East. The mere presence of our forces in a small coastal portion of the country seems to have brought no fundamental change in the local political climate.

It might be assumed that the availability of our forces would relieve the pressure on the Lebanese security personnel thus giving them a free hand in suppressing the insurrection now in its third month. There is no indication that this is the case. Chehab, the commanding officer of both the military and internal security forces, in reply to our pressing questions asserts that the bitter factional split among his personnel prevents even energetic action to clean up the city of Beirut much less the country at large.

My initial reading of the local situation leads to the preliminary conclusion that it is in our interest to promote a solution of the immediate and major Lebanese political problem, i.e. the election of a new president. We should use whatever influence we can bring to bear under present circumstances to ensure parliament’s meeting next Thursday for that purpose. This would be in consonance with the Lebanese constitution. There will be criticism because it occurs in the shadow of our military operation. Alternative procedures could generate worse criticism. Chamoun would serve the balance of his term ending September 23.

It is my belief election of the new president will bring about relaxation in the country with the prospect of cessation or reduction for the present of rebel activity.

If this assessment is reasonably accurate we are then left with the problem of what to do with our forces. Locally it would be possible to claim their mission had been successful. If calm is restored there could be gradual withdrawal. UNOGIL could remain if not replaced by a more substantial UN force.

But the larger area problem would not have been solved. I have no knowledge of results of your talks with Lloyd. I do not know what action in Iraq and Jordan is contemplated or whether Damascus and Cairo will be left to generate further disturbances here or elsewhere. It is fairly evident that unless the Nasser movement is checked at its source our withdrawal may even give added impetus to it. No doubt our military intervention has exercised a sobering effect throughout the area. But unless it is followed by a reversal of the area trend that effect may rapidly dissipate.

Thus I come to the primitive conclusion that the Nasser element must be either destroyed or an accommodation with it developed. I know that this conclusion does not add to your fund of knowledge.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1958. Secret; Niact.

2 Document 125.

198. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, July 19, 1958, 4 p.m. 198. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, July 19, 1958, 4 p.m.1

Washington, July 19, 1958, 4 p.m.

SUBJECT

Situation in Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Charles Malik

The Secretary

IO—Mr. Francis Wilcox

NE—Mr. Stuart Rockwell

Dr. Malik conveyed to the Secretary a message which he had received three-quarters of an hour before the meeting by telephone from President Chamoun. The message was directed to President Eisenhower, and Dr. Malik said the written text would be delivered the next day.2 President Chamoun expressed his deep gratitude to Mr. Eisenhower for the assistance being given to Lebanon and sought to refute the bad impression left by the statement of protest against the presence of U.S. forces in Lebanon made by the President of the Lebanese Parliament.

Dr. Malik then read another message which he had received several days before from President Chamoun. After conveying his deep thanks for U.S. military assistance, the President made three basic points.

1. Neither Lebanon nor Jordan could remain independent unless the combined onslaught of Nasserism and Communism were dealt with now.

2. The talk of a holding operation in Lebanon and Jordan saps the moral energy of those who would like to see a general cleaning up in the Middle East.

3. There is the impression that the U.S. is in a hurry to turn over the responsibility for guarding Lebanon’s independence to the “dubiously adequate” ability of the UN. If this is the intention of the U.S. it would be better if U.S. forces had not come in in the first place.

The Secretary asked what President Chamoun would like to have us do. The President had made no specific suggestion, said Dr. Malik, but some of Dr. Malik’s personal ideas were that we should support King Hussein to the hilt, that we should put 20, 000 troops in Lebanon and 20, 000 troops in Jordan, that we should see what Turkey can do in Syria and Iraq, if this can be confined to local operations, and that there should be a strong warning to Nasser.

The Secretary said that when we responded to the request of the Lebanese Government we did not think of this as a commitment to root out Nasserism and Communism from the Middle East. We thought of it as responding to a call for help from a small nation threatened in the face of events in Iraq. We did not go into Lebanon to deal with Nasserism and Communism. Had President Chamoun told us that he wanted us to come in for this purpose, we would not have given an affirmative response. It was now disconcerting to be told that it would be better not to have gone in at all if we were not ready to expand the operation.

Dr. Malik presumed that President Chamoun was being honest. The President believed that Lebanon, even with the presence of U.S. forces, could not be protected against Nasserism and Communism. The President was of course deeply grateful for what the U.S. had done.

The Secretary commented that it was legitimate to discuss the future, but not in terms that unless we went to war with the UAR and the USSR we should not have gone into Lebanon. We do not believe in preventive war. The only way to deal with the basic problems in the Middle East without resorting to global war is by handling them with patience, piecemeal. He believed that Lebanese independence could be preserved, if the Lebanese wanted to preserve it, through an increased UN presence and a gradual U.S. withdrawal over a period of months. A UN mantle should be cast over Lebanon. There was no use in talking in grandiose terms about uprooting Communism and Nasserism. This was something we were not prepared to go to war to do. It was better to hope for a peaceful solution than to solve matters by nuclear warfare. Frankly, we did not contemplate using Lebanon as a base for general war in the Middle East. Dr. Malik said that the Lebanese Government never believed that the U.S. had any such idea.

The conversation then turned to the prospect of election in Lebanon. Dr. Malik believed that it would not be possible to hold these on July 24 because of the tense atmosphere. He thought they should be held before September 23, however.

Dr. Malik inquired who would decide whether the UN had established adequate measures to protect Lebanese independence and, therefore, US forces could be withdrawn. The Secretary said that the decision would rest with the U.S. and Lebanon, not with Hammarskjold or anybody else. It would be a derogation of Lebanese and American sovereignty for anybody to try to force U.S. troops out of Lebanon if Lebanon and the U.S. did not desire this. Dr. Malik said that if there could be an understanding between the U.S. and Lebanon on this point, the Lebanese Government would not object to the Japanese resolution in the Security Council.3 The measures taken by the UN must really be adequate to preserve the independence of Lebanon. The Secretary agreed.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–1958. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Secretary’s residence. A summary of this conversation was sent to the principal concerned posts in Europe and the Middle East, and to USUN. (Circular telegram 78, July 19; ibid.)

2 Not printed. (Ibid.)

3 See Document 195.

199. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 199. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 19, 1958—7 p.m.

530. From Murphy. I called on Chamoun this morning with McClintock. The President had previously received Admiral Brown and had given him his military recommendations based on his intelligence there had been increased infiltration from Syria in recent days. Chamoun told Admiral Brown priority objectives in military reduction of rebellion were in following order: (1) Tripoli (2) Baalbek (3) Rashayar. He did not include Basta section of Beirut or the Chouf in this military appreciation.

President said he had no particular worries now that US forces were installed in Beirut, however, as had I, he had received indications there might be increased terrorist activity directed from outside.

Chamoun said he now felt stronger vis-à-vis Chehab because of presence of American forces. He had asked General this morning to prepare a plan of operation—or some prompt military result. I told President I had to speak frankly. With American forces in Beirut if there were any incidents, as for example terrorism or attacks from the Basta, they would have very serious consequences. These would be good neither for Lebanese nor ourselves. I therefore wanted to impress very firmly on President need for prompt and effective action by the Lebanese military. I regretted however that my impression of General Chehab yesterday were [was] that he intended to do nothing. Chamoun said if Chehab did not act he would then consider removing him and appointing a new commander. McClintock said he has heard similar talk over the past 2 months with no result. Chamoun replied situation now was different with US forces landed.

As for Nasser’s visit to Damascus Chamoun had no hard information. He said he expected by this evening through listening to radio and telephonic communications to be able to formulate a better judgment as to what significance of Nasser’s visit in Syria might be.

Chamoun had no information re Iraq.

I mentioned my conversations yesterday with President of Parliament Osseiran (Embtel 496)2 and my attempts to persuade Osseiran to make at least a clarification of his misleading statements in telegrams to President and SC re US intervention in Lebanon. Chamoun said he intended to set matters straight in a press conference tomorrow with Hearst newspapers. However we pointed out official nature of Osseiran’s communication and injury done US by a message from President of Lebanese Parliament. Chamoun finally agreed to suggestion he telegraph President Eisenhower as one head of state to another indicating Osseiran spoke for himself only and in disregard of constitutional law; while at same time he would ask Sami Solh as Prime Minister to send a similar communication to SC.

On domestic political problem and question whether if Parliament can meet July 24 a President can be elected, Chamoun seemed almost wholly at sea. He said he was undertaking consultations and would know by Monday or Tuesday what possibilities were both for holding a parliamentary session and with respect to what candidates might have a chance of election. At this point of interview Chamoun’s weary mind seemed almost to black out. He furrowed his brow and had at times difficulty in recalling what he had said only moments before. At one point he startled us by asking “what would you think if I resigned before July 24 in order to force Parliament to meet?” This suggestion had reference to provision in Lebanese constitution that on removal for whatever cause of chief of state temporary head of government becomes cabinet, which in turn is called upon mandatorily to convene parliament immediately for purpose of electing a new president. I suggested he wait before acting on such a desperate course as certainly repercussions from outside Lebanon would not be very favorable either to himself or ourselves.

Admiral Brown who has known President for some years said he was shocked at degree to which Chamoun had physically and psychologically declined since he last saw him. McClintock who has been in almost daily contact with Chamoun during last two months of crisis informs me he had definite impression President may be suffering from some physical or psychological disturbance. This was first day for example in Ambassador’s experience Chamoun did not use tobacco. A man with a medical record of two heart attacks, Chamoun did not look in physically good shape this morning. This is his 68th day without leaving the presidential residence.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–1958. Secret; Priority.

2 Document 192.

200. Editorial Note 200. Editorial Note

On July 19, a message from Nikita S. Khrushchev, Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, to President Eisenhower was presented to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow. The text of the message was transmitted to Washington in telegram 170 from Moscow, July 19, and subsequently released in Moscow and Washington. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series; text of the letter is printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 11, 1958, pages 251–233) In the letter, Khrushchev stated that “armed intervention” by the United States in Lebanon and by Britain in Jordan, and the danger of intervention in Iraq and elsewhere in the Middle East posed the danger of a general conflagration. To prevent such a catastrophe, Khrushchev proposed a conference of the heads of government of the Soviet Union, the United States, Great Britain, France, and India to meet to consider the crisis in the Middle East. He also proposed participation by the U.N. Secretary-General, and suggested that the conference be held in Geneva on July 22, although he was prepared to meet anywhere else if preferable. He noted that he had addressed similar letters to the leaders of the other three countries involved, and to the Secretary-General. (Copies of all of the letters were released by the United Nations on July 20 as U.N. doc. S/4059)

On July 20, Presidential Press Secretary Hagerty issued the following statement in response to the Khrushchev letter: “The United States is carefully studying the Soviet note and intends promptly, after appropriate consultations, to make a calm and constructive response. It will not undercut and, we hope, will enhance the work of the United Nations which has been so well begun. We think it vital that the work of the United Nations Security Council energetically go on.” For full text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, page 994.

201. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 19, 1958, 4:57 p.m. 201. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, Washington, July 19, 1958, 4:57 p.m.1

Washington, July 19, 1958, 4:57 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO THE PRESIDENT

The Sec said the 9 prisoners are released.2 He told re the message from Khrushchev.3 The premise is we are committing aggression. We have not received the full text as yet. The Sec’s reaction is negative—he thinks it is a propaganda stunt but we will study it. The Sec had a talk with Malik.4 They are kind of anxious to drag us into this thing in a bigger way—the Sec told him we are not going to do it. We are there for one purpose—the integrity and independence of Lebanon—if that is taken care of then we leave etc. He is seeing the Yugoslav at 55 and then Lloyd at 5:30. He will talk with Lloyd about the message from K and see what his reaction is—and let the Pres know later on.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 Apparent reference to the release of a U.S. helicopter crew which had been held for a month in East Germany.

3 See supra.

4 See Document 198.

5 Reference is to the Chargé of the Yugoslav Embassy; the conversation is summarized infra.

202. Memorandum of a Conversation, British Embassy, Washington, July 19, 1958, 6 p.m. 202. Memorandum of a Conversation, British Embassy, Washington, July 19, 1958, 6 p.m.1

Washington, July 19, 1958, 6 p.m.

SUBJECT

Foreign Secretary Lloyd’s Visit

PARTICIPANTS

United States Secretary Dulles

Under Secretary Herter

Frederick Reinhardt

United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Lloyd

Sir William Hayter, Foreign Office

Lord Hood

Mr. Jackling

Mr. Laskey

Mr. Logan

Soviet Proposal for an Immediate Summit Meeting—The Secretary read a draft press statement which he proposed to issue immediately commenting on Mr. Khrushchev’s invitation.2 He felt it important to contradict at once the Russian imputation of aggression to the United States and the United Kingdom over their actions in Lebanon and Jordan respectively. Mr. Lloyd said that while he had no comment on the text of the proposed statement, he would not wish to reach any decision yet on the substance of the reply to the Russian proposal for a meeting. The Secretary agreed, although his own feelings about a meeting were very negative.

Lebanon—The Secretary said that he had seen Mr. Malik, who had spoken by telephone to President Chamoun just previously. Mr. Malik implied that the American entry into Lebanon had still left the main problems of Communism and Nasserism unaffected. Mr. Malik had agreed that no attempt at a solution of these problems by force was likely to be profitable but had no useful suggestion to make. He did not suggest that the United States should leave Lebanon. He thought that the elections should be postponed for some little time although not beyond the last date in September required by the Constitution. Mr. Lloyd suggested that we should aim for an agreed international status for Lebanon by which the country would undertake not to join the United Arab Republic or any Western alignment. The Secretary made clear his intention that United States forces should remain in Lebanon until some satisfactory alternative to their presence had been found which would ensure the independence and security of that country. If this was to take the form of a United Nations force he could not envisage anything being built up which would take the place of the United States forces inside two or three months. If, however, President Chamoun should ask for the United States to leave a new situation would arise. He also considered that Mr. Lloyd’s suggestion for an international solution deserved very serious consideration.

Mr. Lloyd emphasized that the United Kingdom would back the United States “to the hilt” in remaining. In further discussion, Sir William Hayter and Lord Hood urged that it was essential to set the United Nations to work on a political solution and that this was more desirable than any attempt to form a United Nations force in Lebanon. Mr. Lloyd pointed to the difficulty in restoring order in the country when the Government in Beirut appeared to be the prisoner of the insurgents and the Lebanese Commander-in-Chief reluctant to take any firm action. The Secretary said that Mr. Murphy had reported from Beirut in very gloomy terms.3 The local political situation was dubious, President Chamoun had been prisoner for the last sixty-

seven days in his house and the presence of the United States forces had not effected any change in the internal situation. General Chehab asserted that divisions of opinion amongst his own personnel made action against the rebels impossible. Mr. Murphy felt therefore that a political solution was essential and that the election of a new President would ease the tension. The United States forces could then leave, claiming that their mission had been successful. Unless some solution could be rapidly devised such sobering effect as the military action had achieved would speedily be dissipated. Lord Hood suggested that this provided an argument for a meeting with the Russians in that Mr. Khrushchev might be brought to agree to tell Nasser to bring insurgent activity in Lebanon to an end. The Secretary agreed that a political solution was needed which might be found through United Nations resolution creating a separate and independent status for Lebanon, making it a ward of the United Nations and keeping it out of the United Arab Republic, but this would take longer than putting in a United Nations force.

[Here follows discussion of the Persian Gulf, Iran, and Sudan.]

Jordan—Mr. Lloyd referred to the request made by King Hussein for help in restoring the Arab Union by the movement of Jordanian forces into Iraq. He asked whether the Secretary believed that the position in Iraq was beyond redemption. The Secretary confirmed that this was his belief and said that he thought hints being given in Baghdad of Iraqi readiness for friendship with the West were part of a facade intended to deceive the West. Sir William Hayter said that he thought King Hussein’s proposal was made for the record and was not to be taken seriously. It was agreed that the same objections to any action by Jordan applied as in the case of the Turks and that King Hussein must be firmly discouraged from taking action by the same arguments.

Soviet Proposal for Summit Meeting—This was further discussed. The Secretary referred to the agreement which had just been reached between the American Red Cross and the East German Red Cross for the release of the American crew of a helicopter which had come down in East Germany a month ago. He considered this to be significant and that it was probably timed to coincide with Khrushchev’s proposal for a meeting. Mr. Lloyd suggested that there might be some merit in a meeting with the Russians, although not on their terms, and on the basis that there was no question of intervention to restore the position in Iraq. The suggestion that the meeting should be composed of the United States, United Kingdom, France, India and Russia was advantageous in that it was a movement away from the claim for parity. A meeting would give us an opportunity to tell the Russians directly where we stood and the risks they would face if they did not respect our position and our interests. The real danger of the situation

was that the Russians might misunderstand our intentions. If we could hold firm and prevent the Russians from intervention we might well in the end profit from dissension amongst the Arab states stemming from Arab selfishness and narrow-mindedness. The Secretary said that while not ruling out the possibility of attending a meeting he was doubtful of its value. He mentioned a recent discussion with the Yugoslav Chargé d’Affaires. He had answered Yugoslav criticism of the United States and British action by asking him whether it could be held wrong to assist small countries when they were threatened from outside. The Yugoslav Chargé d’Affaires had replied that as a result of their discussions with Nasser the Yugoslavs were convinced that a movement of Pan-Arabism was on the way and that to block it was to stand in the path of progress. The Secretary commented that that of course was Nasser’s own line. He was therefore doubtful whether Soviet Russia would be prepared to take any steps to stop Nasser and that if he were to be stopped it would have to be by the United States and the United Kingdom. Lord Hood suggested that if we could convince the Russians that we intended to stop the spread of Pan-Arabism in its present violent form the Russians might be prepared to join with us in stopping it for fear of a general war unless the situation were brought under control.

Israel—Mr. Lloyd reported that the Israelis were making difficulties about the over-flying of Israel necessary for the Jordan operation and asked whether the United States Government could be of help. Mr. Reinhardt reported that we were meeting similar difficulties with regard to overflights of United States aircraft which we were endeavoring to overcome.

[Here follows discussion of Italy’s view of the crisis and the impact of the crisis on the Baghdad Pact.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.4111/7–1958. Top Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt.

2 See Document 200.

3 See Documents 197 and 199.

203. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 203. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, July 19, 1958—10:48 p.m.

203. Embtel 171.2 In response to note requesting USG provide political, economic military assistance to enable AU government destroy insurrection in Iraq, you should orally inform Hussein and Rifai along following lines:3

US and UK have come assistance Jordan in response request from His Majesty that such assistance be given to assist in preserving Jordan independence and integrity. US and UK have collaborated in responding to this request, UK by dispatch of troops and US by providing necessary emergency support in form POL and other assistance.

US believes primary concern at moment of HKJ and friends of HKJ should be preservation independence and integrity of Jordan. New request for assistance to destroy insurrection in Iraq goes far beyond scope of purpose for which US and UK were requested and agreed to help Jordan.

US determination to support Jordanian independence has now once more been demonstrated to be firm. It will remain so. US, however, has not conceived its support Jordanian independence to include material assistance for Jordan military intervention in Iraq. It regrets that it unable to comply with His Majesty’s request that US assistance to Jordan should be expanded to include this new undertaking.

FYI. In delivering this message you should make every effort make clear to Hussein and Rifai that US unwillingness to assist in military campaign in Iraq in no way implies lessening of US determination to assist in preservation independence of Jordan. Your approach should be based on concept that essential factor is preservationof this independence which should not be jeopardized as it would be quite impractical through invasion of Iraq from Jordan.4 End FYI.

Dulles

1 source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/7–1958. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Ankara, Tehran, Karachi, Tel Aviv, London, Paris, Damascus, and USUN. Drafted by Rockwell, cleared in draft by Rountree, and approved and signed by Dulles.

2 In telegram 171 from Amman, July 19, Wright reported that he received a note from the Arab Union Foreign Ministry in Jordan announcing the AU’s intention to “crush insurrection Baghdad, restore peace in accordance with AU constitution.” The note requested U.S. assistance to allow the AU Government to destroy the insurrection and restore the legitimate status in Iraq. (Ibid.)

3 Dulles made a stylistic change here by replacing the phrase “as follows” with “along following lines.”

4 Dulles changed the final part of the last sentence which initially read: “should not be jeopardized through invasion of Iraq.”

204. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, July 20, 1958, 10:30 a.m. 204. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, July 20, 1958, 10:30 a.m.1

Washington, July 20, 1958, 10:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Foreign Secretary Lloyd’s Visit

PARTICIPANTS

United States Vice President Nixon

Secretary of State Dulles

Under Secretary of State Herter

William M. Rountree

G. Frederick Reinhardt

United Kingdom Foreign Secretary Lloyd

Sir William Hayter, Foreign Office

Lord Hood, British Minister

Denis Laskey, Foreign Office

United Nations and Khrushchev Letter—Mr. Lloyd reported London’s view that we should complete UN consideration of the Lebanese and Jordan questions before any get-together with the Russians. The Secretary considered that any meeting in the kind of emotional climate the Soviets were producing would be very bad. He thought we might consider the calling of an extraordinary meeting of the Security Council. He read a draft reply2 to Khrushchev’s message calling for a Summit conference on Middle East questions which was discussed at some length.

Mr. Lloyd then read an analysis from the British Embassy, Moscow, which concluded that there were advantages in talking with the Russians: first, because of the danger of war that might arise from a Soviet miscalculation of Turkish intentions and secondly, because the make-up of the meeting Khrushchev proposed was better than might be expected. Mr. Lloyd thought Nehru and Hammarskjold would be helpful if our objective was some UN or international status for Lebanon. The Secretary saw some advantage in the UN forum as being more orderly and one in which agenda and other procedures had to be followed but there were certain disadvantages such as the participation of people not directly involved, the problem of Iraqi credentials, and others. Mr. Lloyd felt we should make some positive proposal in reply to Khrushchev’s letter. The Secretary observed that to accept the proposal would be to have a meeting at the Summit on terms we have always resisted. Such a meeting would be unprepared, limited to the Middle East and produce nothing but demagoguery. Mr. Lloyd thought we had a good issue in the independence of little states. The Secretary assented but pointed out that many of the little Arab states did not seem to want independence. He cited a recent report3 from the Arab Section of Jerusalem and referred to the Yugoslav Chargé’s view of the “historic inevitability” of the Pan-Arab movement. The Secretary believed our position in Lebanon and the British position in Jordan was going to become very dangerous shortly. To Mr. Lloyd’s question what the Russians meant when they referred to the “Middle East”, the Secretary recalled that last year Gromyko had interpreted it to mean all of the Middle East.

Baghdad Pact—With reference to the Baghdad Pact states, the Secretary said it would be a source of bitterness if we had a Summit meeting before talking to them. Our basis for action in Lebanon and Jordan was in response to the appeal of small countries. If we rushed into a Summit, it would jeopardize the support we have gotten on this basis. Mr. Lloyd recalled that the Baghdad Pact meeting was scheduled to be held in London next Monday.4 After some discussion as to whether there was any advantage in advancing it a couple of days, it was agreed that on balance it was better to hold it as scheduled. The Secretary undertook to reach London on Sunday and be available for informal talks and to stay on through Monday to attend the first day of the regularly scheduled meeting of the organization.5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.4111/7–2058. Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at a breakfast meeting at the Secretary’s residence.

2 A copy of this draft reply was sent to London and Paris for comment on July 20 in telegrams 708 to London and 298 to Paris. (Ibid., 396.1/7–2058) Copies of these telegrams initialed by Eisenhower are in the Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series.

3 Not further identified.

4 July 28.

5 Documentation on the Baghdad Pact meetings in London, July 28–29, is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

205. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 20, 1958, 3:45 p.m. 205. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 20, 1958, 3:45 p.m.1

Washington, July 20, 1958, 3:45 p.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

The Vice President, Secretary Dulles, Mr. Herter, Mr. Rountree, Mr. Reinhardt, Mr. George Allen, Mr. Allen Dulles, Secretary McElroy, General Twining, Mr. Irwin, Mr. Hagerty, General Goodpaster

Secretary Dulles began the review of points needing consideration or discussion. We have thought the Japanese resolution2 in the United Nations could be the basis for our next steps regarding the Middle East situation. If the Soviets veto it, we would still go ahead under action the Secretary General will suggest. He proposed to the President a statement for public release to the effect that we wish, despite Khrushchev’s message,3 to continue with efforts in the United Nations. The President approved the statement with minor editing after considering and dropping as not feasible for inclusion a reference to our desire to remove our forces from Lebanon.4

The President said he felt we have not yet seen an avenue out of our over-all problem in the Middle East in light of the Arab sympathies toward Nasser—which are probably greater than we thought existed. Mr. Allen Dulles said that we have an immediate demand upon us to reassure governmental leaders—the mob scene in Baghdad has scared them very badly. The President thought there were many thoughtful comments and observations in Nehru’s message to him—even though it reflected an erroneous assumption that there had been no mass infiltration into Lebanon. He had also seen an estimate that 90% of the Christians, but only 20% of the Moslems, in Lebanon wished to remain independent. He stressed his view that we should have moved quickly on the Vice President’s proposal to establish radios in Libya and Sudan, but these proposals were obstructed through denial of funds by the Congress for USIA.

[Here follows discussion of the President’s desire to improve informational programs in the Middle East, the approach to take to the new government in Iraq, and general Middle East concerns which had been discussed with Foreign Secretary Lloyd during his visit to Washington.]

Secretary Dulles said the German Ambassador had been in to see him, and that Ambassador Bruce had called by telephone. The Secretary had told Grewe we were not at all pleased with the lukewarm support given to us at NATO. The Germans were concerned as to where we go beyond Lebanon, and the Secretary had told the Ambassador we are not going beyond there. He thought that an assurance to our friends will quiet them down. Secretary Dulles asked how large a force we have in Lebanon. General Twining said we will have 10, 000 when the second battle group arrives—we have about 7, 000 now. Mr. Dulles said he thought it was desirable not to send in any more. Mr. Allen Dulles said there are three million barrels of oil stored at Sidon. The Secretary thought perhaps we should move up to guard this oil (although this will have bad connotations). He said he had asked Murphy for his recommendation. The President recalled that Chamoun had suggested moving the Marines into additional areas.

General Twining said that Admiral Holloway has a plan for expansion. The consensus seemed to be against expanding the forces or the area of deployment in Lebanon.

Secretary Dulles next said that the British are getting into a dangerous situation in Jordan. They cannot leave without the situation collapsing, and are in trouble with the Israelis who are objecting to their overflights. Ben-Gurion has sent a very sharp letter on this. Mr. Herter said the Israeli objection is that the British have been overflying without clearance. General Twining commented that the situation in the area is almost impossible; there is nothing that anyone can rely upon. Mr. Rountree said that one reason Faisal denied us clearance for overflights is that there were press leaks that we were overflying Saudi Arabia. The President thought that the Nasser elements, having taken Iraq, would find Jordan a weakness. For the West to save Jordan may be largely a “beau geste.” Mr. Allen said that the big problem is that when we pull out of Lebanon the British will be in trouble in Jordan. Secretary Dulles said that, for this reason, the British are not anxious for a UN solution to the problem in Lebanon, and U.S. withdrawal from that area. Mr. McElroy said that the Israelis have given us overflight clearance for POL to Jordan, in the sense of not interfering with our flights, although reserving the right to object. Secretary Dulles said he thought the Israelis and British could also work this out, if the British will confine themselves to narrow corridors, fly high, and give advance notice.

The Vice President asked as to what our thoughts are with regard to recognition to Iraq. Secretary Dulles said we must think of the impact on the Turks, the Pakistanis and the Iranians. They would greatly resent any quick recognition on our part. Also, recognition would amount to acceptance of the dissolution of the Arab Union.

The President said we must consider what our mode of action, or form of approach, should be on the Persian Gulf problem. We have talked about supporting the British, but this does not necessarily mean sending in a combat team.

Secretary Dulles said that Hammarskjold is saying that if others accept the Khrushchev proposal for a meeting, he would also go. The Vice President stated that if Hammarskjold agrees to do so, this action would finish the United Nations in terms of any ability to deal with cases involving the large powers. Secretary Dulles said that King Hussein has asked us to send troops into Iraq. Mr. Rountree reported that we have turned down this request. Mr. Dulles said we must remember that the King was very courageous, and saved the whole situation in the Middle East a year ago. The President commented that we do not have as good a case for going into Jordan as for going into Lebanon. Also, it is very questionable whether we should get into the position of supporting Kings against their people. Secretary Dulles thought we should stay out of Jordan, and Mr. McElroy agreed. He added, however, that we are committed to giving logistic support. The Vice President asked whether it would be proper for us to have any contact with the Iraqis at the present time and the Secretary told him that our Ambassador is still there and is in contact with them.

Secretary Dulles next handed to the President a first draft of a proposed reply to Khrushchev.6 After minor editing the President discussed at length with the group the implied acceptance in the message of having a meeting of Heads of Government under UN auspices. The Vice President suggested instead referring to a Summit Meeting, leaving the present situation to the United Nations. Secretary Dulles also commented that we must avoid anything that would indicate acceptance of the Soviet premise that the problem is one of U.S. aggression against Lebanon. There was general agreement that the notion of a hostile confrontation of the President and Khrushchev at a UN meeting would have no value, and great harm. Also, we do not wish to be jockeyed into the position of having to attack Nasser publicly in the United Nations. The Vice President suggested that Lodge should stress hard that Khrushchev’s proposal would weaken and in fact vitiate the United Nations. There was consensus that the draft should be reworked to indicate that the United States would welcome a resumption of the negotiations, halted by the Soviets, for a Summit Meeting—and that the Middle East, among other problems, could be

considered there. With regard to the present problem, the United Nations should continue to deal with it as expeditiously and with as much support as possible.

G
Brigadier General, USA

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Top Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster on July 21. The full text of this memorandum is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

2 See Document 195.

3 See Document 200.

4 For text of this statement, issued on July 20, see Document 200.

6 See footnote 2, supra.

206. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 206. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 21, 1958—1 p.m.

566. President tells me he talked at nine this morning with Malik who requested instructions attitude to adopt toward Japanese resolution (USUN’s 85).2 Malik added discussion would commence in SC within ten hours.

Chamoun said Malik had reported US delegation felt it should vote in favor as otherwise USSR would call for special session of GA.

Chamoun instructed Malik to use his influence against adoption of Japanese resolution. He said, “If your forces are compelled to withdraw, it will be regarded as a victory for the opposition and your friends in Middle East will feel let down.” Chamoun added opinion unarmed UN force contemplated by Japanese resolution would be ineffective in sealing frontier and preventing further infiltration from Syria.

In broader sphere, President said he was convinced if US did not move affirmatively after its landing in Lebanon, we would lose the Middle East. In response to my questions, he indicated somewhat evasively this meant military operations against Iraq and Syria with corollary of involvement with Egypt, although he did not spell out their names. Chamoun said he could predict that within six months of our withdrawal from Lebanon, trouble would break out again in Middle East in an exacerbated form and at that time our chances of resisting being thrown out of Middle East would be much less bright.

Following this presentation, I thought it wise to go over points outlined Deptel 78.3 Chamoun listened with attention and indicated

he had not received a comprehensive summary from Malik of latter’s conversation with Secretary July 19.4

In response to my question whether there might not be a middle ground between all-out war in Middle East now as he and Malik seem to advocate and our instant withdrawal, I pointed out that even if Japanese resolution were adopted, Hammarskjold would have his hands full and much time would necessarily elapse before he could send expanded UN force to Lebanon and before we left country. I offered personal thought display of US might and promptitude with which it was manifested last week might serve to instill a feeling of caution in Nasser and Soviet Government. I did not think our troops would withdraw precipitously nor in advance of proper arrangements, if Japanese resolution were adopted, for staging in of UN observer force.

Main burden of Chamoun’s argument can be summarized as follows: 1. He is very much opposed to adoption of Japanese resolution.5

2. He prefers US forces build up and move in against what he regards as Nasser-subservient regimes in Middle East.

3. If this is not done, Chamoun predicts that in six months there will be such a drift toward Nasser in Iraq as to bring that country within UAR; and that Kuwait and Saudi Arabia will follow.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320.5783A/7–2158. Secret; Niact. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Telegram 85 from USUN, July 19, transmitted the text of the resolution submitted by Japan to the Security Council that day. (Ibid., 320.5783A/7–1958) The resolution is summarized in Document 195.

3 Not found.

4 See Document 198.

5 Malik called on Dulles in his office on the afternoon of July 21 to stress Lebanon’s objections to adoption of the Japanese resolution. Dulles replied that the United States planned to vote for the resolution because it would “enlarge the responsibility of the United Nations in connection with the Lebanese question and would provide for taking certain additional measures to ensure the integrity and independence of Lebanon.” He did agree, however, to support a Lebanese request for postponement of consideration of the resolution to allow the Lebanese Government to reevaluate the situation. (Memorandum of conversation, July 21; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2158) That evening, the Department telegraphed instructions to the Embassy in Beirut to approach President Chamoun and outline the Secretary’s arguments in favor of supporting the Japanese resolution and preventing an open split between the United States and Lebanon at the U.N. (Telegram 393 to Beirut, July 21; ibid., 320.5783A/7–2158) Both documents are included in the microfiche supplement.

207. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 207. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 21, 1958—2 p.m.

568. Pass USC and DOD from Holloway. London pass to CINCNELM Rear Echelon from Holloway. During conversation this morning with Chamoun, Admiral Holloway and myself President outlined recent requests he had made to General Chehab: (1) That Lebanese Army undertake offensive operations to clean out Basta and at least to immobilize threat against communications in the Chouf.

(2) Failing such action by Lebanese Army, that Chehab agree to two battalions of Gendarmérie (1000 men) supported by army artillery and aviation, to be used for these offensive operations.

President said so far as US forces were concerned he would be highly appreciative if they could be deployed along frontier to seal off further Syrian infiltration. He quoted General Chehab as warning such action by our troops might in fact increase such infiltration, but that Chehab would have “no objection” if American forces were so deployed.

Admiral Holloway pointed out that without expressing any opinion on this request from President it would be clearly impossible for American forces to be deployed along frontier so long as their line of communications were threatened from the Basta. Admiral Holloway indicated it was sine qua non for the Basta to be liquidated. He told President of his conversation yesterday afternoon with Chehab (Embtel 554)2 and of his readiness to consider a joint operation with Lebanese forces against the Basta.

Admiral Holloway likewise reported to Chamoun encouraging progress which has been made with Chehab and tangible signs of increasingly effective cooperation not only between Chehab and Holloway but at all echelons.

I asked Chamoun if he had made any suggestions to Chehab for purging his senior staff. President said he was still offering suggestions to this end but clearly indicated his advice fell on negative ear. Both Admiral Holloway and I urged on President danger of taking any step which might push Chehab to resignation as we both felt his presence is increasingly effective cooperation between Lebanese and US military.

Conclusions: (1) We do not feel US deployment along Syrian border either necessary or wise.

(2) Key is reduction of the Basta as this will bring an end to revolution and eliminate reason for further Syrian infiltration and therefore any requirement for US deployment on frontier.

(3) We feel by patient improvement of relations with Chehab and his staff, even admitting grave deficiencies of that staff, Admiral Holloway will be able to negotiate Chehab into a position of positive action with or without US forces. Similar Fabian methods of persuasion with Chehab may also make it possible to bring about needed staff changes.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2158. Secret. Priority. Repeated to USUN and London.

2 In telegram 554 from Beirut, July 20, McClintock reported on a meeting at his residence between Chehab and Holloway which illustrated the growing cooperation between U.S. and Lebanese forces. Chehab felt that the presence of the U.S. troops had discouraged Lebanese insurgents, who were, in his view, no longer willing to respond to Syrian instigation but were actively seeking a political solution to the crisis. Chehab was eager to establish joint military-police shore patrols, and discussed joint planning to facilitate the movement of U.S. forces in the country, but he was not prepared to undertake operations to eliminate the opposition stronghold in the Basta. (Ibid., 783A.00/7–2058; included in the microfiche supplement)

208. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 21, 1958 208. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 21, 19581

Washington, July 21, 1958

SUBJECT

Western Replies to Khrushchev July 19 Proposal for Summit Meeting on Middle East

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary of State

Lord Hood, British Minister

Mr. Reinhardt, Counselor

Mr. Kohler, EUR

Lord Hood called at his urgent request having received instructions containing British views on the line of action and proposed replies to the Khrushchev proposal of July 19.

Reading from these instructions Lord Hood said that since Khrushchev had mentioned the Secretary General of the UN, the Foreign Office agreed that Khrushchev’s proposal would be handled and replied to by the United States proposal for a special meeting of the Security Council.2 However, the Foreign Office made the following observations in this connection: (1) It should be made clear at the outset that the special Security Council meeting would in fact be attended by the heads of Government and that President Eisenhower would be available at least part of the time. For his part Prime Minister Macmillan was ready to attend (2) It should also be made clear that this SC meeting would make possible other informal meetings outside the SC between the representatives of the participant governments directly concerned (3) In addition to the regular membership of the SC there was a possibility under Article 31 of the UN Charter3 of inviting other governments to participate in the special Security Council meetings notably India which had been mentioned by Khrushchev. Such participants also should be available and eligible to attend appropriate outside informal meetings (4) Finally it should be made clear that the special meeting would be for the purpose of discussion only and that no resolutions would be put forward except such as might be agreed in advance among the major participating powers. Lord Hood explained that this was to alleviate any fears on the part of Khrushchev that he would be faced with a voting procedure which might isolate him or put him in the minority.

The Foreign Office hoped that the British and French Governments would agree on these points. The British UN representative, Sir Pierson (Bob) Dixon, would be instructed to make observations along the foregoing lines in supporting Ambassador Lodge’s proposal for a special Security Council meeting.

The Secretary who had taken exception to Lord Hood’s opening remarks interjected that there was no such US proposal to be presented in the Security Council today saying that he did not know how the British could have received such an impression. Lord Hood indicated that the source had been Sir Pierson Dixon in New York.

However, before discussion was resumed on this point Lord Hood finished reading his instructions saying that the British proposed to reply to Khrushchev along the foregoing lines though they would dismiss Khrushchev’s distortions rather more shortly than in the US note.

The Secretary then asked Lord Hood if he were familiar with the reference to a special Security Council meeting as contained in our proposed reply which Lord Hood thereupon reread. The Secretary then said that we did not consider a summit meeting would be desirable at this time and in this atmosphere in which we would be accused of being the disturbers of peace. Our language simply put up to the Soviets the proposition that they could turn to the Security Council if they considered there was a threat to the peace and if they wanted such a meeting but we frankly hoped they would not. We want to calm things down. He then cited the strong German opposition to a high level meeting and said we were in great danger of having disarray in our own ranks. The Secretary went on that perhaps the British had based their proposals on our first draft. He would say that there had been some shift in our own thinking on the subject. It was clear that if we should take the initiative in calling for a SC meeting we would be in a bad position in which we would be accused of breaking the peace and Khrushchev would be in the position of saving it. The position would be very complicated and difficult. Our defense would require us to attack Nasser, who would not even be present, as regards the developments in Iraq, Lebanon, and Jordan. Meanwhile, the Soviets would be attacking us. He had not really had time to think through what the results of such a meeting would be. If there were a break, then this would be bad for the peace rather than good.

Lord Hood cited Selwyn Lloyd as considering it desirable that we make clear our intentions and our interests in the Middle East to prevent Soviet misinterpretation or miscalculation. When the Secretary commented that such a meeting was not necessary for this purpose, Lord Hood said that is was in the British view desirable to say these things to Khrushchev across the table. He suggested it might also be possible to reach agreement as regards Lebanon and Jordan. In response to this the Secretary asked who would support a neutralist Jordan. As he understood it the British were not in a position to assume this burden and the mounting Congressional opposition to the Khrushchev proposal in this country made it unlikely that Congress would be willing to support appropriations for this purpose. Lord Hood said that he had no answer to this question but repeated that the rough lines of a political agreement might be possible to work out.

The Secretary then asked why we should at this stage, just because of the Khrushchev initiative, reverse the consistent position we had been taking in opposition to a discussion of the Middle East at a summit conference. Lord Hood said that the British feel that in view of developments the British now feel that it would be unrealistic to exclude such discussion. In fact the proposed informal talks associated with a high level SC meeting could be regarded as a part of the preparation for a general summit conference.

The Secretary then repeated that there had been some shift from our preliminary ideas discussed with Selwyn Lloyd as a result of the White House conference yesterday and increasing congressional opposition to the Khrushchev proposal. If the USSR wants to convoke a Security Council meeting that is all right but it would be unsound for us to take the initiative or to encourage such a meeting.

Lord Hood replied that it was clear that his instructions were based on a misunderstanding in New York and said that he would take immediate corrective action as far as this afternoon’s Security Council meeting is concerned. The Secretary said he thought it was important that this be done immediately.

In response to Lord Hood’s question as to what would happen if the Japanese resolution4 passed, the Secretary made it clear that the US did not propose to take any initiative to enlarge the scope of Security Council action. This was a question for the Russians. He emphasized that there was an agreed and established procedure for the handling of alleged threats to the peace, reading from the text of the UN Charter. This clearly delegated the responsibility of the SC on behalf of all UN members so that there could be no complaints from any of our allies that they had been left out. Lord Hood then asked if we took the position that there was no threat to the peace, adding that the Russians themselves might be considered to be posing a threat which would make desirable a discussion on broad lines of the situation in the Middle East. The Secretary replied that our immediate quarrel is with Nasser’s extreme Pan-Arabism. This places the Soviets in an advantageous position of being able to attack us while it does not serve our interests to have to pursue a public attack on Nasser. Lord Hood said that there was widespread feeling in the UK that this was in fact a dangerous situation; that the presence of our troops in the Middle East made incidents possible which might have explosive potentialities.5

The Secretary said he understood that there was an instinctively different approach to these problems between the British and ourselves which we had so far been able to reconcile with respect to the preparation for a possible summit talk. When something happens the British immediately think in terms of the Prime Minister going somewhere or doing something about it. Under our Constitutional procedure and outlook the idea of the President engaging actively in such discussions and negotiations is abhorrent. He does not, like the Prime Minister in Parliament, handle these matters in any detail with the Congress. The President has plenty of burdens and he leaves these detailed matters to the members of his Cabinet.

Lord Hood then said, “But what shall I say to London?" The Secretary replied that we cannot agree at the moment that the President would necessarily go to a Security Council meeting in New York even if the Soviets should take the initiative in calling for one. We want to discourage a Security Council meeting at the level of heads of government. You want to encourage such a meeting. There is a gap to be bridged and we shall wish to ponder this further on both sides. Lord Hood said he felt it necessary that there be an indication to the Russians that there be more than an ordinary Security Council meeting. He said that while the British Government felt such proposals as the present ones should be public, he would like to know whether it would be acceptable to us if these be made orally, perhaps by the Ambassadors when they deliver a reply to the Khrushchev letter. The Secretary responded that it would be premature today to say that we could go along with any such formula. We are concerned about the attitude of the Germans, the Italians, and the Turks. We would probably face a revolution in our own camp if we proposed to the Russians that we have a series of cosy talks with the Russians in New York. Others among our allies would like to be included too. Lord Hood said he did not see how the Germans and Italians could object to such meetings, but the Secretary indicated that our position remained as stated and that we would have to ponder this question further.6

1 source: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2158. Confidential. Drafted by Kohler.

2 This proposal was in the draft reply to Khrushchev’s letter; see footnote 2, Document 204.

3 Article 31 of the U.N. Charter provides that any U.N. member which is not a member of the Security Council may participate, without vote, in the discussion of any question brought before the Council whenever the Council considers that the interests of that member are specifically affected.

4 See Document 195.

5 Dulles and Hood continued their discussion at Dulles’ residence that evening, and Dulles observed that the Middle East crisis offered an opportunity which might not recur:“I said to him that I was convinced that the Soviets were in a state of concern because they feared that our moves in the Middle East might confront them with a choice between accepting a great setback in the Middle East or accepting the risk of general war. They could not accept the latter because they had gambled on not developing many long-range bombers and had not yet adequate missiles in operation. We would probably not have another such chance. But probably we did not have the nerve to take advantage of the probabilities. The likelihood was that this would be our last fair chance and that we would let it pass.

“Our successors, a decade from now, might pay the price.” (Memorandum of conversation by Dulles, July 21; Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations: Lot 64 D 199; included in the microfiche supplement)

6 Eisenhower telephoned Dulles on July 21 to inquire about developments concerning the Soviet proposal. Dulles reported that the British were leaning toward a heads of government meeting at the Security Council, and the Canadians also felt that the problems of the Middle East should be on the agenda for any summit meeting, but the French were more in line with U.S. thinking and opposed a summit meeting on the Middle East. (Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries)

209. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 209. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 21, 1958—4 p.m.

571. Eyes only for Secretary from Murphy. Admiral Holloway lunched with McClintock and me today. He showed us a copy of a telegram sent by Admiral Brown, CINCSIXTHFLT, to Holloway,2 information Burke, in which Admiral Brown made certain recommendations after a brief visit to Beirut July 18/19. Admiral Brown recommended that American forces in Beirut be reduced to the minimum necessary to protect American lives and property; that their objective would be to prevent a military coup and the control of key positions leading to reduction or isolation of the Basta area in Beirut to [by?] the Lebanese Army; to secure the port of Tripoli as increase of US forces permit; to seize other key points of infiltration and to seal the Lebanese borders. He also recommended a series of broadcasts to the Lebanese people explaining the purposes of the American military intervention.

Admiral Holloway, Ambassador McClintock and I find ourselves in disagreement with part of Admiral Brown’s recommendations which incidentally were not discussed by the Admiral while he was here. No doubt there was not adequate opportunity. We believe that continuation of the present line will be productive of the best results from the US point of view. Admiral Holloway particularly is pleased and encouraged over the developing attitude of General Chehab, Commander of the Lebanese Forces. There is increasing cordiality and cooperation. For us to assume the burden of sealing the Lebanese border which consists of almost 200 miles of frontier; to seize other points such as Tripoli at this time would be entirely counter-productive from a political point of view in our opinion. Of course, this opinion is based on an ignorance of whatever decisions you may have arrived at during the course of conversations with Lloyd regarding the larger picture. Those decisions conceivably could increase the scope of the operation, but we are inclined to believe in the light of your conversation with Malik3 this is not the case.

Should Admiral Burke bring the foregoing to attention, we hope that an effort could be made to reassure him that in our opinion here, pursuit of this present line will be productive of the best results.4

Holloway is reporting separately to Burke.

I might add that we are making contact with some opposition leaders. We will hope to report on this separately. Thus far I am convinced that the earliest solution of the internal Lebanese political problem may well be in our interest. There are some affirmative aspects of the situation which seem to me very encouraging.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2158. Secret; Niact; No Distribution Outside the Department.

2 Not found.

3 See Document 198.

4 The Department responded, in telegram 399 to Beirut, eyes only for Murphy: “We concur your recommendations and will so speak to Admiral Burke should he raise matter.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2158; included in the microfiche supplement)

210. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, White House, Washington, July 21, 1958, 5:05 p.m. 210. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of State, White House, Washington, July 21, 1958, 5:05 p.m.1

Washington, July 21, 1958, 5:05 p.m.

1. Press Conference—President and Secretary decided to cancel their respective press conferences this week.

2. Lebanon—The President read Murphy’s 571 from Beirut.2 He and the Secretary agreed with Murphy’s and Admiral Holloway’s view that the present line in Lebanon should be followed contrary to Admiral Brown’s recommendation that our operations be expanded throughout the country. The President commented that if these people are not capable of doing their business with us protecting their capital and their rear, then there is little more that we can do about it. The Secretary felt that we should stay in Beirut and look for a resolution of the problem through the UN and an internal political solution. The President thought that if we started pushing around too much we would shortly have the whole Arab world against us. He noted that he had canceled the plans to embark the 101st Airborne Division and the 2nd Marine Division, although elements of the latter were being held ready.

3. Reply to Khrushchev—The Secretary described the differences in the U.S., U.K. and French positions on the reply to Khrushchev’s call for a meeting of heads of government.3 Both the British and the French found our proposal a bit too negative. The President thought the British approach better than the French and noted that in his letter Khrushchev referred to the spirit of the Charter more than once. The Secretary said he would be willing to be a little more affirmative in our reply with respect to our acceptance of a special Security Council meeting with heads of government and Foreign Ministers participating. The President said he would be willing to go that far, remarking that he had been under the impression, after yesterday’s meeting at the White House,4 that that was in fact what we were going to do. He thought we could use the language which was in the Secretary’s draft no. 3.5 There was further discussion in the formulation of our reply and it was decided to inform the British and French immediately of our position.

4. The President read a draft message to the King of Afghanistan which he approved with a minor amendment.6

The meeting was attended by the President, the Secretary of State, Frederick Reinhardt, James Hagerty for item one, General Goodpaster for items 3 and 4.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings With the President. Secret; Personal and Private. Drafted by Reinhardt.

2 Supra.

3 In a telephone conversation with the President earlier in the afternoon, Dulles had explained that the British “have been strong for a Heads of Government meeting at the Security Council instead of just pointing out that the way is open as we have.” He added: “The French are opposed to the British and more in line with us in this respect.” (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 See Document 205.

5 Not found.

6 The message from President Eisenhower to King Zahir was sent to Kabul in telegram 49, July 21. The message responded to the King’s concerns about developments in Lebanon, as expressed in an undated letter to Eisenhower. Eisenhower regretted the necessity to use military force in Lebanon and assured Zahir that the United States would work through the United Nations as much as possible to seek a solution. (Both in Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series, Afghanistan)

211. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 211. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 21, 1958—7 p.m.

211. Pass Defense. Re Deptel 2032 and Embtel 171.3 Conveyed orally substance Deptel Prime Minister Rifai whose reaction was nothing short [of] incredible.

He began by saying there must be some misunderstanding as HKJ had no intention become militarily involved Iraq. According Rifai note cited Embtel 171 was only pro forma compliance request Iraqi members AU Parliament now in Jordan who asked that King Hussein in his capacity head AU should make formal demand US on behalf Iraq under provisions Article 2 and 62 A of AU constitution which provides:

(1) All international obligations either partner existing time consummation union shall continue in force but not be binding on other partner; (2) Arab Union Foreign Ministry shall be contact point all foreign relations when Article 74 under which AU assumes responsibility conduct its foreign affairs comes into force July 1, 1958. Since Iraqi members AU now resident Jordan wish invoke provisions Eisenhower Doctrine as contained paragraphs 2 and 6 of joint Iraqi/USG communiqué August 6, 1957 and in view fact legitimate Government Iraq incapacitated they decided ask Hussein put on record their formal request USG provide Iraq assistance under Eisenhower Doctrine.

RIFAI emphasized that neither King Hussein nor himself ever had any intention call on USG support military intervention Iraq which they regard as unrealistic in view geography, military requirements, men/matériel.

I invited Rifai’s attention to both his and King’s remarks relative to use US/UK troops insure internal security Jordan when “reorganization Jordan army withdraw in order make attack on Iraq.” He responded by saying I must have been mistaken since His Majesty has no such intention. Rifai continued that HKJ request for US military assistance was for sole purpose maintenance Jordan integrity/independence. British troops are here for that purpose not for anything else. He then proceeded make eloquent appeal immediate dispatch 2500–3000 US troops to Jordan on oft-repeated grounds essential maintenance internal security, “take curse off return mandate British

troops.” He dwelt at length on adverse effect presence British having on Jordanian public. Confided pamphlets demanding withdrawal British troops have already been distributed Amman, also manifest calling for general strike in protest “reoccupation Jordan by UK forces.” I again queried Rifai as to reason 6000 foreign troops needed keep order. His answer “we are not sure of army officers and the jails aren’t big enough to hold all those we suspect”. He said it would not be necessary for me to see Hussein personally since he (RIFAI) knew King’s position and could answer for him. Rifai said he wished to make clear that any US forces sent Jordan should be “combat seasoned veterans” who could command respect people and he wanted them placed where they could be seen by public deterrent any revolt.

In blunt terms I told Rifai Hussein’s action in using his recent press conference attended by nearly 100 foreign correspondents to blackmail US into sending troops Jordan would be less than productive.5 USG had proved on several occasions it true, tried friend Jordan and pledged military/economic assistance needed guarantee Jordan independence. We were determined continue this policy but would insist on implementing it by means which will insure its success but not at price destruction those institutions we pledged defend.

RIFAI agreed Hussein had been carried away emotionally by loss his cousin Faisal/members of his family which reflected in his press conference conduct. Furthermore because doubtful loyalty his own army his and Jordan’s survival might well depend on presence foreign troops. As he walked to door with me Rifai again asked I convey my government desire Hussein/himself US troops together air force unit be stationed Jordan for psychological reasons. He admitted under present circumstances wherein British troops are already in Jordan and Sixth Fleet together regional US air support alerted defend Jordan frontier at moment’s notice likelihood successful external attack or internal coup quite remote.

Comment: Because Rifai reaction diametrically opposed his own/Hussein’s previous position as stated to British Chargé Mason/myself I immediately consulted with him make certain we were in agreement on exactly what Hussein/RIFAI had said regard US/UK troops being stationed Jordan. British Ambassador Johnston who has just returned from London together Colonel Lawrie, British Military Attaché, and Mason were all in agreement HKJ position as understood by HMG was US/UK troops should be employed maintain internal security when Jordan army marched off put down revolt Iraq. There can be no doubt Hussein/RIFAI have executed 180 degree turnabout for reasons best

known to themselves. [5½ lines of source text not declassified] Regardless reasons change all for best from US standpoint, strengthen our position no need US troops Jordan. I cannot emphasize too strongly my conviction any assignment US troops here would be less than productive, certain play directly into hands Communists/pro-Nasser elements who would turn on our troops in same manner they are waging campaign against British. It seems to me our best hope keep Jordan on our side lies in supplying badly needed commodities such as diesel oil, kerosene, gasoline, wheat, stock feed together financial/economic support its pro-western government. All of these will be felt in some degree by man in the street without whose support it will eventually be impossible build up Jordan into fortress sufficiently strong hold off Nasser attack until we can work out our Middle East policy objectives in light recent events Iraq/Lebanon.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2158. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Karachi, London, Paris, Tehran, Tel Aviv, and Damascus. Received at 8:28 p.m. and passed to the Department of Defense at 11 p.m.

2 Document 203.

3 See footnote 2, Document 203.

5 In telegram 196 from Amman, July 20, the Embassy reported that in a press conference on July 19, King Hussein had stated that he had asked for U.S. troops to be sent to Jordan, and he “expected them.” (Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2058)

212. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 212. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 22, 1958—1 a.m.

214. Pass Defense. Reference Embassy’s telegram 211 to Department.2 Received call Prime Minister Rifai 1900 hours that King Hussein wished see me immediately. On arrival Palace found British Ambassador Johnston who had received similar summons. He asked if I knew what King had in mind. Replied negative but suspected renewed demand troops.

We were taken King’s office where Rifai awaited, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] over combination bad news concerning additional reported deaths Jordanian officials caught Baghdad together Nasser’s stepped-up propaganda campaign urging Jordanians emulate Iraq rebellion against Hashemite Monarchy, which has already resulted in numerous bombings Amman. More than anything else King disappointed his request additional United States-British troops has not been given favorable consideration. [4½ lines of source text not declassified]

I told Rifai I could not accept as valid any inference that my government had not fulfilled its commitments, giving as examples the seven and a half million dollars turned over to HKJ during last two days, five and a half million of which will be used to meet army payroll July 25. Plus additional five million dollars to finance emergency POL import and wheat and fodder shipments totaling 20, 000 tons. Rifai agreed this true but unfortunately Hussein had asked for United States troops and he had not received them. I again asked Rifai to justify the need for United States troops when British had already provided them. His reply which was concurred in by Ambassador Johnston was to the effect psychologically it would be much better to have American as well as British troops Jordan.

At this point Hussein came in and after usual exchange of pleasantries, proceeded to repeat Rifai’s arguments but without any great display of emotion. Nevertheless he left no doubt he wanted not only United States ground troops but in addition some United States air power in Jordan plus balance British Brigade now in Cyprus bring total foreign troops approximately 7, 000.

I asked Hussein if this meant Jordan army to be used outside country. He replied negative. Exclusively for internal security. I remarked I had met Pakistani Foreign Office representative earlier today and wondered if any proposal had been advanced by the Moslem members of the Baghdad Pact re Iraq.

[1 paragraph (6½ lines of source text) not declassified]

[6½ lines of source text not declassified] Abundantly clear both Hussein and British anxious participation United States troops. Hussein because he announced publicly he had requested them therefore he concerned loss of face if they don’t arrive. British because resentment return their “mandate army” rapidly increasing with open threats murder one or two soldiers as warning they should get out. USARMA has been assured by Jordanian army it capable dealing internal security problem [1 line of source text not declassified], I have come conclusion in light Hussein/RIFAI complete reversal policy toward military intervention Iraq that new plan involving joint attack by Turkey, Iran, Pakistan with some assistance Jordan is in the making. This would explain supposed need 7, 000 foreign troops who would have no choice but perform security duty if Hussein ordered his army join operation against Iraq. My opinion every argument advanced by Hussein and British for United States troops is good reason we should stay out.3

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2258. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jidda, Karachi, London, Paris, Tehran, Tel Aviv, and Damascus. Received at 12:55 a.m. and passed to the Department of Defense.

2 Supra.

3 On July 23, the Department responded, in telegram 273 to Amman, as follows:

“If you deem it desirable make further response to Hussein’s second request for US troops, in addition helpful reply you have already given, you authorized state we believe well-known and substantial evidence of US participation with UK in providing assistance to help HKJ defend its independence should provide desired psychological effect referred to in paragraph 3 of reftel. Through this combination of effort US and UK have demonstrated their full support for Jordan in its courageous attitude. We will keep situation under close review to determine whether further measures are necessary but do not plan to alter present pattern of assistance.” (Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2258; included in the microfiche supplement)

213. Letter From the President to George M. Humphrey 213. Letter From the President to George M. Humphrey1

Washington, July 22, 1958.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

The story of our effort to preserve the peace and to avoid unacceptable deterioration of the United States position in the Mid East has been fairly well told in the press; I shall not bore you here with its details. The fact is that we will take any honorable and practicable solution to the Lebanese problem, so that we can remove our troops. But we must insist that the formula is both practicable and honorable.2

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

The basic reason for our Mid East troubles is Nasser’s capture of Arab loyalty and enthusiasm throughout the region. Foster and I have long struggled with the Congress to get the kind of propaganda campaign established in that area that could counteract anti-Western sentiment as it now pours out of the Cairo—and Soviet—radios. We have never been able to get the money to do a good job, though today we are probably spending more by the month to solve this crisis than it would have cost us by the year to have been more effective in preventing it.

There is no use going over with you all of the ins and outs of our negotiations with the Russians. Admittedly they are masters in propaganda, in deceit, in distortion and in influencing ignorant populations. At the same time they seem to appeal also to a certain percentage of the intelligentsia. But one thing is certain. The men in the Kremlin are serving only their own selfish purposes. They are not trying to do anything decent for any other portion of humanity.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

As ever,3

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Personal and Confidential. Humphrey resigned as Secretary of the Treasury in May 1957.

2 In briefing legislative leaders on July 22, Eisenhower said that the United States would withdraw its forces from Lebanon as soon as “the U.N. group takes hold, or if Lebanon says that we are not wanted.” (Supplementary Notes on a Legislative Leadership Meeting, July 22; ibid., Staff Memos—July 1958; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Printed from an unsigned copy.

214. Letter From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower 214. Letter From Prime Minister Macmillan to President Eisenhower1

London, July 22, 1958.

Dear Friend: As you may know, since we responded to King Hussein’s appeal last Wednesday2 we have flown something just over 2, 000 British troops into Jordan. They have settled down well and their presence has helped to stabilise the position and prevent Jordan going the same way as Iraq.

Both our Representatives in Jordan have now been told by the Prime Minister that if we are to continue to hold the position against the threat of subversion it is essential to increase the forces on the ground. The Prime Minister has appealed for this. It is clear that unless reinforcements are sent there is a real danger that a coup may take place under our very noses. I believe that this is a moment of crisis for Jordan and for our whole Middle East policy. What is needed is less military than political reinforcement. For this I believe the essential thing is that you should send in some American troops to be alongside ours on the ground. Not only would this increase the military strength of the forces in Jordan, but it will have an extremely favourable political effect, since it will be a visible proof of our support for Jordan’s independence.

At the same time we must face the problem of supply.

Our troops in Jordan have supplies of food and oil for approximately 12 days together with ammunition for a few days local operations. We have been building up these stocks as fast as we can to a level where we should have some margin for ordinary consumption and for emergencies.

As you know, however, all our supplies have to be brought in by aircraft which have to overfly Israel. We are having great difficulty with Ben Gurion about this and he himself is in political difficulties with his colleagues and the Opposition. At the moment, we are continuing to fly our supplies in since we have not yet been formally asked to stop, but we are really dependent on Ben Gurion’s good will and his ability to carry his people with him. I have sent him personal messages, which I hope will help him in his difficulties. Meantime, the Israelis have cut down the time during which overflying is permitted to nine hours out of the twenty-four, nearly all of which are during the night. We are urgently exploring alternative supply routes, including Akaba, but there are difficulties about these which will take time to overcome.

When we first went into Jordan we had our eyes open. We did so relying on the moral support, which you have freely given us, and upon your promise to give us logistic aid.

We have already asked Foster if you could take over the air lift from us and fly in essential supplies in American aircraft. I am sure that the Israelis would raise much less political objection to your aircraft overflying them, and your Globemasters are so much bigger than any of our aircraft that the job could be done with far fewer sorties.

To sum up, I think we have reached a turning point in Jordan. If we are to hold the position, the forces on the ground should be fortified by the visible presence of your troops. We must also ensure the safety of their supplies, and both for political and logistic reasons I am sure that you are in a much better position to do this than we are. I hope that you will be able to do this. It would be disastrous for both you and us if we were forced to withdraw before some settlement has been ensured which will preserve the independence of Jordan.

With warm regards,

Yours sincerely,

Harold Macmillan3

1 Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Top Secret. Conveyed to the White House on July 22 under cover of a note from Lord Hood which indicated that the message was personal for the President from the Prime Minister. Hood also conveyed a copy of this message to Dulles along with a personal message to Dulles from Foreign Secretary Lloyd, in which Lloyd emphasized the urgency of Macmillan’s message and asked for Dulles’ support. He argued that it was vital to “hold on” in Lebanon and Jordan until satisfactory agreements were achieved in both places. “Otherwise our prestige will be fatally affected in every non-Nasser Arab country.” (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

2 July 17.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

215. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Permanent Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) in New York, July 22, 1958, 5:54 p.m. 215. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Permanent Representative at the United Nations (Lodge) in New York, July 22, 1958, 5:54 p.m.1

New York, July 22, 1958, 5:54 p.m.

They exchanged amenities. Hammarskjold did make his statement.2 The Lebanese made a statement today3 but it did not upset the applecart. The Soviet4 clearly made no motion though he huffed and puffed. He threatened to call the GA but we are on top of that said L. The vote on the Jap res was 10–1. L replied Hammarskjold will start moving right away. The Sec asked if he has money. L said he had emergency fund on a reimbursable basis. We don’t want him to feel cramped for money to do the necessary things, said the Sec, but he does not know if we can provide him with money.5 L said the SYG has had unfair criticism in the newspapers re not being cooperative with us and L has sent a telegram6 showing what he has done and maybe the Sec could write. The Sec said call7 or write. L mentioned going away for a few days quietly and he can be back in a few hours. The Sec brought him up to date re the Br proposal etc. Also he is giving the Amb a note8 a few minutes from now—and also re the tip-off K would come. It could be next week but the French are opposed and we don’t know what De Gaulle will do. L said the SYG has a suggested formula—call the SC and Chiang and Hussein don’t have to be there. The Sec said you can’t keep them from coming. L said it is possible though to arrange ahead of time with the Russians and then call in India etc. to sit depending on the question. The Sec’s impression had been they would not come but he has a feeling they are afraid a general war may originate here—he thinks they are scared of the Turks. L said Sobolev practically said to the SYG this a.m. he was going to have to talk in a fierce way but in effect he wanted him to intensify his effort in Lebanon because they are worried and the best info L has is Sobolev talks with Gromyko who is not well regarded by Khrushchev. The Sec said for L to go—he will be going to London this weekend.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in the Secretary’s office by Phyllis D. Bernau. The source text indicates that Lodge placed the call.

2 The Security Council voted on July 22 on the Japanese resolution of July 18 to authorize the Secretary-General to take additional measures to insure the integrity and independence of Lebanon. The resolution failed of adoption owing to a Soviet veto, despite a 10–1 vote in favor. Following the vote, Secretary-General Hammarskjöld made a statement in the Council indicating that, in light of the failure of the Council to take additional action in the crisis in the Middle East, he intended to expand the activities of the Observation Group in Lebanon and take such other action, under the provisions of the Charter and the resolution adopted on June 11, as he considered necessary “to prevent a further deterioration of the situation in the Middle East and to assist in finding a road away from the dangerous point at which we now find ourselves.” (Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations: Vol. 4: Dag Hammarskjöld, 1958–1960, pp. 144–145) The Security Council then adjourned sine die.

3 For the statement of the Lebanese Representative in the Security Council on July 22, see U.N. doc. S/PV. 836.

4 Soviet Representative Sobolev.

5 In a subsequent memorandum to Dulles on July 22, Assistant Secretary Wilcox addressed the question of financing expanded U.N. operations in Lebanon and proposed that up to $8 million be authorized from Mutual Security funds to meet such financing. Dulles approved the recommendation. (Department of State, Central Files, 320.5783A/7–2258; included in the microfiche supplement)

6 In telegram 117 from USUN, July 22, Lodge stated: “Secretary and Dept should know that Hammarskjold has given me fullest possible cooperation during recent concluded SC phase of Lebanese problem.” He added: “He has done this in spite of his apparent grave doubts wisdom our decision.” (Department of State, Central Files, 315/7–2258; included in the microfiche supplement)

7 The word “call” is underscored in the source text and a marginal notation on the source text at this point, in an unknown hand, reads: “he did”.

8 See Document 217.

216. Message From Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Secretary of State Dulles 216. Message From Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Secretary of State Dulles1

London, July 22, 1958.

We are in a Parliamentary difficulty here. Most of the House of Commons and most of the press are in favour of a Summit meeting to deal with the Middle East. They may disapprove strongly of the offensive terms of Khrushchev’s invitation and they may accept some argument upon timing, composition and venue, but are firmly convinced that a Summit meeting must take place. As I said on Sunday morning,2 I feel that what we have to extract from the present situation is a viable international settlement for the Lebanon and Jordan—something along the lines of the Austrian Treaty may be the best that we can get—leading on to a general settlement.

I think that the best means of making progress is by some kind of high level talk with Khrushchev. As I told you, this would not be a Summit meeting in which we would have a series of speeches designed to end up with some rather phoney statements about reducing tension and world peace. It would be a high level meeting designed to procure viable settlements for two specific problems—Lebanon and Jordan.

You pointed out your difficulty in Lebanon if the President of the Lebanon were to ask you to withdraw. You are aware of the extreme vulnerability of our position in Jordan from an operational point of view. Therefore it suits both our interests to get respectable and viable settlement as quickly as possible.

Now for that kind of purpose I think the participation of Nehru and Hammarskjold has positive advantages.

If all Khrushchev’s efforts end in a settlement over Lebanon and Jordan, I think his balloon will be somewhat punctured. The card we have to play in all this is the presence of 10 or 20, 000 American troops in Lebanon, and we must not trade this great card of their physical presence in the Lebanon, except for settlement of Lebanon and Jordan.

I really do believe that a top level talk with Khrushchev is the quickest way to get what we both want. I prefer it to be limited to the Middle East. In the new situation I doubt whether he could turn it to so much advantage in the Arab-Israel controversies. The argument against permitting him to get into the Arab-Israel question used to be that his pro-Arab view would make the position of our pro-Western and anti-Communist friends in Iraq impossible. That situation unhappily no longer exists.

I have talked to Harold about this and we really both believe it is in our best interest in this present situation to press on for some kind of high level meeting.

On Sunday I accepted your view that it should not be the kind of meeting proposed by Khrushchev nor did I like the idea put from London about a special assembly of Heads of Government level. But I did like very much the sentence in your original draft,

“Article 28 of the Charter provides for Security Council meetings at which each of the members may if it so desires be represented by a member of its government. If the Soviet Union desires a meeting in the Security Council, at which members could be represented by Heads of Government or Foreign Ministers, the United States would gladly agree in following this orderly procedure.”

I believe that that is the kind of positive reaction which it is essential that we should make in these present circumstances.

In this way we would avoid being summoned by Khrushchev on his own terms and would get a respectable and orderly meeting. I showed Harold that passage in your original draft immediately on my return and he liked it immensely. I hope that you will restore something on these lines in your reply to Khrushchev.

So far as the debate tomorrow in the House of Commons is concerned Harold and I, in order to avoid pressure to approve in principle a Summit meting of the Khrushchev type, as the French and Indians seem inclined to favour, will have to put forward some positive alternative. We should therefore like to back strongly the alternative of a special Security Council meeting which you seemed to favour last Sunday morning.

1 Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret. Conveyed to the Department of State on July 22 under cover of a note from Lord Hood which indicated that the message was personal for Dulles from Lloyd. Hood noted that part of the British draft reply to Khrushchev, incorporating the amendments suggested by Dulles was attached. The attachment is included in the microfiche supplement.

2 See Document 204.

217. Editorial Note 217. Editorial Note

Shortly after delivering the text of Foreign Secretary Lloyd’s message to Secretary Dulles (supra), Lord Hood delivered to the Department a copy of the reply from Prime Minister Macmillan to Chairman Khrushchev which Hood noted was being delivered that day. A handwritten note on the source text indicated that the text of the message was being released in London at 2 p.m., July 22, Washington time, to coincide with Lloyd’s announcement of the proposal in Parliament. In his reply, Macmillan rejected the premises outlined in Khrushchev’s message, but embraced his conclusion. Macmillan proposed a special meeting of the Security Council, to be attended by the heads of government suggested by Khrushchev, or designated representatives, to discuss the Middle East. Macmillan noted that he was prepared to attend such a meeting, and he assumed that Khrushchev would attend as well. (Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204)

In light of this development, Dulles returned a letter to Lloyd that evening through the British Embassy: “Matters have moved on your side rather more rapidly than we had anticipated, and I would have liked to have had a little more time to concert our views and also to seek closer concert with the French. However, in view of your statement in the House of Commons, Mr. Hagerty put out a statement from the White House indicating that if a meeting of the kind you suggested were generally desired, the United States would join in following this orderly process.

“Also, learning that you were releasing today the Prime Minister’s message to Khrushchev, we are doing the same. It is somewhat more lengthy than yours. It does contain in substance the sentence which was in my original draft, although omitting the word ’gladly’.

“I hear a rumor that the Soviets will accept on the assumption that the three Western Heads of Government will be there. If they accept promptly, it must be that they are really frightened about possible developments, perhaps from Turkey.

“I hope that we are doing the right thing. I can see the advantage of the United Nations mantle around Lebanon and some United Nations solution for Jordan, although, as I said, it is not clear tome how Jordan can, standing alone, be made into a viable community, and I do not think that the United States would go on subsidizing it other than as an emergency matter. These are perhaps matters to be thought of.” (Ibid., Central Files, 396.1/7–2258; included in the microfiche supplement)

218. Editorial Note 218. Editorial Note

President Eisenhower’s response to Chairman Khrushchev’s message of July 19 was delivered to Soviet Ambassador Mikhail Menshikov at 6:15 p.m. on July 22, and was simultaneously released to the press. (Memorandum of conversation between Dulles and Menshikov, July 22; Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2258) The text of the letter is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, pages 560–564, and American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 995–999. A draft of the letter, with Eisenhower’s handwritten revisions, is in Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President.

In his response, Eisenhower stated: “I am not aware of any factual basis for your extravagantly expressed fear of the danger of general war.” He rejected Khrushchev’s characterization of the United States intervention in Lebanon as “aggression”, and argued that it was not aggression to help a small nation maintain its independence in the face of expansionist and aggressive forces supported by the Soviet Union. The United States accepted the Soviet call for an international discussion of the crisis in the Middle East, but Eisenhower stated that such discussions should take place within the established framework of the U.N. Security Council, which are already seized of the problem. He noted that the Security Council could broaden its considerations to include the agenda proposed by Khrushchev, and that any member of the Council could be represented by a head of government or foreign minister if it chose to do so.

219. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 219. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 22, 1958—9 p.m.

621. From Murphy for Secretary. I am continuing series of conversations with leading personalities pro-government, middle-of-the-road and opposition. Will report separately substance of these talks. Overall consistent thread from all shades of opinion is however agreement on need for prompt presidential elections. Second general overall impression is that US landing here is generally welcome by Lebanese including some Moslem elements.

I saw Chamoun this evening with McClintock. He asked us as a matter of utmost priority to arrange that Admiral Holloway push Lebanese Commander General Chehab into immediate military action to clean out Beirut and to reject threat of other rebel forces in south who are approaching Damascus highway and may possibly present a threat to Beirut airport. Chamoun estimated their number at 1000.

President said from basis of his political consultations we could regard it “as settled" that presidential elections would be held before end of this month. He said Osseiran, Speaker of Parliament, had called on him today and had offered to do his bidding. (A separate Embtel2 indicates Osseiran has on his own decided to cancel July 24 meeting of Parliament and to convoke Chamber for July 31. We are this evening informally passing word to Speaker indicating our hope that elections can in fact take place before that date.)

Chamoun said his list of possible candidates was narrowing. He mentioned tonight only Jawas Boulos and Alfred Naccache. Chamoun said he would be very happy to have our recommendations as to where choice should fall. We have consistently indicated it would be wise for US to refrain from sponsoring any candidate as this would lead to charges an American stooge were being elected while US forces were landed in Beirut. However Chamoun says we talk to him as a friend and he would like to know our opinion. McClintock advises that as between Boulos and Naccache, who is weak and verged on the valetudinarian, Boulos would be the most acceptable candidate. I have not however as yet made up my mind whether to intimate any preference even to Chamoun.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–2258. Secret.

2 Telegram 616 from Beirut, July 22. (Ibid., 783A.00/7–2258; included in the microfiche supplement)

220. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 23, 1958, 11 a.m. 220. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, July 23, 1958, 11 a.m.1

Washington, July 23, 1958, 11 a.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Under Secretary

Mr. Reinhardt

Mr. Rountree

Mr. Berry

Mr. Jandrey

Mr. Macomber (latter part)

General Twining

Mr. Quarles

Mr. Sprague

Mr. Allen Dulles

Mr. Norman Paul

SUBJECT

Jordan

The Secretary opened the meeting by stating that he wished to discuss with those present the letter to the President from Prime Minister Macmillan which had just been received urging us to send US troops to Jordan.2 The Secretary said he wanted to obtain the views of those at the meeting prior to his discussion of this subject with the President this afternoon.

The Secretary said that he had been dubious of the utility of sending forces to Jordan from the very start. He said that he had suggested to Prime Minister Macmillan last week that the British wait until our large air sortie had been flown over Jordan, to see whether this show of force was sufficient to stabilize the situation. However, before the air mission was flown, the British had already commenced to send in their forces.

The Secretary said that the primary problem as he saw it was the question of what the Israelis would do if the Western military forces are withdrawn from Jordan. The Israelis, of course, assume—as we do—that in that event the present Jordan Government would fall. Would they then move into Jordan, at least up to the West bank of the Jordan River, and would that start a general war? Mr. Rountree said that the Israelis would not necessarily move; General Twining felt that they would.

The question arose about the type of government which would appear in Jordan after Hussein was overthrown, and with whom it would probably be allied. It appeared highly probable that a leftist government would gain power and, according to Messrs. Rountree and Berry, its orientation would be toward the Egypt–Syria axis rather than toward Iraq.

Mr. Allen Dulles indicated that he felt sure that Israel would readjust its frontiers to the West bank of the Jordan River if the present Jordan Government went out of power. The Secretary asked if this would re-commence an Arab-Israel war. Mr. Allen Dulles said “maybe”. Mr. Rountree indicated, however, that the Arabs would have to fight or their treasured “one-nation” concept would be finished. Mr. Rountree also said we must keep in mind that a Saudi Arabian coup is most likely soon after there is clear evidence of our withdrawing support from the Jordan Government and its consequent downfall.

Mr. Quarles asked about the northern-tier-plus-Jordan threat to Iraq; had it been fully forestalled. The Secretary thought that it had, as did Mr. Rountree.

General Twining spoke of the military situation in Lebanon and indicated that our posture there was now such that we could withdraw gracefully (in the military sense) if it became desirable to do so. The Secretary stated that he felt that the Lebanese situation might work out all right. In particular he alluded to the fact that Lebanon was, in itself, a viable state, whereas Jordan was not, and could not stand by itself economically. Lebanon, however, may survive under some form of UN umbrella.

Mr. Allen Dulles and the Secretary agreed that the Soviets were very much afraid of a war commencing in the Middle East at this time. The Secretary said that this being the case, we could risk a great deal there if we so desired, but he saw no possibility of concrete gain in doing so.

Mr. Allen Dulles said that Jordan might be at least retained by us until a Summit meeting took place, so that we could use it as a pawn in any settlement. He asked whether we could not send a MAAG mission there to maintain a facade of troop support without overly committing ourselves. The Secretary replied that, if you commit US prestige sufficiently to satisfy those requesting men and matériel, you then lose too much if and when you are forced to withdraw.

Mr. Quarles stated that he thought the British would keep their troops in Jordan if we only provided them with logistic support. Mr. Allen Dulles concurred, but said that the British alone could only retain control in Amman, not the remainder of the country.

The consensus of this portion of the meeting seemed to be that: the British can hold the portion of Jordan around Amman if they have logistic support; probably they can be convinced to remain there if we take over this aspect of the problem; and they can only be dislodged if the larger portion of Hussein’s army defects and, with aid from the outside, attacks.

There was then some discussion on the problem of logistic support. General Twining said that the British were now sending in 20 of their aircraft each day. If we took over the Jordan supply problem, they said they would need 6 C–124’s a day until July 26, and 4 C–124’s a day thereafter. General Twining stressed, however, that this British estimate was probably much too low and they would raise it once they had us committed. In particular, they would aver that they had landed their forces with only small arms and what they carried in their packs, and they required their armour to retain control of the situation.

Several expressed their understanding that the supply problem could eventually be licked by making use of the ramshackle railway line which goes south from Amman to about 70 kilometers from the Port of Aqaba. Mr. Quarles mentioned in this regard that the British themselves should be able to take over the supply problem once that route was repaired (possibly by our engineers) and British commercial shipping could transport the supplies to Aqaba. Therefore, continued Mr. Quarles, the only question is how long we need send in supplies by air before the British can take over the supply route by ship.

The question was raised of whether the Egyptians would possibly close the Suez to ships bringing supplies for the UK troops in Jordan. Mr. Rountree said he thought that they would not.

[Here follows discussion of problems created by the loss of Baghdad Pact documents as a result of the coup in Iraq.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2358. Top Secret; Presidential Handling. Drafted in S/S–RO by R.A. McKinnon and approved as accurate by Reinhardt.

2 Document 214.

221. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 23, 1958, 3 p.m. 221. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, White House, Washington, July 23, 1958, 3 p.m.1

Washington, July 23, 1958, 3 p.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

Secretary Dulles

Mr. Allen Dulles

Mr. Rountree

Mr. Reinhardt

Secretary Quarles

General Twining

General Goodpaster

[Here follows discussion of the problems involved in dealing with Arab nationalism, and evolving a viable policy to protect U.S. interests in the Middle East while maintaining support for Israel.]

Secretary Dulles next took up the draft of a possible answer to Prime Minister Macmillan’s letter requesting that we send troops into Jordan.2 The President asked whether we expect to be able to get a line of communications operating through Aqaba before the end of the week, and Mr. Quarles and General Twining told him that we do, with use of road and railroad between Aqaba and Amman.

Regarding Jordan, the President said the question in his mind is what kind of outcome we can foresee in the long run if the government is kept in power simply by outside troops. Mr. Dulles recalled that we had not wanted the British to go in. The President saw difficulty in continuing to back Hussein since we do not have as strong a legal basis as we do in Lebanon. Mr. Dulles said that in a sense Jordan lies in the main stream of the flood of which he had spoken. However, we cannot abandon them. Also, we must think of what Israel would do if Jordan goes down. It is clear they would act, and would win initially. The Soviets probably would aid the Arabs, however, and war would widen, with great pressure on the United States to support Israel. He added that the overflights are troubling the Israelis very much, and that they have suggested we bring out that we are taking food and medical supplies to the Jordanian people. Mr. Dulles added that the British may decide not to stay on if we do not send in forces.3 He said an Israeli had told him that if Jordan falls into chaos the armistice becomes inoperative. While it is not wise to prop up Hussein in a nonviable state, it is clear that Israel would take over much of Jordan in the event of revolt. There was then discussion as to how to get Britain out of Jordan without starting a general war in the area. Mr. Rountree suggested looking to the United Nations, indicating he could not see how to achieve a British withdrawal without a loss of face on their part. The group then edited passages in the proposed message referring to this matter.4

In a final comment Secretary Dulles observed that we are laboring under an inherent disadvantage in this area in that we are trying to protect interests of long standing.

G
Brigadier General USA

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Secret. Drafted by Goodpaster. The full text of this document is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

2 Document 214.

3 In a telephone conversation with Dulles earlier in the day, Eisenhower commented that it looked to him as if Macmillan had lost his nerve. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, White House Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Infra.

222. Letter From President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Macmillan 222. Letter From President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Macmillan1

Washington, July 23, 1958.

Dear Harold: I received yesterday your message about Jordan.2 Taking up first the matter of supply, we are quite ready in principle to help out further in this respect. I understand that we are flying POL from Lebanon to Jordan, overflying Israel close to the Syrian border. The Israelis acquiesce in this but do not like it. We have told them that we think this need will be over by this week and that an adequate substitute can be found in Aqaba where, I believe, intensive work is being done to improve the facilities and communication route with Amman.

We would be willing to use our Globemasters to assist you in flying from Cyprus supplies to your forces in Jordan. As you say, a smaller number of these larger planes could do the job you are doing. However, we would have to seek and find some accommodation with Israel. Foster has already talked with their Embassy here about the matter,3 and we hope to get a reply by tomorrow. I am convinced that whatever be the immediate outcome, we cannot look upon these over-flights of Israel as a permanent solution. We must concentrate upon getting what is needed into Aqaba, preferably by commercial vessels because of Arab sensitiveness about non-Arab naval vessels in the Gulf. Then we must quietly create better ways to get the cargoes to the Amman area.

The introduction of our ground forces raises much more difficult problems. Our public opinion and Congress would, I know, be extremely averse to seeing us take this further step.4 We believe,5 as you indicate, that your forces there already stabilize the position and we hope that it will continue thus, until through the UN or otherwise you are able, logically, to lay down this burden.6

As ever,

Ike7

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2358. Secret; Presidential Handling. Transmitted to London in telegram 884 with instructions to pass to the Prime Minister from the President. Telegram 884 is the source text. Drafted by Dulles and cleared by Eisenhower. a draft of this letter, with Eisenhower’s handwritten revisions, is in Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President.

2 Document 214.

3 Memorandum of conversation between Dulles and Israeli Minister of Embassy Yaacov Herzog, July 23. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2358; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Eisenhower deleted a sentence from Dulles’ original draft at this point which read: “Our intelligence does not suggest that it is needed now, and I hope we can postpone this decision.”

5 Eisenhower revised the final sentences, which read in Dulles’ draft: “We believe, as you say, that your forces there already stabilize the position and we hope that it will contain them. We shall, however, keep this under the closest review and keep in touch with you on this matter.”

6 On July 24, Hood conveyed to Dulles a reply to this message for Eisenhower from Macmillan which reads, in part: “Thank you for your message of July 23 about the Jordan problem. I understand the difficulties which you mention. I am grateful about the Globemasters. I have asked our planners to work with yours on this as quickly as possible.” (Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204; included in the microfiche supplement)

7 Telegram 884 bears this typed signature.

223. Editorial Note 223. Editorial Note

On July 23, Chairman Khrushchev addressed a second letter to President Eisenhower concerning the Soviet proposal for a summit meeting to consider what Khrushchev referred to as “a threat to peace in the region of the Near and Middle East.” The letter was delivered to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow at 10 p.m. local time and the text was transmitted to the Department of State in telegram 216 from Moscow, July 23. (Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2358) The text of the letter was subsequently released and is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 999–1000. Khrushchev addressed similar letters on July 23 to British Prime Minister Macmillan, French President De Gaulle, Indian Prime Minister Nehru, and U.N. Secretary-General Hammarskjöld. For texts of these letters, including a copy of the letter to Eisenhower, see U.N. doc. S/4064, July 23, 1958. In his letter to Eisenhower, Khrushchev accepted the concept of a Security Council meeting as the framework for discussions on the Middle East, but proposed that the meeting involve the heads of state of the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and India, although India was not currently a member of the Security Council. He again emphasized the urgency of such a meeting which he proposed should begin in the Security Council on July 28.

An assessment of Khrushchev’s second letter by several senior Department of State officials on July 23 concluded: “Khrushchev in the guise of accepting a Security Council meeting is in fact planning a summit meeting on the terms of his original proposal, that is, the Heads of Government of the U.S., the U.K., the USSR, France and India plus the Secretary-General of the United Nations. To accomplish this he has distorted Macmillan’s language proposing a meeting in the ’forum’ of the Security Council to mean ’within the framework of the Security Council.” They recommended to the Secretary that: “Our reply should make it clear that we are not prepared to participate in a meeting organized on the basis of Khrushchev’s proposal.” (Memorandum from Kohler to Dulles, July 23; Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2358)

224. Message From Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Secretary of State Dulles 224. Message From Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Secretary of State Dulles1

London, July 24, 1958.

I have just seen Khrushchev’s reply2 on the tape, although we have not yet received his official reply. Most of us thought that he would refuse, pleading China as an excuse. However, it seems that he wants to come after all. We feel a little guilty here that we have let you in for this, but I think the way we have all played it together has two major benefits. First, it is clear that the Russians are quite frightened at the prospect of your immense power and they have no intention of letting loose a general conflict in which they would come off worst. Secondly, I think we have rallied to our side all that strange, floating, moderate opinion not only in our countries, but in the European countries. Including many N.A.T.O. countries who are always attracted to the idea of talk. This also applies significantly to Asia and even to some more robust peoples like the Canadians.

In addition, our positions in the Lebanon and Jordan are both very precarious; yours in the Lebanon politically, because of a sudden change of attitude by the Lebanese Government which would make it difficult for you to stay; ours in Jordan, logistically and militarily because we are in an exposed position. A general conference in which we might be able to force upon the Soviets a settlement of these two particular cases might strengthen our position.

However, the main thing now is that we should deal with this new situation together in the closest co-operation. What we have to consider is the timing and the conditions for the proposed meeting in New York. Now that Mr. Khrushchev has committed himself, I think we can take quite a firm view on the details.

Harold wishes me to thank you particularly for your co-operation and to tell you that, as a result, he now feels that he has an absolutely united country behind him. This is of considerable importance in the larger picture. There is a feeling here of unity and purpose in facing up to our problems such as we have not had since the war, and as you know so well, this is a great asset with our people.

I would be grateful for your preliminary thoughts, and Harold and I are looking forward tremendously to seeing you to talk it all over.

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret. The text of the message was conveyed to the Department on July 24 under a covering note from Hood to Dulles.

2 See supra.

225. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 225. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 24, 1958—2 a.m.

251. Paris for USRO, West and Thurston. Reference: Ankara telegram 333 to Department,2 Embassy telegram 248.3 Embassy appraisal based on all information available from HKJ military/civilian sources including King Hussein, Prime Minister Rifai, Lt. Gen. Majali, CG Jordan Army, situation does not justify sending US troops Jordan.

My opinion GOT evaluation Jordan like that other Baghdad Pact members biased. Their concern over fate Iraq desire redress balance which they feel can only be done if US maneuvered into accepting much larger participation military intervention ME understood.

As pointed up Embassy telegrams 211 and 2144 neither Hussein/RIFAI can make case for US troops. Increasing evidence British military at local level believe their assignment Jordan basically wrong from military standpoint. Furthermore Nicosia type approach Jordan public has created widespread resentment British “reoccupation”. Quite naturally British would be most happy share their grief with US. In view

British interest Iraq/Kuwait, especially latter, I suspect British would like free 16th Brigade comprised special purpose airborne troops permit them take part operation designed prevent further losses possibly salvage some already sustained. This could only be done providing British have someone to whom they could turn over present task in Jordan. This would place US in same awkward situation from which British would like to extract themselves of being principal target deep/widespread popular resentment. Furthermore it would wreck what still remains Jordan Army morale which in last analysis must remain hard core any Jordanian internal security system unless country is to become satellite under full military occupation.

I cannot emphasize too strongly fact that with US military strength so near and in such volume as now exists danger external aggression against Jordan practically nil. Internal security situation satisfactory, with British troops actually “surplus”.

US role to date and as presently planned provide present pro-Western government economic tools with which retain control if not affection Jordanian people. It would be most unfortunate if we were to cancel out our “good deeds” by switching to military approach which as far as can be determined would be less than productive.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2458. Secret; Priority. Also sent to Ankara and repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, London, and Paris.

2 In telegram 333 from Ankara, July 23, the Embassy reported that the Turkish Government had urged that the United States respond favorably to the Jordanian request for the dispatch of U.S. troops to Jordan. (Ibid., 785.00/7–2358)

3 Not found.

4 Documents 211 and 212.

226. Memorandum of Discussion at the 373d Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, July 24, 1958 226. Memorandum of Discussion at the 373d Meeting of the National Security Council, Washington, July 24, 19581

Washington, July 24, 1958

[Here follow a paragraph listing the participants at the meeting and agenda item 1.]

2. The Situation in the Near East

Mr. Gray presented an oral report on the results of discussion by the NSC Planning Board of U.S. courses of action designed to prevent the United States from appearing to oppose Arab nationalism and to counter hostile radio broadcasts in the Near East. (A copy of Mr. Gray’s briefing note is filed in the minutes of the meeting, and another is attached to this memorandum.)2 Mr. Gray then called on the Secretary of State for an oral briefing on the situation in the Near East from the diplomatic and foreign policy standpoint.

Secretary Dulles said the situation in Lebanon seems to be as satisfactory as can reasonably be expected. Since U.S. forces entered the country, rebel activities and foreign promotion of such activities had substantially decreased. Relations between the Lebanese and the U.S. forces have been good, and no violent incidents have occurred. Mr. Robert Murphy was presently in Lebanon talking with President Chamoun, General Chehab, and rebel leaders, in an effort to bring about early elections to choose a successor to Chamoun. While the elections could be held at any time after today, Parliament would probably not be convened for at least another week. The Secretary thought that if a successor to Chamoun could be elected and if the United Nations effort could be stepped up, the situation would become better and in fact reasonably secure. In the UN Security Council a Japanese Resolution had been vetoed by the USSR, which had been the only member to oppose it. However, the Secretary General of the United Nations had said he would carry out the spirit of the Resolution under the general authority granted him by the Charter. Accordingly, the Secretary General was actively recruiting additional personnel for the United Nations in Lebanon in order to throw the mantle of the United Nations around Lebanon and make it a United Nations ward. The United States was maintaining good working relations with the Secretary General.

Secretary Dulles thought the situation in Jordan was not quite as favorable as in Lebanon. The United Kingdom had requested that U.S. forces be introduced into Jordan to stand beside the British forces and take over much of the supply effort. Such a move would involve the question of over-flights of Israel, to which Israel was objecting. The Secretary had discussed this question yesterday with the Israeli Minister, and had an appointment with the Israeli Ambassador today. Meanwhile, efforts were being stepped up to improve communications facilities in Jordan. For example, it was hoped that a 50-mile stretch of road between Aqaba and Amman could be put in shape so that adequate supplies could be moved by sea and land. At present, adequate supply was dependent upon an airlift. Secretary Dulles added that this morning the internal situation in Jordan had improved. The King had indicated that there was no real need for U.S. forces in his country, but he continued to want U.S. forces in Jordan as a symbol of U.S. interest. Secretary Dulles said he did not wish, however, to leave the impression that Jordan was secure. The situation remained dangerous, with a large part of the army of doubtful loyalty and with large numbers of Palestinian refugees capable of mob action. Nevertheless, the immediate

situation leading to Western intervention had been met; that is, a careful plot to take over the Government of Jordan along the lines of the Iraqi coup seemed to have been thwarted or postponed.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

Israel is deeply concerned over the situation in the Near East. The Israelis feel that the presence of U.S. forces in Lebanon and U.K. forces in Jordan gives them more protection for the time being, but they are fearful of future developments. If a coup occurred in Jordan, it is not clear what the Israelis would do. Secretary Dulles said that he had asked the Israelis this question and a definitive answer would be forthcoming shortly. The Israeli interim reply had stated that chaos in Jordan would invalidate the armistice agreement between Israel and Jordan, and leave Israel free to take the action necessary to its own security. This was a highly dangerous situation which might result in the renewal of Arab-Israeli hostilities.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

The Director of the U.S. Information Agency referred to Mr. Gray’s report of the Planning Board’s discussion on jamming of hostile radio broadcasts. He wished to point out that if Radio Cairo broadcasts were jammed, there might be additional tension and agitation among the West Bank refugees in Jordan. If these refugees were suddenly deprived of their accustomed Cairo broadcasts, then resentment against the government in Amman would be increased, possibly enough to tip the scales toward revolt. This consideration should be carefully weighed before any decision to jam Cairo broadcasts.

Mr. Allen said that from the public relations point of view, it would be a very bad thing for the United States to get involved in Jordan. The United States had a convincing story on Lebanon and we have some hope of coming out of the Lebanese situation with honor and dignity, but our position is not the best even in Lebanon. In Jordan, public support for the government is no greater—and possibly less—than Iraqi public support was for the deposed Iraqi regime; so that foreign intervention is difficult to justify before world opinion. If we support King Hussein, a monarch with no roots in the country and among the people, we will be in a very bad position. Jordan was an artificial creation resulting from World War I, with no history. Recently the Senate in the Sudan had unanimously condemned U.S.–U.K. action in the Near East. Mr. Allen was afraid if we stay on this wicket, the USSR will beat us to death in public opinion. We must adjust to the tide of Arab nationalism, and must do so before the hotheads get control in every country. The oil companies should be able to roll with the punches, and will in fact be on a firmer foundation in Iraq in the future than under the old regime.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

Mr. Gray then called on the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for an oral briefing from the U.S. military viewpoint. General Twining said the situation in Lebanon was calm. Lebanese snipers had been firing at our planes near the airport, but there had been no casualties from enemy action. Cooperation between U.S. and Lebanese armed forces had been satisfactory. The Lebanese Army was reluctantly seeking to bring the rebel forces under control, but this operation was not proceeding as rapidly as was desirable. The rebels were still unmolested in the Basta, their stronghold in Beirut. The landing of U.S. forces in Lebanon had taken place in accordance with a contingency plan (code name: Blueback)3 prepared in May. The original plan had provided that the Marines and the Army would establish lodgment in Beirut, and that U.K. forces would also enter Lebanon. However, a political decision had been made that the United Kingdom would not participate in the Lebanon landings and the plan had been adjusted accordingly. General Twining then caused two maps to be displayed, one showing the disposition of U.S. forces in Beirut and adjacent areas, and the other showing the disposition of U.S. forces in the Near East. General Twining said there were about 6000 Marines in Lebanon, about 1700 Army troops adjacent to the Beirut airport, and a contingent of Army support forces which would bring the Army total to 2500. In connection with the map showing the disposition of U.S. forces in the Near East, General Twining pointed out that a Marine landing team was enroute to the area from Okinawa. U.S. airborne forces in Germany and in the United States had been alerted. The U.S. Navy had two attack-carrier striking groups in the Mediterranean. General Twining said that the logistic support for the operation in Lebanon had been provided by transport aircraft which had now returned to the United States. Tankers and refueling planes had remained in the area. The airlift capabilities of U.S. forces in Europe and MATS capabilities were being used. About 20 per cent of our SAC forces had been placed on 15-minute alert, and a large proportion of the remaining SAC forces had been put on a relatively short alert. Air defense command units had also been put on a short alert. U.S. jet planes recently made a low-level demonstration over Jordan which had apparently been effective. British forces in Jordan had been airlifted from Cyprus. The United States had assisted the operation in Jordan by airlifting oil.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

The National Security Council: 4

a. Noted and discussed the subject in the light of: (1) An oral briefing by the Secretary of State from the diplomatic and foreign policy viewpoint.

(2) An oral briefing by the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, from the U.S. military viewpoint.

(3) An oral briefing by the Director of Central Intelligence from the intelligence viewpoint.

(4) An oral report by the Chairman, NSC Planning Board, on the results of discussion by the Planning Board of possible U.S. courses of action designed to prevent the United States from appearing to oppose Arab nationalism, and to counter hostile radio broadcasts in the Near East.

b. Noted that the NSC Planning Board would prepare as a basis for discussion at the next Council meeting a list of relevant policy issues arising out of the present situation in the Near East, together with arguments for and against taking various possible courses of action.

[Here follow the remaining agenda items.]

Marion W. Boggs

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by Boggs on July 25. The full text of the discussion of item 2 is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

2 Included in the microfiche supplement.

3 The correct code name was “Blue Bat.” See Document 40.

4 Paragraphs a and b that follow constitute NSC Action No. 1951, approved by the President on July 28. (Department of State, S/S–NSC (Miscellaneous) Files: Lot 66 D 95)

227. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 227. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut July 24, 1958—4 p.m.

658. From Murphy. As indicated Embtel 621,2 I have had a number of interviews with varied sectors of Lebanese political opinion relating to Middle East situation in general, to opinions on US landing in Lebanon, and to an internal political solution of Lebanese problem. Following are highlights of these conversations: 1. Maronite Patriarch Meouchi, the Patriarch who for 14 years was a priest in the US and at one time was an American citizen, celebrated mass which I and McClintock attended early Sunday morning. We later breakfasted with the Patriarch who is one of the most political prelates I have encountered. His view is infected by an overbearing hatred of President Chamoun. In his calmer moments, the Patriarch revealed a Munich-type of mind advocating appeasement with Nasser and a “positive" neutral stance for Lebanon. Although he was coy in indicating preference for any particular presidential candidate, he did say he thought it was now impossible for General Chehab to be elected president (although he revealed that Chehab comes to him frequently for counsel). Drift of his argument was in favor of electing former President Bechara el-Khoury. My general impression of the Patriarch is that he is partisan and up to his armpits in the campaign against Chamoun. He would accept a compromise candidate such as Hitti.

2. Prime Minister Sami Solh: This pleasant if wily old ex-magistrate, obviously a seasoned politician who because of his position as a Sunni-Moslem, is useful to US, although he has been “excommunicated” by the Moslem Mufti. The Prime Minister was delighted at our landing and feels most Lebanese agree with him. I would estimate that he is pretty well at the end of his career.

3. Turkish Ambassador, Cevdet Dulger, a diplomat of long experience in the Moslem world. He has a refreshingly simple approach to all problems in Middle East: “The Arabs are moved by only two considerations—fear or money. What you should do is to buy them off. For two million dollars you could have done as much in Lebanon as you do much more expensively with an entire fleet.” Dulger says the same reasoning applies to all other Arab states. Public opinion in Iraq, for example, he dismissed as non-existent, but repeated his formula, force and funds.

4. Greek Catholic Archbishop Nabaa: This prelate is subtle, intelligent and very well-disposed toward the west. He has recently returned from a visit to Lourdes, Brussels and Rome. Unlike the Turkish Ambassador he felt Lebanese solution must involve issues of principle and that next president must be a man of probity and good character. He thought Jawad Boules was candidate who would come closest to filling the bill.

5. Archbishop of the Greek Orthodox Church, Saleeby. This staunch old prelate is extremely pro-American and proud of the fact there are more than 4000 of his relatives living in the US. He is coming to Washington next year on a leader grant and, as Embassy has pointed out, has his miter in the ring to become the next Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Antioch with headquarters in Damascus. Saleeby, whose congregation is the next largest to Maronites among Christians of Lebanon and which he says contributes 40 percent of all tax revenues to the government, pledged support of Greek Orthodox Lebanese for any presidential candidate US would indicate.

6. Opposition leaders Abdullah Yafi and Hassan Oueini: Through intermediary of former State Department officer, Colonel William Eddy, who speaks fluent Arabic, I met these two “moderate” leaders of opposition at a neutral house. They were fervent in professing friendship for the west and the US but insisted their quarrel was only against Chamoun. In consequence, they deplored US landing. Their view of Nasser and how his relations with US had covered gamut of ups and downs was very much as might have been described by Cairo Radio. They were frankly astonished when I set the record straight on our dealings with Nasser over recent years. They professed desire to see insurrection ended and US forces depart. Their hatred of Chamoun seemed intense.3

7. Middle-of-the-road politician Raymond Edde: Edde, whose younger brother is Minister of Finance in the present Cabinet and whose father was a President of Lebanon under French mandate, gave a fairly well-balanced account of how insurrection began and course of events. An indication of incredibly fragmented political structure here is that he called his so-called “national bloc” party largest single entity in Parliament controlling 4 seats out of 66.

8. Maronite Archbishop Abed of Tripoli: A valiant old bishop well-known for being anti-patriarch and pro-Chamoun. He described conditions in Tripoli where he said many of Christian element were camped near his bishopric in a posture of self-defense. He described conditions in Moslem quarter of city as appalling. Significantly Moslem Mufti had come to his house for asylum. Bishop indicated he had some influence over rebel leader Rashid Karame and thought he could still persuade him to course of moderation.

9. Third force leader, Henri Pharaon. This wealthy, Greek Orthodox landowner and financier, who was one of early organizers of anti-Chamoun movement and a leading instigator of general strike which led to insurrection, is now concerned largely with saving his own skin. However, for the record, he protests our landing and had in his pocket a telegram for SC protesting it as a violation of Lebanon sovereignty. He seemed, however, willing to be persuaded when we pointed out errors in this conclusion, and volunteered to withdraw his telegram. Pharaon impressed me as an intelligent twister who wishes to hedge his bets and to come out on willing [winning?] side.

In addition, I saw entire Latin American diplomatic corps last night at residence as McClintock has arranged weekly briefing of the Latinos, much to their delight. This is a give more than take proposition.

One thing which struck me because it is only unifying through [thought?] in all these interviews was agreement on imperative necessity of holding presidential elections soon. Whether center, opposition or extremely loyalist, all were in agreement on this point. Chamoun in our last conversation told us he felt confident parliament could convene before end of this month and succeed in electing a president who, he thought, would be able to carry out this pro-western foreign policy.

We were impressed yesterday evening by a new sense of confidence in Chamoun. He said several times, “My mind is now at ease because I know independence of Lebanon is saved.” He seemed very sure of himself in stating he thought a new president could shortly be elected. As for his own returning self-assurance, he said as we were leaving that he would still be a power in Lebanon even though he would not be president.

One other general conclusion I draw from these interviews is that increasingly important opinion in Lebanon is accepting fact ours is not an occupying force. I also have feeling most Lebanese welcome our presence here and feel it will make it possible for them to reach a political solution. They are also becoming convinced of sincerity of our statements when we say we are not here to impose a president upon them.

Meanwhile, Admiral Holloway and we are continuing our work on General Chehab and his officers to prepare for eventual military action against immediate focus of infection in Beirut should that prove necessary after presidential elections.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–2458. Secret.

2 Document 219.

3 Murphy cabled a fuller account of this meeting to the Department in telegram 657 from Beirut, July 24. (Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–2458; included in the microfiche supplement)

228. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of State’s Staff Assistant (Boster) 228. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of State’s Staff Assistant (Boster)1

Washington, July 24, 1958.

SUBJECT

Conversation between the Secretary and Foreign Minister De Murville regarding a Summit Conference

In a telephone conversation with Couve de Murville on July 24, the Secretary said that we were not anxious to be stampeded into a high level meeting with the Soviets. He said that while our approach was somewhat different from the French, basically we were not far apart. He wanted De Murville to know that our next reply will tend to slow down the movement toward a meeting. He noted that we did not want to see it rushed, although the British did.

De Murville said that he did not object to the idea of a meeting but not under the conditions set by the Soviets. If the meeting could be arranged calmly and not so soon, he thought it would be all right.

The Secretary said that, although we were expressing our position in a somewhat different manner than the French, we basically share their view that the meeting should not be arranged in great haste. He said we did not think anything should happen for two or three weeks or perhaps longer, but we certainly did not want the meeting to take place within the next few days. He said we planned to suggest that the Permanent Representatives at the United Nations should discuss the question and see if there is general agreement on this kind of meeting and, if so, when and where it should be held.

De Murville said that this was fine and repeated that they did not want to be rushed. The Secretary said that we might have to take account of the views of the British. De Murville said he understood.

The Secretary said that Alphand would report our position in more detail.2

DEB

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2458. Confidential.

2 Dulles also discussed the Soviet proposal for a Security Council heads of government meeting with French Ambassador Alphand on July 24. Alphand stated that France was firmly opposed to a conference within the framework of the United Nations. The French Government was particularly opposed to New York as a locale in that the “theatrical” atmosphere of the United Nations would give Khrushchev a unique propaganda platform. Alphand added that De Gaulle almost certainly would not attend such a conference. (Ibid., included in the microfiche supplement)

229. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 229. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut July 24, 1958—7 p.m.

674. Chamoun requested Under Secretary Murphy and me to call at noon today. Murphy described his recent conversations with leaders of all shades of opinion. Purpose of visit from Chamoun’s point of view was to sound out his latest idea on presidential elections. President said that following Chehab’s social meeting with Holloway’s staff described Embtel 651,2 General had spent some hours with him in a frank discussion of what to do next both politically and militarily.

Chamoun explained his thought by saying re all candidates now under discussion as potential presidential timber, they suffered from fundamental risk of not having army support during very delicate days ahead for Lebanon. He had previously urged Chehab to accept presidency under circumstances when Chehab was much more popular than today. Now, however, especially among Christian community, Chehab’s stock had fallen to a new low. On Moslem side also, Chehab’s admission of US landing force had decreased his popularity. Notwithstanding, Chamoun thought Chehab would still be best president for Lebanon because he could insure military support for which another president might have to go begging. Chamoun seemed sincere in stating his concern was for long-range future of Lebanon rather than for immediate local political advantage.

From these considerations President thought only way to rehabilitate Chehab’s reputation was for him promptly to win some military success either in the Basta or in the Chouf. President reverted to idea he had suggested to Admiral Holloway on Monday (Embtel 568)3 for US forces to be deployed near Syrian frontier, thus releasing sufficient troops of Lebanese Army for a decisive action. He proposed an immediate meeting between ourselves, Admiral Holloway and General Chehab to discuss possibilities.

Murphy pointed out we were not canvassing for any particular candidate so long as Lebanon could find itself a president and end its protracted crisis. However, there were persuasive arguments as President had outlined and certainly we would have no objection to Chehab if his number should come up. We had been considerably encouraged by degree of progress made in collaboration between Chehab and his staff with Admiral Holloway and his entourage.

On question of Chehab’s staff, Chamoun said he was well aware of possibility that if Chehab became president he might promote Colonel Salem, present Chief of Staff, to position of Commander-in-Chief. Chamoun’s antidote for this would be to arrange, once Chehab were president-elect, to appoint a completely new Commander-in-Chief with Chehab’s acquiescence, the new commander to clean out old staff and set up more reliable one.

We are not immediately acceding to Chamoun’s suggestion because we wish to try out his proposal on Admiral Holloway. Off-hand our judgment is that following warnings to opposition outlined Embtel 6494 and 657,5 situation in Basta should be sufficiently quiet for Chehab to be able to deploy forces either to compress Basta or to attack in Chouf. However, on eve of elections we are inclined to doubt political wisdom of latter course. McClintock cannot resist feeling Chamoun wants still that “military victory" for which he has unsuccessfully clamored throughout 21/2 months of civil war.

Subsequently to dictation of foregoing, I have consulted with my French and British colleagues. We agree on following points: 1. It would be a capital mistake to undertake military operation against Jumblat in the Chouf since this is unnecessary from military point of view, would be counter-productive in arousing enmity of Druzes, and in any case is needless since once a new president is elected, we are confident Jumblat will speedily make his peace.

2. Ambassadors feel it is necessary to take measures to neutralize or if necessary reduce the Basta. Yesterday there was a brisk fire fight around British Embassy residence while my French colleague was lunching with my British colleague. Firing did not subside until 6 p.m. We all concur, however, that Chehab has sufficient military resources, backstopped by presence of American forces, to accomplish neutralization of the Basta.

3. British and French Ambassadors concur in Murphy’s idea there is much political benefit to be gained from suspension of military curfew in Beirut. All three Ambassadors feel it would be highly useful if curfew could be lifted on day Parliament meets for presidential elections provided Basta situation has previously been dealt with.

4. All three Ambassadors concur (more in sorrow than in anger) that given list of possible presidential candidates, Chamoun’s analysis is right: That Chehab by and large would be best president in light of unsavory alternatives if he is not chosen. One more argument favoring Chehab is that he alone among candidates would be immune from charge of being imposed on Lebanon by American bayonets.6

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Dated July 24. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Document 207.

4 In telegram 649 from Beirut, July 24, McClintock reported that Murphy had indicated to opposition leader Abdullah Yafi that U.S. military forces in Lebanon were seriously concerned about the security threat posed by insurrectionists in the Basta. McClintock noted that Yafi was visibly shaken when Murphy told him that the destruction of the Basta could be accomplished in a matter of seconds by the forces assembled in Beirut. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2458; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 See footnote 3, Document 227.

6 In telegram 487 to Beirut, July 25, the Department responded as follows: “Our preliminary reactions to this very helpful telegram are as follows:

“1. We do not believe US forces should in present circumstances be deployed near Syrian frontier.

“2. Agree would be unwise move against Jumblat in present circumstances.

“3. Action against Basta should preferably be confined to neutralization.

“4. Chehab seems to us acceptable as President if he has reasonably wide backing, and in these circumstances would be willing if necessary help persuade him accept.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2458)

230. Editorial Note 230. Editorial Note

On July 25, President Eisenhower responded to Chairman Khrushchev’s July 23 letter. Eisenhower welcomed Khrushchev’s acceptance of the proposal that if international discussions of the dangerous situation in the Middle East were to take place they should take place in the U.N. Security Council. Eisenhower added, however, that it was not yet certain that a high-level meeting to conduct such discussions was “generally desired.” He proposed an exchange of views among the permanent representatives of the members of the Security Council to determine whether a meeting was generally acceptable, and under what conditions the members and invited participants would meet. If there was general agreement on these points, a date for the meeting could be established, but Eisenhower noted that the date of July 28 proposed by the Soviet Union for the meeting would be too early for the United States.

The text of the President’s reply was handed to Soviet Ambassador Menshikov by Secretary Dulles at 1 p.m. on July 25. Dulles informed Menshikov that the text would be released to the press within the hour. (Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2558) A draft of the letter, with the President’s handwritten revisions, is in the Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President, and included in the microfiche supplement. The letter is also printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, pages 565–566, and American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 1001–1002.

231. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of State’s Staff Assistant (Boster) 231. Memorandum for the Record by the Secretary of State’s Staff Assistant (Boster)1

Washington, July 25, 1958.

SUBJECT

Conversation between the Secretary and Prime Minister Macmillan regarding Summit Security Meeting

Prime Minister Macmillan telephoned the Secretary this afternoon with regard to the discussions about a possible meeting with the Soviets.2 He said that the French were being very difficult; that they seemed to be backing out and wanted to come back to the Geneva idea. He said he would like to try to calm the French by asking Couve de Murville to London on Saturday.

The Secretary said that our reply3 had been sent and that we had made some changes in it. He said he thought the French would be willing to go along if the arrangements for a meeting could be made in a little more measured way. He said he had talked with De Murville4 and that the French felt arrangements were being made with too great haste and were also worried that they might get into a discussion of the Algerian question. He thought also that General De Gaulle was probably averse to leaving France at the present time. If we could make arrangements for a meeting date two or three weeks hence, the Secretary thought it might be all right. The Secretary referred to the last paragraph of our letter to Khrushchev and said he thought the French would be willing to go along on this basis. He saw no reason why the French would not be willing to allow the Permanent Representatives in New York to work out the date, duration, agenda and other details of a meeting. This would not commit anyone to have a meeting. Mr. Macmillan said they agreed that the meeting had to be in the United Nations.

DEB

1 source: Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–2558. Confidential; Eyes Only.

2 The British Embassy also on July 25 conveyed Foreign Secretary Lloyd’s objections to certain passages in the proposed U.S. reply to Khrushchev. In essence, Lloyd suggested limiting the discussion as much as possible to Lebanon and Jordan in the hope of securing an agreement on those issues without broadening considerations beyond the possibility of agreement. (Letter from Hood to Dulles, July 25; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series, Lebanon 1958) Eisenhower discussed the British objections with Dulles, Herter, Reinhardt, Hagerty, and Goodpaster on July 25, and concluded that to limit the agenda to Lebanon and Jordan “would result in our appearing solely in a defensive role.” It would be better to discuss the entire range of problems in the Middle East, as well as the underlying causes of the problems. (Ibid., Eisenhower Diaries; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 See supra.

4 See Document 228.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 232. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 25, 1958—5 p.m.

698. Pass JCS and DOD from Admiral Holloway. Joint message, Holloway, Murphy, McClintock. We called on President Chamoun this morning at his instance to consult with him and Chehab regarding the proposition that Chamoun made yesterday that it is essential that there be some sort of military success by Lebanese forces.2 This would be designed to improve chances of a favorable political solution on July 31, to augment the authority of the Lebanese Government and would be in the interest of the prestige of the US forces in Lebanon.

Chehab made lengthy “appreciation of situation” pointing out there were in his military opinion two alternatives before us: 1. There could be a widely stepped-up military action against rebels which would have to be accomplished largely by US forces as in Chehab’s opinion Lebanon army would break up and certainly would not cooperate in such a wide-scale operation. Chehab predicted that any energetic movement against rebels either in Basta or elsewhere would provide a nationwide reaction among insurrectionists and predicted within 24 hours after such an operation were mounted, there would be vigorous rebel response in Tripoli, the Hermel, the Bekaa and the Chouf.

2. Second alternative was for Lebanon army by its own means to conduct a modest plan of operations helped by presence in Beirut area of very important American forces. Chehab said instructions had been given to commence operations seeking to reduce area of the Basta commencing at 1400 today. (The Basta is a central, Moslem district in the heart of Beirut. Its control by insurgents is perhaps one of the most humiliating features of the present government situation.) His plan calls for a sort of nibbling action employing not more than a company and a half of troops at any given point (he says he has a battalion and a half in Beirut) with object of pushing insurrectionists back upon themselves, of preventing harassment at present by rifle and grenade fire on government buildings, and of making it impossible for rebels in Basta to continue their present threat to public security in the city.

Chehab was very firm in stating he could not with his own means contemplate a reduction of the Basta. This was true not only because of insufficient forces but more particularly because his hybrid army of Christians and Moslems would break apart. He said repeatedly, “I have a very brittle instrument in my hand. If I strike too hard, it will break”.

Admiral Holloway inquired if it might not be possible for Chehab to augment his very scant striking force in Beirut if US forces should relieve Lebanese troops now in static lines. Although at first he seemed dubious, Chehab finally agreed this should be possible and mentioned what a help it would be if 40 or 50 troops now maintaining guard on Tapline terminal could be brought to Beirut, being replaced by US forces.

On general plan of campaign in civil war, Chehab said he had initially been faced with two alternatives: (a) To deploy his six battalions (550 men each) along Lebanon frontier in hope of preventing infiltration from Syria.

(b) Deploying his forces on internal lines, which he had done, and which had pegged them in fixed positions.

It was agreed by Chamoun, Chehab and ourselves that contemplated plan of operations initiated today against Basta, even though it did not contemplate taking entire area, would have salutary political effect prior to elections scheduled July 31. We also agreed it essential that such action be taken at once if position of our own forces in respect to public opinion here and elsewhere were not to be jeopardized as well as for need to reinforce respect for authority of Lebanon Government.

Upshot of a two-hour interview in which President Chamoun took minutes of the meeting were following three conclusions: 1. Starting at 1400 today, Lebanon army would commence its operation to curtail size of Basta but not to take Basta.

2. US forces would so far as possible replace Lebanese forces in static positions. Lebanese troops thus relieved would be used in Chehab’s striking force to be used against the Basta or elsewhere.

3. US to respond affirmatively for Lebanon military request for matériel. This would include equipment for psy war, such as loudspeaker trucks, teargas, and other necessary arms or munition.

Secretary Murphy added a fourth point that as this was a police action, there should be cooperation to improve psychological warfare efficacy.

Chehab was emphatic that a joint operation by American and Lebanon troops would bring about the immediate dissolution of his army as an effective instrument.

It was finally agreed Admiral Holloway would in person at 10 am tomorrow present General Adams to Chehab, who in turn would give instructions to his staff for immediate cooperation in setting forth above program. Murphy and McClintock will call at 11 am tomorrow on Chamoun to assess political auspices thereof.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2558. Secret; Niact. Holloway sent a separate report on this meeting to Admiral Burke in CINCSPECOMME telegram 6238 to CNO, July 25. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files: CCS Lebanon (5–13–58) Sec. 4; included in the microfiche supplement)

2 See Document 229.

233. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 233. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, July 25, 1958—7 p.m.

272. Palace telephoned King Hussein wished see me immediately. On arrival found Prime Minister Rifai with King. Hussein opened conversation with statement Jordan in precarious position, almost completely surrounded by enemies, immediate action mandatory.

In light USG position re dispatch troops Jordan he had asked Rifai prepare alternate proposal which he would now present. Rifai began by saying both he and King realized request US/UK forces although justifiable had produced number unfavorable repercussions: (A) Widespread public resentment so-called “reoccupation”.

(B) Insistence by British their patrols be fully armed resulting creation Cyprus climate.

(C) Radio Cairo/Damascus charge Hussein asked British protect him from his own people.

(D) Jordan Army morale seriously undermined as presence British troops considered reflection ability national army protect its King.

I pointed out it was these same reasons which caused my government doubt wisdom sending US troops Jordan plus fact heavy concentration US land/sea/air power Lebanon area made any external aggression against Jordan virtually impossible. Rifai said main concern Hussein/himself was not external aggression but internal security which although now satisfactory might change under Nasser’s heavy propaganda attack aided by money agents infiltrated from UAR. Rifai explained Nasser knows street mobs by themselves cannot effect successful coup, must have cooperation army/security forces. While majority Jordan Army loyal there are some dissident elements particularly among company grade officers. Hussein/RIFAI greatest fear is occasion when army may be ordered fire on mob and refuse. When this happens government is finished, chaos results, army junta favorable Nasser will take over. Even if internal security maintained Jordan is now embattled island Nasser sea, cannot stand idly by permit Iraq/Syria particularly latter consolidate position. [51/2 lines of source text not declassified]

In order achieve foregoing objectives at same time clear country foreign troops Rifai with Hussein’s blessing submitted following proposal which King said he wished me transmit as formal request my government soonest.

(A) USG provide necessary funds raise two additional brigades recruited from tribes loyal King. Rifai estimates cost approximately $8 million.

(B) USG and HKJ enter into mutual defense agreement under which Jordan Army would be re-equipped (particularly armored brigade), supplied technical other military assistance under supervision MAAG/Jordan.

(C) Since Baghdad Pact finished as effective “northern-tier defense arrangement" new regional defense organization comprised Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan, Iran, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, Morocco, US, UK, France, West Germany, Greece, Libya, Italy to be known as METO shall be established.

Hussein outlined advantages plan saying two new brigades recruited among loyal tribesmen would strengthen internal security force to point where foreign troops would not be required and British brigade could be permitted depart. Expansion Jordan Army would make substantial contribution its morale, same time afford economic benefits by creating employment nomadic tribesmen hard hit by this year’s drought.

A US/HKJ defense treaty would have tremendous psychological effect by demonstrating to people Jordan US determination stand with Jordan against enemies which surround it. Creation MAAG/Jordan would permit American military come, be seen but in role partners working within framework Jordanian defense establishment not as “occupying force”.

Creation Middle East regional defense organization would permit grouping Arab as well non-Arab states which would have benefit pooling military potential major powers free world with strategic geography Middle East.

Hussein asked my opinion proposal. I replied expansion army meet country’s internal security requirements instead relying foreign troops had considerable merit as did idea US/HKJ mutual defense treaty including establishment a MAAG Jordan. Re regional grouping METO it involved wide-range political/economic as well as military considerations which I did not feel competent comment on although basic concept well illustrated in similar organizations such as SEATO.

I took opportunity in line increasing number of countries granting recognition new Iraqi Republic sound out Hussein/RIFAI their reaction should US in company other free nations feel obliged follow similar policy on grounds we better able serve legitimate interests our friends if we enjoy diplomatic relations new government. [31/2 lines of source text not declassified]

As I was about leave Rifai said wished make point re Khrushchev’s proposed summit meeting Security Council which heads of state including those Middle East would attend. Rifai requested I inform my Government King Hussein would insist on attending any such meeting in order to properly present his country’s case before Security Council.

Comment: I know from earlier conversations Rifai that he/Hussein/Talhuni have made painful reappraisal HKJ policy requesting foreign troops. Proposal advanced by Hussein/RIFAI my opinion holds certain advantages USG on assumption we wish retain Jordan as free-world fortress in Middle East at least until situation clarifies extent longer range policy objectives can be determined. No doubt it will cost us considerable amount money but at least under proposed set-up we would be in position know exact status Jordan security forces with additional advantage exercise some direct supervision over military assistance we provide. My opinion by refusing be pushed into dispatching US “occupation" troops we have gained opportunity establish MAAG/Jordan something which heretofore has been dismissed by HKJ as impossibility. In view Iraq toward which Jordan has in past looked for military support vis-à-vis Israelis now “on other side”. Expansion Jordan Army by two brigades does not seem unreasonable. Furthermore it can be used as device reassure Israel which has taken position it must strengthen its own security forces due to encirclement by Nasser, since two additional brigades in light present conditions cannot be construed as posing military threat Israel. Plan has further advantage of having Jordan as far as internal security concerned defended by Jordanians rather than ourselves or British. [21/2 lines of source text not declassified]2

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2558. Top Secret; Niact.

2 The Department responded on July 26, in telegram 306 to Amman: “Inform King we have received his proposals and are studying them. They obviously raise a number of very important considerations and serious problems. As soon as we have completed formulation definitive views we will convey them to King. Meanwhile, in these critical days we would like to reiterate our support for Jordan and His Majesty.” (Ibid.) Wright reported, in telegram 307 from Amman, July 28, that he conveyed the Department’s response to Hussein and Rifai, who expressed appreciation but hoped for a prompt, favorable reply. Hussein was especially anxious to proceed with recruitment of the two additional brigades to bring the army up to full strength and permit the withdrawal of the British troops. (Ibid., 785.00/7–2858) Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement.

234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 234. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, July 25, 1958—10:38 p.m.

102. For Murphy. Realize it difficult for us from this distance give useful guidance to you who are so capably dealing on ground with complex fast moving situation. Set forth below, however, are number of considerations which have occurred to us.

1. Believe it desirable you avoid if feasible being in country at time election takes place. This connection, we have had in mind possibility your visiting other NE states prior returning Washington. We thinking along lines of confidential message from you to Chiefs State UAR, Iraq, Jordan stating you shortly returning US to report to President and you would be grateful for opportunity exchange views re situation ME. Would appreciate your views.

2. Agree with you it might be unwise for USG make known it favors any particular presidential candidate. We believe it preferable you proceed along lines pressing Chamoun to make his suggestions. It seems to us President should be elected before September 23 even if US forces still in Lebanon.

3. Appreciate need prevent Salam from intimidating from Basta stronghold those opposition leaders who have shown some willingness work toward internal political settlement. At same time seems to us initiation by army of military action, unless clearly necessary, might prejudice efforts being made to promote political settlement.

4. We doing utmost assist UNSYG in quickly strengthening UN presence in Lebanon. You may wish use this fact appropriately in your discussions with Lebanese, pointing out we facilitating UN process which could with fullest cooperation all parties lead to situation where Leb independence integrity assured and US forces could withdraw. In addition to this, strengthened UN presence Lebanon will, in our view, attract considerable sympathy in international community for efforts Lebanon making preserve its traditions of freedom.

5. Would be useful if means could be found identify US forces Lebanon with some sort of humanitarian activity (relief food, medical care, and the like) for Lebanese people. You may wish ask Admiral Holloway explore his capabilities in this regard.2

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–2558. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Bergus and cleared by Rockwell, Rountree, Sisco, Walmsley, and Dulles. Repeated to USUN.

2 Murphy responded, in telegram 747 from Beirut, July 27, that the Department’s ideas with respect to the direction his efforts should take corresponded with his own thinking. He felt that he and the Embassy staff should continue to press for presidential elections to be held on July 31. That would allow him to leave Beirut on July 30, and he suggested an itinerary which would take him to Amman, Tel Aviv, Beirut, Baghdad, Ankara, Beirut, Cairo, and London before returning to Washington. Turning to the Department’s other observations concerning Lebanon, Murphy noted that there was no intention to initiate U.S. military action against insurgents in the Basta. Such action would only occur in the event of extreme provocation endangering the security of U.S. forces. Murphy added that he and the Embassy staff had been “plugging" the line of strengthening U.N. forces in Lebanon as a future guaranty of Lebanese independence, but the response had been mixed: “from extreme cynicism in case of Chamoun to approval in case of others.” (Ibid., 110.13–MU/7–2758; included in the microfiche supplement)

235. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Delegation at the Baghdad Pact Council Meetings, at London 235. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Delegation at the Baghdad Pact Council Meetings, at London1

Beirut, July 26, 1958—3 p.m.

158. For the Secretary from Murphy. McClintock and I saw Chamoun this morning at President’s request. He said (Embtel 698)2 that as he had half anticipated General Chehab had not moved against Basta despite assurances given to Admiral Holloway and ourselves yesterday. General now claims he will commence operations some time this afternoon. Chamoun said that following our interview yesterday he had implored Chehab “to act like a man”; and indicated to us this morning that he would not make up his mind definitively re pushing Chehab for presidency before Monday. He still hoped general could somehow generate sufficient determination to undertake military action against the Basta before that time, but it was clear Chamoun viewed prospect with immense skepticism.

President said there was further intelligence of Syrian intervention. He claimed he had received word at 10:30 last night of Syrian penetration close to Tripoli. Troops in uniform had been identified wearing Arab headdress instead of Syrian peaked cap, and a tank, he said, had been located at Tripoli airport. We asked if he had immediately communicated this intelligence to UNOGIL. Chamoun smiled contemptuously and said they were so ineffective it would not have been worthwhile.

We agreed that since neutralization of Basta is largely a police action, it might prove useful if gendarmes should compose striking force with Chehab to backstop it by armor and artillery. Failing that, at least Admiral Holloway might consider taking up with his forces certain guard positions now held by gendarmes with view to releasing them for police action against Moslem insurgent quarter. We shall discuss these possibilities with Holloway shortly.

We discussed with President contents Deptel 4873 repeated London 1040 and found Chamoun unhappy but resigned at first three paragraphs thereof. I gave Chamoun careful account of my talk yesterday with Jumblat (Embtel 715)4 and said we also from our own observation concurred in feeling it would be unwise to move against Jumblat in present circumstances (Deptel 487). Chamoun said he disagreed because he was convinced eventually military action would have to be taken in the Chouf, but he would accept our views at present.

In closing, Chamoun said we need not worry about elections next Thursday. Once his own mind was made up (and he still favored Chehab if latter could be brought to action), he felt it would be possible for decision to be taken in Parliament July 31.

After seeing Holloway, we hope to have another talk with Chehab5 and then continue circuit by consulting once more with Chamoun.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2658. Secret. Repeated to the Department of State. The source text is the Department of State copy.

2 Document 232.

3 See footnote 6, Document 229.

4 In telegram 715 from Beirut, July 25, Murphy reported that he had met in the Chouf with Druze opposition leader Jumblatt. Jumblatt was strongly in favor of prompt elections for president, but skeptical that such elections would take place while U.S. forces shored up Chamoun’s position. Murphy concluded that Jumblatt did not contemplate aggressive military action, and recommended against the military operations which Chamoun had been pressing for in the Chouf. He felt that Jumblatt, like most other Lebanese political figures with whom he had spoken, would be thankful if the crisis could be resolved by an internal solution. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2558; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 Murphy and McClintock met with Chehab that evening and found him again unwilling to take military action against the Moslem opposition force in the Basta. To do so, he argued, would lead to a renewal of rebel activity and postpone the presidential election. Chehab added that he felt Chamoun would not hold the elections as planned unless the United States put heavy pressure on him. (Telegram 744 from Beirut, July 26; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2658; included in the microfiche supplement)

236. Telegram From the Department of State to the Delegation at the Baghdad Pact Council Meetings, at London 236. Telegram From the Department of State to the Delegation at the Baghdad Pact Council Meetings, at London1

Washington, July 26, 1958—4:33 p.m.

Tosec 4. Re Amman 272.2 Following are our preliminary comments on King Hussein’s proposals for recruiting two additional brigades, mutual defense agreement between US and HJK, and new regional defense organization.

As Wright says, proposal to create two additional brigades might have advantages if we desired to maintain Jordan as Free World fortress in Middle East. However, we do not believe it would be in US interests to attempt to do this and in fact we would be happy if some way could be found for us to disengage ourselves from our responsibilities in Jordan with minimum political disadvantage. Under circumstances it would seem to us undesirable to become involved in further heavy commitments, especially since it seems almost certain that sums we would be required to provide to accomplish Hussein’s purposes would be substantially greater than the $8 million he mentions when consideration is given to annual maintenance costs, effect on Jordanian budget of maintaining two additional brigades, etc. It is also by no means certain that existence of two additional brigades would prevent coup against King.

On other hand, until we can see more clearly how situation in the Middle East is going to develop, and because of fact that our prestige is heavily engaged in Jordan, we are probably required to continue to extend considerable degree of support to Hussein. Although it would seem inadvisable to agree to equip two additional brigades, it might not be too disadvantageous to sign a military aid agreement (not a mutual defense agreement) with Jordan whereby a MAAG would be established in Amman and some additional training and equipping of the Jordanian army undertaken by us. This would not, however, establish rationale for withdrawal UK forces. We regard it as highly unlikely that a number of the states proposed by Hussein would be willing to enter into suggested Middle East regional defense organization and we of course do not believe that Baghdad Pact is “finished” as a northern tier defense agreement. Accordingly, we believe that Hussein should be discouraged from further consideration of this proposal.

We were encouraged by Hussein and Rifai remarks concerning recognition of Iraq which should prove useful background for your conversations in London.

Essential thing for Jordan as we see it is that there be eventual political adjustment whereby Jordan, perhaps with some manifestation of UN interest in protecting it against indirect aggression, would cease to be “embattled island in Nasser sea.” We should be working to achieve this, not to build up Jordan’s isolation from Arab world.

Defense requests foregoing be brought to attention Sprague.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/7–2558. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Herter and in substance by Irwin in Defense.

2 Document 233.

237. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State 237. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State1

London, July 28, 1958—3 p.m.

Dulte 4. In conversation before lunch Sunday Defense Minister Sandys and the Prime Minister raised with Secretary subject of joint military planning in Middle East operations.2 In ensuing discussion they suggested that if not joint planning at least planning liaison would be desirable. As British idea presented in rather general terms, Secretary said he would study question on basis written exposition which Macmillan undertook to send him. Some hours later following letter received from Prime Minister: “July 27, 1958. Dear Foster:

Our talk at luncheon clarified my mind a great deal. This is how I see the position. If, in spite of the French complication, the Russians accept a meeting of the Security Council, then I think it unlikely that desperate action will be taken by Nasser or the new Iraq Government to precipitate a crisis in the Middle East. We might look for a few weeks’ pause before any further serious trouble develops–such as a coup in Jordan or a move against the Western interests in the Gulf.

If under one pretext or another the Russians decline a meeting this will mean that they have decided to hot up the cold war in the expectation that they will gain more from this than from a temporary pacification.

If the first happens and there is to be a meeting in a fortnight or so, we must work out together, with great speed and concentrated effort, both a short-term plan for Lebanon and Jordan and a longer-term plan for the Middle East generally. It may well be that we shall not be able to make much practical progress with our longer-term ideas at this first conference; but it is most important that we should be seen to be taking a liberal and forward-looking view and should not appear merely to be concerned to protect our own Western interests.

If, on the other hand, there is no conference, the cold-war pressures will be accentuated. Just, therefore, as the State Department and the Foreign Office should be working together on a political plan for the conference, so we should also be engaged in intensive joint planning (mainly on the military side) for the second situation in case it should arise. I am not suggesting that we should undertake any fresh commitments at this stage, or that any operations we may have to undertake should necessarily be joint operations. But we ought to make sure that each of us knows what the other has in mind, and that all our plans, whether joint or separate, fit together.

I am quite happy about the machinery for political consultation and planning. For we [are] well accustomed to working together either through normal diplomatic channels or through the special machinery in Washington. (I confess that I am not so happy about the military side. Ought this to be concerted in Washington and, if so, by what machinery? Or ought it to be done through Admiral Holloway—either at his advance headquarters, or at his rear headquarters in London? Perhaps, as there must be a substantial political element in all this, it would be best done in Washington. You will know best. But that it must be done, and urgently done, I am sure you will agree.)

Yours ever, /s/Harold Macmillan”3

Whitney

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Top Secret; Priority. The telegram was marked in the Department of State for Presidential handling, which indicates that it was sent to the White House for Eisenhower.

2 According to a memorandum of this conversation, prepared by Greene, Macmillan and Sandys expressed concern to know in advance of any additional military moves the United States might undertake in the Persian Gulf, should events deteriorate further in the Middle East. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1061)

Dulles reported separately on his discussions in London with Macmillan and Lloyd in Dulte 1 from London, July 27. In that telegram, Dulles noted that he and Macmillan shared a concern that if the Soviets backed away from a heads of government meeting, on whatever excuse, “we will be facing a period of increased difficulty and danger, especially in the Middle East.” Dulles concluded that he and Macmillan agreed that “we need urgently to find more effective machinery for joint planning—military, political, economic and psychological—to face this risk, if the Soviets reject our UNSC proposals.” (Ibid.,6 Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204) Both documents are included in the microfiche supplement.

3 Dulles acknowledged Macmillan’s letters with a brief note to Macmillan on July 28, which indicated that he was consulting with Washington and would respond later. (Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204)

238. Editorial Note 238. Editorial Note

On July 28, Chairman Khrushchev addressed a third letter to President Eisenhower urging a meeting of the heads of government of the Soviet Union, the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and India to consider the crisis in the Middle East. Khrushchev characterized Eisenhower’s July 25 response to his second letter as an effort to delay the conference and prevent the adoption of measures leading to the withdrawal of United States and British forces from Lebanon and Jordan. Khrushchev alleged that the United States had backed away from an initial agreement on a heads of government meeting within the framework of the Security Council. He stated that the Soviet Union was still prepared for a conference under auspices arranged by the Secretary-General, but added that he preferred President De Gaulle’s suggestion that a heads of government meeting take place in Europe rather than at the United Nations. He offered, if need be, to host the meeting in Moscow, but insisted that an early meeting was an urgent necessity, and asked for a rapid reply to his letter. The text of the letter was conveyed to the Embassy in Moscow on July 28 and transmitted to the Department in telegram 264 from Moscow, July 28. (Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204) The full text is printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 18, 1958, pages 275–277, and excerpts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 1003–1005.

239. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 239. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 28, 1958—6 p.m.

764. From Murphy. London for Secretary. McClintock and I saw Chamoun at noon. He had progressed considerably toward a political solution.

Chamoun said he had agreement at last from General Chehab to accept presidency and had concurrence of Speaker of Parliament for latter’s support of Chehab’s candidacy. Chamoun asked if we were of a like mind and we replied we had no objection to Chehab but did wish strongly that election be Lebanese elections and not seem colored by presence of American forces.

Although it must have caused him a hard struggle, Chamoun this morning stated he had at last agreed that warrants for arrest of opposition deputies would be placed in suspension to permit them to vote next Thursday. We applauded political wisdom of this decision and said further we hoped non-parliamentary opposition leaders such as Jumblat, Yafi and Oueni would likewise have warrants temporarily suspended in order to permit them to consult in Beirut with their political leaders.

Chamoun asked us urgently to impress on Chehab need for more resolute military action at least to curtail rebel activity in Beirut and possibly to repulse what he described as significantly increased rebel movements in north Lebanon near and on hills northeast of Tripoli.

We propose to request Admiral Holloway to give us a careful military study of situation in these areas and to arrange meeting between Holloway’s staff, General Chehab and ourselves early tomorrow to go over possibilities of some military action prior to elections. Now that Chehab has accepted candidacy he is in a different position as if parliament makes him president he will be facing the same issues in a new light.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–2858. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

240. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 240. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 30, 1958—noon.

819. From Murphy for the Secretary. Yesterday we ran into a series of complicating developments which we are trying to resolve on the spot. As you undoubtedly know, there was an attempt at assassination of Prime Minister Solh yesterday a.m., he narrowly escaped death by a matter of seconds as a result of terrorist bomb attempt which killed six people. Naturally he was shaken and emotional. This has precipitated a crisis in the Lebanese Government which involves General Chehab.

For over a week Chamoun has been telling me that Chehab is really the only possible presidential successor, and day before yesterday he confirmed that he would support Chehab who had accepted to be a candidate. He implied that this was the government’s viewpoint.

On the other hand, after lunch yesterday, in a high state of emotion resulting from that morning’s attempt on his life, Solh in the presence of Holloway, McClintock, Adams and myself, poured out a stream of invective against Chehab. He said there would be a special meeting of the Cabinet yesterday afternoon which would result in Chehab’s dismissal and the dismissal of a number of officers on the General Staff. He blamed Chehab for the development of the crisis during the past months, calling him a traitor. He even became bitter in his reference to American forces standing near with folded arms and doing nothing. He wanted to know whether, as he said Chamoun had told him, the US had insisted that Chehab be the candidate and that we would accept nobody else.

As dispassionately as possible I told the Prime Minister that we regarded with amazement a situation where he as the responsible head of government over a period of months has been unable, according to his own admission, to effect dismissal of officers of the General Staff whom he has considered disloyal and ineffective throughout the period of the rebellion. According to his own statement, he and his government have been unable to dismiss the commanding general whom he considered disloyal. At the same time the President of the Republic has told us for days that Chehab is the only possible candidate for the presidency. According to Solh’s own admission, his government has authority over only a fraction of the territory of the country—perhaps as little as a third of the area. He now addresses the question of us whether, if his government acts to remove General Chehab and members of the General Staff and there is a violent reaction on the part of the Lebanese Army, we would defend the present government by attacking the Lebanese Army with our forces.

I emphasized that we had been if anything too careful to refrain from supporting one candidate as against another. Only in reply to Chamoun’s question did we indicate we would have no objection to Chehab as President. Chamoun had recommended it. This frankly is an impossible situation and I said I would give a negative answer to his question. In fact, I said as a personal opinion that we would prefer to remove our forces from the area.

Holloway agreed and informed Solh US forces would not be used as suggested by Solh.

McClintock traced the history of the development of the present situation and the reasons for the despatch of our forces to the Lebanon.

Solh emotionally said, “Very well, I will resign and leave the country.” We deprecated this but did not urge him not to resign.

Holloway and McClintock agree with me that present government does not possess adequate authority to govern. Prolongation of the political crisis will cause further deterioration and give encouragement to terrorism. In that case, some form of coup d’etat becomes increasingly probable. If that happens, a military group would probably spearhead it.

Thus we conclude that whatever safety there is for us in this precarious situation lies with Chehab and his military establishment such as it is.

We are informed by Solh that parliamentary election of a new President is impossible under these conditions. Yet postponement may produce chaos. Solh has espoused an early election before yesterday’s attempt on his life. Now he is in full cry against it and declares that loyal members of the Parliament will not attend.

For their part, opposition are not being helpful. They have issued a manifesto denouncing elections unless both Chamoun and Americans go. In this stormy situation I plan to see Chehab and possibly speaker of Parliament before leaving this afternoon for Amman.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–3058. Secret; Priority.

241. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 241. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 30, 1958—2 p.m.

820. Pass JCS and DOD from Admiral Holloway. From Murphy for the Secretary. Following my telegram 819,2 General Chehab called this morning. He had been detained by Patriarch who told him in his estimation much of manifesto from opposition described Embtel 8063 was window-dressing for the Basta mob. Patriarch persuaded Chehab of his ability to secure a written promise from opposition that after elections (presumably for Chehab) they would commence to lay down their arms and rebellion would end.

Although Speaker of Parliament Osseiran has been insistent that election should take place tomorrow, Chehab feels they should be deferred by one day until August 1. This would make it possible for five rebel deputies, against whom warrants for arrest are outstanding, to consult with other opposition leaders as well as moderate politicians and thus be prepared for a vote on Friday. Chehab says that if necessary Lebanese military will give physical protection to these deputies and other opposition leaders. He adds that after we see Rashid Karame this morning, Karame has an appointment to confer with Chehab who will later receive Jumblat and endeavor to work out a general agreement with moderate opposition leaders for elections on Friday.4

General intends to see Chamoun this morning and “insist” (for Chehab an unusual word) on foregoing program.

Chehab said explicitly in presence of Admiral Holloway that he would not request departure of American Forces until military aspects of rebellion had been reduced and contained. We feel there will be no difficulty with Chehab with regard to an abrupt demand for removal of our forces. In fact, arrangements which have been slowly perfected for a cordial working relationship between American and Lebanese military will be an additional assurance against precipitate action of that nature.

Chehab is now on his mettle. He feels Chamoun and Lebanese Government have been trying to use him as cat’s paw and he is now determined to show who in fact has the whip hand. In consequence, we believe that despite last-minute maneuvers and protestations on both sides, there is a reasonably good prospect of election on Friday which will produce Chehab as next President of Lebanon.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–3058. Secret; Priority.

2 Supra.

3 In telegram 806 from Beirut, July 30, the Embassy reported that opposition leaders had met at the home of Saeb Salam and issued a 15-point manifesto outlining the demands which would have to be met to ensure their participation in a presidential election. Included in the manifesto was a demand for the immediate evacuation of all foreign troops, and a demand for the resignation of Chamoun and the formation of a cabinet approved by the opposition. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–3058; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 August 1.

242. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 242. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 30, 1958—9 p.m.

836. Amman for Murphy. Malik asked me to see him this evening prior to final Cabinet session at 6 p.m. to go over latest developments on tomorrow’s elections. Malik said he wished to communicate following account of today’s events at palace: 1. Chamoun had spent part of morning with a large group of loyal deputies. He found great disagreement among them and opposition to his proposal that Chehab be elected president. Effect of yesterday’s dynamite attempt on Prime Minister was everywhere apparent. At last President told deputies that if they did not accept his advice meet tomorrow and elect Chehab, he would himself resign his office. Shaken by this ultimatum, deputies apparently agreed with great reluctance to follow President’s bidding.

2. Chehab, with whom Malik had a brief conversation, indicated he was now ready to accept the presidency but hoped for as large a vote as possible as easing way for re-establishing national unity. He also said he thought Sami Solh Cabinet should resign to be replaced by a government of “technicians”.

3. While Chehab was talking to Malik, Sami Solh arrived at palace and raised a fearful scene in adjoining hall, screaming at top of his voice that Chehab was a coward, weakling and imbecile, whom he would in no circumstances accept as president of Lebanon. With some difficulty Prime Minister was quieted down and hustled off to a tense Cabinet meeting which lasted for two hours.

4. At meeting of government attended by Chamoun, Malik said wide dissatisfaction was displayed toward American attitude. It was apparently believed we had sat by with folded arms while situation in Lebanon had deteriorated; and that we were pushing Chehab as a candidate. Chamoun complained according to Malik Americans were letting it be known that Chehab was his (Chamoun’s) candidate. Upshot of meeting was general agreement best solution would be to press for a military solution of rebellion with all possible means. This would, in Malik’s words, mean “maximum cooperation on all sides including the American.”

Malik said he had been requested by Cabinet to get my reaction. I pointed out notion of Chehab candidacy was one which President Chamoun had volunteered to Murphy and me. At no time have we indicated a preference for any candidate although we did honestly feel that Lebanon’s political agony would not be eased by letting the present situation drag on and possibly deteriorate. I also recalled a condition of our forces landing here was that Lebanon army would continue to fight and that there be fullest cooperation between Lebanon armed forces and our own. I added that we were perfectly confident of our ability to assist Lebanon to maintain its integrity and independence; but for US forces to be involved in a civil war while Lebanon forces were not fighting was a matter calling for very serious consideration. I then pointed out that in all objectivity situation of Lebanon Government had not changed since insurrection commenced on May 8: The government was powerless to enforce its decisions. It depended for its instrument of force upon the Lebanon military and General Chehab.

I was then asked to confer with Chamoun in Malik’s company. I found President affable and relaxed in contrast to his Foreign Minister. In fact for first time in all these months I had impression I was now speaking to Chamoun when he had at last reached “the moment of truth.”

Chamoun said more for Malik’s benefit than mine that there was no other candidate than Chehab if only because he controlled the armed forces. President said he was not bluffing when he had threatened his resignation to the deputies. He still thought it best to hold elections tomorrow and for Chehab to be elected. He did not, however, wish to dismiss Sami Solh at once but would prefer to have some days elapse before a way out was found for the Prime Minister.

Malik at this point said to President that he completely concurred in my analysis: That throughout the rebellion Lebanon Government had in fact been impotent. Their fate depended on General Chehab and he had not wished to carry out dictates given him.

He exclaimed, “we are confronted by a coup d’etat a la Libanaise; Chehab has contrived to take power.” To this Chamoun dissented saying that Chehab had not planned events but they had developed of their own momentum. He said wryly, “this all began ten years ago when we isolated the army to keep it out of politics. It became a state to itself and it is now coming into constitutional power.”

Malik expressed worriment over foreign policies which Chehab might follow. I said in my judgment climate of international opinion was now propitious for Lebanon to be given some sort of international guarantee which would settle the course of its foreign policy advantageously to Lebanon. I thought President Chamoun could play a useful role in few months remaining before end of his term in expediting events toward some form of international guarantee which might save Lebanon not only from its enemies but—perhaps more difficult—from the Lebanese themselves.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–3058. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Amman.

243. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State 243. Telegram From the Embassy in Israel to the Department of State1

Tel Aviv, July 31, 1958—9 p.m.

129. From Murphy. Amman for Wright. Shortly after arrival Amman evening July 30 Wright and I were received by King Hussein and Prime Minister Rifai. I extended cordial greetings from President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles. These were warmly reciprocated. Hussein was exceptionally complimentary regarding recent US actions in and statements regarding ME.

During course of two hour conversation I conveyed our active interest in welfare and independence of Jordan, our desire to be helpful where possible and our appreciation of the current problems weighing on King and his government.

In expressing appreciation US attitude and aid rendered Hussein said he understood reasons why US had found it unwise to send forces. He was grateful to British for their immediate response. He stressed point British had come to protect constitutional regime and not just the persons of himself and Rifai.

I said at times there might be reasonable differences of opinion as to methods of achieving goals. We believe US forces in Lebanon plus UK forces in Jordan have had beneficial regional effect. Hussein agreed and said perhaps this adequate for time being. He left no doubt that without arrival of both forces in area his regime would have probably suffered same fate as Iraq. He asked many questions regarding Lebanon and expressed doubts regarding Chehab.

We discussed Jordanian armed forces with our interlocutors emphasizing the touching fidelity to the person of Hussein of the Bedouin officers and men. Hussein urged our support of recent requests for US aid to arm and equip two additional brigades, total of 8000 men. I said I was sure this would receive active study. I was very sympathetic but avoided anything savoring of a commitment.

We discussed ME propaganda. They offered full cooperation and joked about past difficulties in raising Radio Jordan from 50 to 100 kilowatts. I informed them of President Eisenhower’s personal interest in improving our output in area. They agreed it should be improved on an urgent basis. They said Jordan in the heartland of the Arab world. [11/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Wright mentioned rumors re abdication of Hussein. This evoked indignant denial and repeated references to loyalty troops. It also aroused contemptuous references to Nasser as a liar and rogue parading as Arab leader. Egyptians are not Arabs said Rifai. In the end Nasser would not force the issue with Israel but would yield. They said Nasser is a bluffer. As any demagogue he is dependent on momentum and words. In the end Nasser would fail ignominiously.

[1 paragraph (51/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Reference to question recognition of Iraq aroused emotional objections by both. It would be regarded as reward for Bolshevik brand of brutality. How could civilized nations deal with murderers, et cetera? At time of conversation I had not received word regarding Department’s decision to recognize shortly. Therefore Wright and I were noncommital.

Subsequently Rifai dined alone with Wright and me. On subject Iraq recognition and in reply to Wright’s questioning he blandly said, “well, we meant you should not recognize right away, perhaps in a month or six weeks.” Rifai is a realist I believe and is aware of the trend in several countries including US.

In this conversation Rifai asked me to inform Washington: 1. Hussein is determined to defend his throne and country and would “never” abdicate.

2. If US will give Jordan arms and money with which to insure its internal security and protect its borders against external aggression, Jordan does not need aid foreign troops.

My brief contact convinces me that Jordanian situation is fragile and unpredictable. [21/2 lines of source text not declassified] Hussein temporarily depends on the loyalty and devotion of Bedouin army elements. As far as we are concerned his attitude and that of Rifai could not be I think more friendly and well disposed toward US.

Lawson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/7–3158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Amman. Murphy arrived in Amman on the afternoon of July 30 and departed for Tel Aviv on the evening of July 31.

244. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 244. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, July 31, 1958—9 p.m.

869. I called this afternoon on General Chehab to express my congratulations on his election as President.2 I made it clear this was a courtesy visit as I had no wish to talk shop; but Chehab was clearly eager to do precisely that. He made following points: 1. General has been under very intense pressure from various political elements including moderate groups as well as opposition for an immediate public declaration calling on US forces to withdraw from Lebanon. Chehab said he refused to issue such a statement. He did wonder, however, if it might not be possible for United States (and he hinted a statement would have greater impact coming from President Eisenhower) to make declaration indicating that with improved security situation in Lebanon, it would presently be possible to re-embark our troops.3

2. Chehab indicated he was also under great pressure from opposition for immediate departure from Lebanon of President Chamoun. I recalled to Chehab his consistent attitude that Chamoun should finish out his constitutional term of office and indicated we had taken a similar line discussion with the press. I also made point which I thought would not be lost on a new President-elect that it would be a bad precedent for Chamoun or any other constitutionally elected Chief of State to be compelled to resign before end of term. Chehab agreed but expressed suggestion that possibly Chamoun might wish to make a trip abroad while still remaining legal President of Lebanon until September 23. He said “he had heard it said" that possibly Chamoun might be invited to the United States. I indicated I had no knowledge of such a proposal.

3. In any event it was clear that Chehab has made up his mind Sami Solh government must go. He said vote in Parliament this morning indicated that Cabinet itself was split right down the middle. Following this morning’s elections, he found it difficult to believe that present government could effectively continue in office. At one point General hinted that possibly if Sami Bey should depart from Lebanon, it might be a sufficient sop to opposition to enable him to resist demands for Chamoun’s departure.

4. On formation of a new Cabinet, Chehab indicated his preference for workmanlike group of technicians but admitted he would presently run into difficulty with professional politicians and people with their own axes to grind. He likewise expressed doubt that it would be easy for Chamoun to contemplate participation in a new government of various opposition members who Chehab thought might usefully serve in new Cabinet.

5. On opposition demand for general elections, I was relieved to find Chehab still firmly of opinion that it would be disastrous to dissolve Chamber and hold elections. He said with passions so heightened by recent events, it would be impossible to contemplate this possibility for a long time to come. I emphatically agreed.

6. General expressed hope US would be able to help Lebanon by financial and matérial assistance. He cited destruction of roads, bridges and buildings due to civil war and financial straits of GOL. On military account he hoped he could continue to look to US for supply of certain matériel. His only specific request, however, was that certain arms of French manufacture which were included in next year’s budget and which were essential to Lebanese TO and Es might possibly be purchased with US funds. Total amount was small, in neighborhood of between 3 and 4 million Lebanese pounds.

7. On over-all situation following election, Chehab said he expected civil war would rapidly peter out. He had some information indicating that Tripoli might open tomorrow. It would take a few days longer for resistance in the Basta to fade away, but was following example of General Eisenhower in leaving rear doors open for enemy to flee.

8. As for recrudescence of Syrian-Egyptian infiltration again in Lebanon, Chehab said he thought it would be some while before Nasser undertook any new adventures against this country. He had it from a number of Moslem sources that Nasser had been very much shaken by swift and effective American military intervention in Lebanon.

Comment: Chehab is exceedingly friendly and willing to use his prestige to insure most practical arrangement of future relations with United States. However, he will, as he indicated to Holloway, Murphy and me yesterday, feel compelled by public opinion as well as by his own military estimate of situation to ask for our withdrawal once it is clear military aspects of insurrection have been dealt with. I believe his suggestion for a voluntary statement on our part is evidence of his desire to accomplish our eventual withdrawal by most tactful means. I took pains to tell General this was already within framework of previously established US policy and cited statements of President Eisenhower and Ambassador Lodge in that regard. However, Chehab continues to feel some additional declaration from US would obviate necessity on his part for making a public request for our withdrawal.

Department will note Chamoun’s opinion on withdrawal set out Embtel 870.4 I am hopeful we may be able to conciliate opinions of President elect and Chamoun in order that our troops may remain here at least until end of summer. A carefully drafted statement possibly embodying Chamoun’s suggestion our forces would be expected to stay pending an international settlement for Lebanon might bridge gap between Chehab and Chamoun.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/7–3158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Chehab was elected President of Lebanon by the Lebanese Parliament on July 31. He received 43 votes on the first ballot in the Chamber of Deputies, which was one short of the necessary 2/3 majority, and was elected on the second ballot with 48 votes to 7 for Raymond Edde. (Telegram 861 from Beirut, July 31; ibid.) President Eisenhower sent a personal message of congratulations to Chehab on July 31, noting his expectation that close and cordial relations would continue between the two countries. (Telegram 607 to Beirut; ibid., 783A.11/7–3158) McClintock reported on August 1 that Chehab was delighted with the message from Eisenhower, and referred in particular to Eisenhower’s statement that he could appreciate what it meant to step out of the military life into political office. (Telegram 892 from Beirut; ibid., 783A.11/8–158)

3 McClintock also reported, in telegram 867 from Beirut, July 31, that Chehab was opposed to any increase in the strength of the U.N. group in Lebanon, and anticipated requesting the departure of the observation group almost simultaneously with the withdrawal of the U.S. forces. (Ibid., 320.5783A/7–3158)

4 In telegram 870 from Beirut, July 31, McClintock reported that he had called on Chamoun after the election to express his admiration for Chamoun’s patriotism and ability to put the welfare of his country above personal and partisan interests. Chamoun said that the vote that morning had been taken “in an air of national mourning”, but he had convinced his supporters that there was no practical alternative to Chehab. McClintock gave Chamoun a summary of his earlier conversation with Chehab, and indicated that Chehab was under strong pressure to compel Chamoun to leave before September 23. McClintock suggested that Chamoun might best serve the country by heading a Lebanese delegation to the United Nations where the question of an international guarantee of Lebanon’s independence might be debated. McClintock noted that, to his surprise, Chamoun responded that he considered the suggestion a good one, provided that the representation of the participating states was at the chief of state level. (Ibid., 783A.00/7–3158; included in the microfiche supplement)

245. Editorial Note 245. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on July 31 on significant world developments affecting United States security, Allen Dulles offered the following assessment of developments in Lebanon and Jordan: “The Director of Central Intelligence has said the Parliament of Lebanon had held a meeting and elected General Chehab as President of Lebanon. Two ballots were required. On the first, Chehab did not receive the required two-thirds majority; on the second, which did not require a two-thirds majority, he received the votes of 48 of the 56 Deputies present. Ten Deputies had been absent, including the Prime Minister, who had been out of his head since the attempt to assassinate him, and would probably resign soon.

“The President asked whether the Prime Minister had been shell-shocked during the attack on him. Mr. Dulles replied that the Prime Minister had not been physically harmed, but that he had received a terrific mental shock.

“Continuing, Mr. Dulles said the election of General Chehab was probably the most favorable result under the complicated circumstances existing in Lebanon, particularly since the opposition had voted for Chehab. However, the election had not settled all the affairs of Lebanon. Chehab had not shown much decisiveness in the last few days. This might be due to a natural indecisiveness in the face of a crisis; or it might have been a deliberately clever play of the cards, designed to secure greater support in the election. Some time back, Chehab had been Nasser’s candidate. Accordingly, we would expect closer ties between Lebanon and the UAR. Chehab might not hold office long. As a result of his election, the immediate crisis would probably subside, fighting would cease in most of the country, and Lebanon would get back on its feet economically.

“Mr. Dulles then noted that the situation in Jordan remained acute. It was hard to see how the regime could survive if and when U.K. forces retired from the country. The withdrawal of U.K. troops would probably be the signal for the collapse of the King, who does not enjoy sufficiently popular or Army support to remain in power when not held up by U.K. forces.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 374th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Boggs on August 1; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

At the same meeting, the Council engaged in an extensive discussion of general policy problems relating to the Middle East. The record of this discussion is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

246. Letter From Secretary of State Dulles to Prime Minister Macmillan 246. Letter From Secretary of State Dulles to Prime Minister Macmillan1

Washington, August 1, 1958.

Dear Harold: Immediately upon my return to Washington I asked my staff to examine the supply problem of British forces in Amman, as outlined in your letter of July 27 and its attached note.2 They were also directed to address themselves to the similar memorandum3 that Marshal Dickson gave Mr. Barbour at the time we were discussing this problem on July 27.

A memorandum on this subject has been prepared and a copy is attached.4 This memorandum, I believe, presents a better picture than I had anticipated. I am particularly glad to note that you have been able to send two ships through the Canal and that we have been able to airlift such a large quantity of supplies to Amman. The fact that one of your ships appears to be a commercial vessel is particularly good news for it is in line with the President’s view expressed in his message of July 235 that it is preferable to use commercial vessels as much as possible in that area.

The only point that has been left open is the request that we continue a small airlift of one or two sorties a day from Cyprus to Amman after the major airlift draws to an end around August 6. Our military are reluctant to undertake such a general commitment and I am concerned over the Israeli clearance problem. Up to now the Israelis certainly have been most helpful, but you will recall that it was only with considerable difficulty that I was able to get the clearance “for a few days”. Ben Gurion is, moreover, under considerable pressure on the question of overflight clearances and I do not see how we can guarantee the continuance of this airlift. We of course would reexamine the matter should the situation make it imperative to do so.

I also note that there is some feeling here that our assistance in this area should be coordinated at one point. An informal working committee that has been established with your Embassy in Washington and which meets once a day to handle the POL problem for Jordan seems to have done an excellent job. I would suggest that this ad hoc group extend its work to include these other matters relating to our assistance in supplying your troops in Amman.6

Faithfully yours,

Foster7

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–258. Top Secret. Drafted in C by G.M. Godley and cleared by Frederick W. Jandrey in EUR, Berry in NEA, Dillon, Dulles, and in Defense by General Picher, Captain Costello, and Irwin. Transmitted to London in telegram 1398, August 2, for delivery to the Prime Minister. Telegram 1398, which is the source text, was repeated to Amman and to Beirut for Murphy.

2 See footnote 2, Document 237.

3 Attached to a memorandum of conversation between Dickson and Barbour on July 27. Dickson’s memorandum, like the note attached to Macmillan’s letter, laid out the ways in which the United States might provide “urgently needed” assistance in the maintenance of U.K. forces in Jordan. (Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1061; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 The text of this memorandum is ibid. The memorandum, prepared in the Department of State, addressed the requests for support in supplying the British troops in Jordan and concluded that airlift support should continue as authorized by Israel until August 6, after which the British could sustain their forces by sea from Cyprus through the Suez Canal to Aqaba. Since the British had already demonstrated the capability to transit the canal under British flag, there appeared to be no necessity to accede to the request for U.S. transport.

5 Document 222.

6 Dulles also addressed a letter to Macmillan on August 2, transmitted to London in telegram 1400, August 2, in which he responded to Macmillan’s letter of July 27 proposing joint U.S.–U.K. military planning for Middle Eastern contingencies. (See Document 237) Dulles concurred that it would be wise to “step up” joint military planning, and proposed to do so by developing further the liaison arrangements established in London with Admiral Holloway’s London-based staff. (Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204; included in the microfiche supplement)

7 Telegram 1398 bears this typed signature.

247. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 247. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, August 1, 1958—4 p.m.

891. During my call this afternoon on General Chehab, he said he informed President Chamoun this morning that his immediate program involved two fundamental objectives;

1. A new government must be formed forthwith. Parliament by its act yesterday had repudiated Prime Minister Sami Solh who had politically opposed Chehab’s election and in consequence, a new cabinet was necessary. He said that although Chamoun made no commitments and was preoccupied with finding a formula how to let Sami Bey out without loss of face, he had impression that Chamoun as a practical politician would agree to a change in government.

2. Next problem was the Basta. General could now no longer tolerate Basta continuing as a focus of infection. Revolution there should have to be eliminated by one means or another. However, he was hopeful insurrection could be terminated through negotiations. He said Saeb Salaam, self-styled “Commander-in-Chief”, had become “tres sage” and was seeking to have a talk with the General. Chehab hoped therefore revolution in all parts of country might speedily come to an end.

General again raised possibility of Chamoun “taking a trip” (vide paragraph 2 Embtel 869).2 I referred to Secretary’s press conference yesterday in which he had alluded to possibility of Lebanon and Jordan being represented at SC “summit” meeting August 12.3 I wondered if possibly President Chamoun might attend this meeting as head of state. At first Chehab was hesitant, saying Moslem element in country would be deeply suspicious of leaving it to Chamoun to discuss an international guarantee for Lebanon. However, upon reflection he said he thought it might be possible provided Chamoun were accompanied by representative Moslems as members of Lebanese delegation. It was clear General quickly saw possibilities of getting Chamoun out of the country in rapid course but with necessary political safeguards for his action in New York.

Reverting to question of declaration from US on withdrawal of US forces (Embtel 869), I observed to Chehab it was a fortunate coincidence that yesterday Secretary in his press conference had said “whatever our views may be, we would not stay in Lebanon after we had been asked to withdraw by duly constituted Government of Lebanon.” General said this was exactly what he had in mind and was very pleased at tenor of Secretary’s remarks. I left with him translation in French of pertinent excerpts and requested he have his staff give him resume of entire press conference4 from wireless file text.

Comment: I am much encouraged by change in General’s attitude during past few days. This is the first time in almost three months he has on his own initiative talked in a determined way on eliminating insurrection from the Basta. He is also warming to his new responsibilities. In particular, he is heartened by a new vigor and pride in all ranks of Lebanese Army which he said with glowing eyes “is now the old army as it used to be.” With his increasing confidence and assurance of unified support from armed forces, I have feeling Chehab will bring an end to insurrection quickly.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Document 244.

3 For the transcript, see Department of State Bulletin, August 18, 1958, p. 269.

4 For the transcript, see ibid., pp. 265–272.

248. Editorial Note 248. Editorial Note

On August 1, President Eisenhower replied to Chairman Khrushchev’s July 28 letter. Again, he took exception to the premises underlying Khrushchev’s characterization of the intervention of U.S. and British forces into Lebanon and Jordan as aggression. The intervention occurred, he argued, as a result of indirect aggression against small countries in the Middle East which had to turn to the United States and the United Kingdom for support to preserve their independence. To discuss this problem, Eisenhower indicated that he was prepared to participate in a heads of government meeting of the members of the Security Council. He proposed August 12 as the date for the meeting and agreed that it could take place outside of the United States, but added that he could not agree to a meeting in Moscow in light of the mass demonstrations and violence which had occurred at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow on July 18. The text of this letter was transmitted to Moscow in telegram 214, July 31, for delivery on August 1. (Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/7–3158) The text was released in Washington on August 1 and is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, pages 577–579, and American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 1018–1019.

249. Telegram From the Embassy in Iraq to the Department of State 249. Telegram From the Embassy in Iraq to the Department of State1

Baghdad, August 2, 1958—6 p.m.

581. From Murphy. On my return from Jordan and Israel I have read carefully the several Deptels regarding UN activity and plans in Lebanon.

First of all I would like to stress that in my opinion actually there is no “friction” between UNOGIL, the Embassy and Admiral Holloway’s command. To the contrary it seems to me there is an admirable cordiality and mutual desire to work together. Naturally the initial shock to UNOGIL’s staff of the sudden arrival of a large US fighting force required adjustments both in operations and attitudes. All parties concerned deserve credit for intelligent cooperation. McClintock, Holloway, Galo Plaza, General Bull and their associates and I have enjoyed many contacts, daily discussed mutual problems frankly and have been, I think, mutually helpful. I hope Lodge will emphasize this to Hammarskjold and Bunche.

UNOGIL, I believe, is puzzled as to the future. Sometimes in this kind of situation there may be a tendency to develop unconsciously a vested interest, to institutionalize.

My own preliminary thinking, for what it is worth, would be in the direction of reduction rather than an increase in the personnel of UNOGIL.

My reasons are: (1) Belief that the new Lebanese Government will hope to develop its own control of the situation. There is certainly a fair prospect of its success. Newly elected President Chehab, I am sure, is determined to achieve control. If he succeeds, a large UN establishment in Lebanon would not only be unnecessary but unwelcome and controversial. The key to control, I think, is the ability of Chehab now to stimulate Lebanese armed forces and gendarmérie to act and to bring about a reconciliation of elements which will reduce opposition to government control. Lebanon control of its own destiny obviously should be promoted if it offers reasonable hope of success.

(2) Lebanon is flooded with clandestine small arms and explosives. It continues afflicted by terrorists. This situation has arisen from both domestic and foreign causes. Its correction, I am convinced, can be best effected by GOL. Pernicious foreign interference can be reduced and eventually eliminated by determined GOL action coupled with a national union type of reconciliation. From my talks with principal opposition leaders I am convinced they intend to cooperate with Chehab. Already this morning there is news that Druze leader Jumblatt is requiring his followers to turn in their arms at Mouktara.

With development of cooperation of opposition leaders, effective police action, a system of rewards and penalties to suppress terrorism and collect arms and explosives, the reasons for a large UN establishment would begin to disappear. Clandestine and foreign radio agitation would be reduced. I think we should lend encouragement to GOL, giving it to understand that it has the primary responsibility to establish law and order. Such policy, I believe, will be far more palatable to the Lebanese. Proposal to establish a large UN force in itself is a declaration of lack of confidence in Lebanon’s ability to bear its proper responsibility. Chehab, I am sure, would like a chance to demonstrate ability to cope with the problem. With temporary presence here powerful US military force, we can encourage and support him to do so. Such support and encouragement are especially important in the initial stage until the authority of GOL in the country is reestablished. The beginning is the critical period. After that, Chehab’s authority will be more easily accepted by the disparate elements making up this complex little country.

So I come to the conclusion that with any luck it may be possible in the near future to not only withdraw US forces gradually but to avoid a heavy UN build-up. I am confident GOL would not desire presence of a more or less permanent and large UN contingent any more than it would wish indefinite continuance in Lebanon of US military forces.

I believe that Holloway and McClintock substantially share foregoing views. On return to Beirut and before departure I would like to supplement this with additional comment relating to form of guarantee of Lebanese independence and integrity.

Gallman

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–258. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Beirut and USUN.

250. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, August 3, 1958, 10 a.m. 250. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, August 3, 1958, 10 a.m.1

Washington, August 3, 1958, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

US Attitude toward Passage of UK Troops through the Suez Canal to Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

Lord Hood, Minister, British Embassy

The Secretary

C—Mr. Reinhardt

NEA—Mr. Rountree

H—Mr. Macomber

NE—Mr. Rockwell

Lord Hood called under instructions to discuss the continuing requirement for the build-up and supplying of the UK forces in Jordan. He said that in the light of the Israeli refusal to permit overflights to continue,2 the UK would have to send men and supplies into Jordan via the Suez Canal.

It was suggested to Lord Hood that if this were done it would be less provocative if the troops could transit the Canal in commercial vessels rather than in warships.

Lord Hood asked whether he could inform the Foreign Office that the US would support the UK if the Egyptians prevented that passage of UK troops through the Canal bound for Jordan. The Secretary replied that this was a most important question which could not be decided quickly during the course of a casual Sunday morning’s conversation. In a situation such as Lord Hood described, we would be getting awfully close to war. The Secretary would think about the matter during his trip to Brazil.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786B.54/8–358. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Secretary’s residence on Sunday morning.

2 See infra.

251. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, August 3, 1958, 3 p.m. 251. Memorandum of a Conversation, Washington, August 3, 1958, 3 p.m.1

Washington, August 3, 1958, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Israeli Decision to Request US to Cease Overflights of Israel

PARTICIPANTS

Mr. Abba Eban, Israeli Ambassador

Mr. Yaacov Herzog, Israeli Minister

The Secretary

C—Mr. Reinhardt

NEA—Mr. Rountree

NE—Mr. Rockwell

Ambassador Eban and Mr. Herzog called at the Secretary’s request. The Secretary spoke strongly to them of the President’s and his shock upon learning that as soon as Israel received a Soviet protest concerning the US and UK overflights of Israel to Jordan, Israel was preparing to acquiesce to the Soviet request that the flights be stopped.2 The Secretary said that it was particularly shocking that Israel would do this without any consultation with the US. We had believed that Israel fully agreed with the US and UK purpose in Lebanon and Jordan of showing the Soviets and Nasser there was a point beyond which they could not go. If Israel had now changed its mind, we would like to know. There were wide political implications in giving the USSR a sense of power in the Middle East by such subservient actions as Israel seemed prepared to take.3

Ambassador Eban said that Israel was deeply concerned over the malevolent power of the Soviet Union which could destroy Israel in five minutes. The Prime Minister’s decision was based on the belief that the additional British request for overflight permission involved the sending of additional troops into Jordan which were an added convenience but not crucial for the support of the British operation. Israel felt that by now the British should have been able to make other arrangements to get these forces into Jordan. Israel lacked a formal security guarantee from the US and felt itself in a most poignant position.

The Secretary stated that the Eisenhower Doctrine made clear that the US would come to the support of Israel should it be attacked by a Communist power. For future guidance we wanted to know whether Israel felt so menaced by the USSR that it would do whatever the Soviet Union requested.

The Ambassador said he would at once transmit the Secretary’s important observations to his government. Israeli general fortitude could not be questioned, he thought. The Secretary said he was sorry he had had to speak so bluntly, but important issues were at stake.4

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Secretary’s residence on Sunday afternoon. A longer version of the conversation was transmitted to Tel Aviv in telegram 111, August 3. (Ibid., Central Files, 785.00/8–558; included in the microfiche supplement)

2 In telegram 137 from Tel Aviv, August 2, the Embassy in Tel Aviv reported that the Foreign Ministry had just delivered an urgent message from Prime Minister Ben Gurion to the effect that overflights of Israel by U.S. planes must stop immediately. The Foreign Ministry indicated that the same démarche was being made to the British Embassy. When Ambassador Lawson asked the basis of this urgent request, the Assistant Director General of the Foreign Ministry explained that Ben Gurion had been on the point of making the request because of political pressure when he received a Soviet protest note concerning the overflights. The Prime Minister felt that he could no longer submit the Israeli people to the risks involved in the overflights. (Department of State, 785.00/8–258; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Dulles had discussed the Israeli decision to halt the overflights with Eisenhower that morning. “I said that the broad implications of this were perhaps more serious than the immediate impact on UK forces in Jordan, although the latter was important. I noted that this might require the UK to send reinforcements via the Suez Canal, and that this in turn might raise serious problems.” (Memorandum of conversation with the President, August 3; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, Meetings with the President)

4 On August 5, the Israeli Government reversed itself and authorized the resumption of the U.S. airlift to Jordan. Israel asked only that the United States initiate consultations to find an agreed arrangement to bring the flights to an early conclusion. Ambassador Eban stressed, in conveying this message to the Department, that Prime Minister Ben Gurion did not want to leave the impression that Israel had bowed to Soviet pressure. Israel had not answered the Soviet note, and when it did, would reject the contention that U.S.–U.K. action in Lebanon and Jordan, and Israel’s cooperation with the overflights, were aggressive. (Telegram 119 to Tel Aviv, August 5; Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–558; included in the microfiche supplement)

252. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 252. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, August 3, 1958—5 p.m.

397. Embtel 272.2 Inform King and Prime Minister we have been giving careful consideration to HKJ proposal for financing two new brigades. As King and Rifai know we continue our firm support for Jordan. We believe however we will be in better position reach decision regarding these brigades when we know results of deliberations of proposed high level SC meeting on ME. If this meeting takes place the security of all states in ME, and especially Jordan and Lebanon, against indirect aggression will be a principal topic of discussion and it is US intention to seek in SC measures and arrangements designed to safeguard ME states against this threat. SC deliberations may thus have important implications for future security of ME states and accordingly we believe we should hold final decision on request for two additional brigades in abeyance pending results SC meeting.

You should inform King and Rifai that we do not agree that BP “finished” as northern tier defense arrangement. On the contrary, during London BP meeting US strengthened its relationship with northern tier countries and intends increase its support of the defense of these nations. We furthermore doubt that several of countries mentioned by Rifai would be willing join suggested organization. Accordingly while we very much appreciate receiving King’s suggestion it is our view it would not be desirable to seek new regional defense organization at this time.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5/8–358. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell, Rountree, and Dulles.

2 Document 233.

253. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 253. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 4, 1958—5 p.m.

372. Re Deptel 3972 and Embtel 272.3 I have held off informing King Hussein/Prime Minister Rifai contents reference telegram since no reference made his second proposal calling for US/HKJ mutual defense treaty, establishment MAAG/Jordan which I am certain he will inquire about. If it is Department’s intention hold in abeyance decision this matter pending outcome Security Council meeting Middle East as in case creation two new brigades I am concerned over depressing effect it likely have on Hussein at time he already feels USG has not been as responsive as he had hoped Jordan security needs.

Increasing talk among both Jordanian/foreign communities to effect Hussein position becoming untenable for long pull, might be better if he left scene quietly after making arrangement transfer power provisional junta rather than hazard widespread civil strife brought on by frustration people at Jordan’s economic/political encirclement by hostile states abetted by Nasser agents infiltrated from Syria.

I am convinced that unless it is our intention build Jordan into Middle East freedom fortress capable acting as base operations, designed undermine, bring down pro-Nasser governments adjacent states to be followed by creation free Arab federation it would be better permit Jordan make adjustment political/economic realities its present future position.

Country team opinion it is still not too late perform holding operation Jordan providing USG willing commit necessary money, equipment, technical know-how do job. Any such undertaking will be costly running possibly as high as $100 million annually, [2 lines of source text not declassified]. To justify expenditure incidental fortress concept Jordan’s potential as advanced base, wide-range paramilitary operations must be fully utilized; otherwise it will serve no useful purpose achievement US national objectives.4

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5/8–458. Top Secret; Niact.

2 Supra.

3 Document 233.

4 The Department responded on August 5, in telegram 423 to Amman, that the considerations which led to a determination to defer a decision on the two additional brigades until after the pending Security Council meeting on the Middle East also applied to the decision on the U.S.–Jordan mutual defense treaty and the establishment of a MAAG for Jordan. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5/8–458; included in the microfiche supplement)

254. Editorial Note 254. Editorial Note

On August 5, Chairman Khrushchev addressed the final letter to President Eisenhower in the series of exchanges which began with Khrushchev’s letter of July 19 proposing a five-power summit conference to discuss the Middle East. In his August 5 letter, which was a response to the August 1 letter from Eisenhower, Khrushchev repeated his arguments concerning the responsibility of the United States and the United Kingdom for the crisis in the Middle East, but switched the thrust of his proposal to a call for an emergency session of the U.N. General Assembly to discuss “the question of the withdrawal of troops of the USA from Lebanon and troops of Great Britain from Jordan.” Khrushchev stated that the Security Council had become subservient to the United States and did not represent a proper forum for such a discussion. For the larger questions of war and peace, he proposed that preparations begin for a separate summit conference of the great powers to “facilitate the creation of trust and mutual understanding between states and aid in a more rapid thawing of the ice of ’the cold war’.” Similar letters were addressed on the same day to British Prime Minister Macmillan and French President De Gaulle.

The text of the letter to Eisenhower was conveyed to the Embassy in Moscow on August 5 and was transmitted to Washington in telegram 336, August 5. (Department of State, Central Files, 396.1/8–558) Copies of the three letters were sent to the U.N. Secretary-General and were circulated to the members of the Security Council on August 5 as U.N. doc. S/4079. The full text of the letter to Eisenhower is printed in Department of State Bulletin, September 1, 1958, pages 342–346, and excerpts are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 1019–1021.

Khrushchev’s proposal was received in Washington as an opportunity to seize the initiative on the issue in the General Assembly. Assistant Secretary of State Wilcox recommended in this vein to Acting Secretary of State Herter shortly after Khrushchev’s letter was received. (Memorandum from Wilcox to Herter, August 5; Department of State, IO Files: Lot 65 D 30, Special Meeting—1958) Lodge concurred from New York, and proposed that the United States seize the initiative at the outset of the emergency session by introducing a resolution which would contain a positive proposal to meet the constructive aspects of Arab nationalism. (Telegram 218 from USUN, August 5, ibid., Central Files, 396.1/8–558) Herter called Dulles in Brazil at 6:40 p.m. to get his response. Dulles felt that, while the United States was not bound to accept the Soviet proposal, it should welcome a General Assembly meeting and not be afraid of it. (Eisenhower Library, Dulles Paper, General Telephone Conversations; included in the microfiche supplement)

Herter’s discussion that afternoon with British Minister Lord Hood revealed, however, that the British were concerned about a General Assembly session called to consider Jordan and asked the United States to delay in responding to the Soviet proposal. (Memorandum of conversation, August 5; Department of State, Central Files, 320/8–558) Herter raised the British concern in a meeting with Eisenhower shortly thereafter, but the recommendations from Dulles, Lodge, and Wilcox, and the public release of the letter by Khrushchev combined to dictate a quick public response if the United States was to seize the initiative at the United Nations. Eisenhower also felt that, since the United Kingdom had the right under its treaties to go back into Jordan, the British government would not be embarrassed in the General Assembly. (Memorandum of conference with the President, August 5; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries; included in the microfiche supplement)

Accordingly, Eisenhower responded to Khrushchev’s letter by releasing a statement at 7:30 p.m. on August 5 in which he welcomed Khrushchev’s agreement that the problems which had been under discussion in the exchange of correspondence should be placed before the United Nations. He expressed regret that Khrushchev had rejected discussion in the Security Council, but added that a meeting of the General Assembly for the purpose of the discussion was completely acceptable. He was instructing the United States Permanent Representative to the Security Council to request such a meeting. For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, page 1002.

Permanent Representatives Lodge and Sobolev each introduced resolutions in the Security Council on August 6 calling for an emergency special session of the General Assembly. (U.N. docs. S/4056/Rev. 1 and S/4057/Rev. 1, respectively) The Soviet resolution called for consideration of the question of the immediate withdrawal of U.S. troops from Lebanon and U.K. troops from Jordan, but the Security Council on August 7 adopted the United States resolution which simply made reference to the lack of unanimity among the permanent members of the Security Council, and called upon the General Assembly to assume responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security with respect to the questions at issue. (U.N. doc. S/4083; all of these resolutions are printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 1022–1023, 1027–1028) Lodge reported on August 6 that the British position with respect to a special session of the General Assembly “had come around completely,” and that the British now hoped that the General Assembly meeting might create conditions which would enable them to withdraw from Jordan. (Department of State, Central Files, 320/8–658)

255. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 255. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut August 5, 1958—6 p.m.

943. From Murphy. McClintock and I made farewell calls today on Malik, Chamoun and Chehab.

Malik had nothing constructive to offer except a memorandum written off the top of his head including such a choice item as: “I hope and trust that the intervention of the US in Lebanon will not amount to a victory of the rebellion and therefore of Nasserism and communism in Lebanon.” Text will go forward by pouch.2

Chamoun charged me with taking a personal message to President Eisenhower to express his heartfelt thanks for prompt action by US which had saved independence and integrity of Lebanon.

Chamoun indicated that for time being at least he and cabinet had decided there would be no change in government. Reason put forward by President was that any “caretaker” government which might replace that of Sami Solh would probably ask for immediate withdrawal of US forces. This would plunge country into anarchy with threat of renewed violence in civil war. It was a risk he said he could not take.

(Comment: Chehab said later he had explicitly told President yesterday that he did not intend at once to ask for US withdrawal. Our feeling is Chamoun is torn between two emotions: 1. His reluctance to cast adrift Sami Solh; and 2. His stark inability to find another Sunni Moslem politician who would accept Prime Ministership during next five weeks.)

My talk with Chehab was most satisfactory. In fact, I am increasingly impressed each time I see the General with his eminent common sense (cf. penultimate paragraph Embtel 2832)3 and with his position of being above considerations of ward politics which so embitter and embroil Lebanon political scene.

Chehab said he had sought in vain to secure agreement of Chamoun to appointment of an interim government. He confirmed impression given us by President that Chamoun now intends for both himself and Sami Bey to stick it out in office until September 23. Chehab made no bones of his misgiving that this decision by Chamoun would prolong insurrection. Although in general country was much quieter than before elections, the fanatic elements in such places as Tripoli and the Basta were outside control by moderate leaders including Rashid Karame and Saeb Salaam. Chehab took at face value Salaam’s assurance to me (Embtel 936)4 that insurrection would continue until Chamoun leaves.

As for withdrawal of US forces, Chehab said he had couched his statement to nation in terms deliberately designed to leave him elbow room in respect of time and manner in which our troops would be phased out. Chehab said he certainly did not wish American forces to depart until he had security situation well in hand and had made good progress in solving difficult problem of collecting arms with which Lebanon now saturated. Chehab likewise said he was convinced even leaders of Moslem opposition did not desire withdrawal of US forces until peace had been restored although, as a sop to their mob, they had to make public statements clamoring for our departure. I had certain impression from Chehab he will not want removal of our forces or make any form of request in that direction for some time to come. In response to my question he said he would be willing to concert with Adm. Holloway on a possible phased reduction in our troop strength.

Queried as to his attitude on UN observers, Chehab said he thought they might have a practical role to play, particularly in assuaging fears of Christian element when US troops begin reembarkation. He thought UN observer force might usefully stay on a while longer after period of US withdrawal. He seemed to have no precise thought one way or another on possible build-up of UN observer strength.

Queried as to nature of government he would seek to form after taking office, Chehab said he wanted an inconspicuous government made up of people truly devoted to trying to heal wounds and restore national unity. He made a quiet point in describing the characteristics he sought in a new Foreign Minister being a man who would not only understand the Arab world and relations with the occident but who would also have roots at home and understand his own people.

Chehab was explicit in his thanks of US intervention both military and political. He was kind enough to say that without my efforts here elections would not have taken place and although he expressed regret he was the man chosen, he left no doubt in our minds that he intended to do his duty and to carry out that duty in his own way.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–558. Secret. Repeated to Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Not found.

3 The reference is in error and has not been further identified.

4 Telegram 936 from Beirut, August 5, reported on Murphy’s meeting on August 4 with opposition leader Saeb Salaam. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–558; included in the microfiche supplement)

256. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 256. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 6, 1958—7 p.m.

404. Re Deptel 423,2 Embtel 272.3 Conveyed substance reference telegram Hussein/RIFAI. Took occasion leave copy Secretary Dulles remarks American Embassy Rio de Janeiro re Jordan/Lebanon which gratefully received, deeply appreciated King/RIFAI.

Prime Minister Rifai at King’s direction made following points re problem US military aid Jordan: (A) While reasons delay our reply proposal understood/appreciated by both King/RIFAI unfortunately they cannot transmit their assurance/confidence in USG to Jordan people in absence any tangible evidence/Promise military support.

(B) Rifai in new role HKJ Defense Minister intends participate actively all defense matters including operations as well formulation policies/programs.

(C) [181/2 lines of source text not declassified] Rifai emphasized urgent need constructive action by US demonstrate off-repeated statements US will stand by Jordan side not merely empty promises. He warned failure US act promptly provide massive military aid sufficient insure expansion Jordan armed forces to point foreign troops no longer required would mean not only loss of Jordan to free world but entire Middle East as well.

(D) Rifai again brought up question F–86 jet aircraft formerly destined Iraq. He asked US again give serious consideration their prompt delivery Jordan. I pointed out HKJ lacked trained pilots as well maintenance service/facilities. He replied we have 20 pilots already, US can train others in Pakistan or States “but give us those planes.” I commented jet aircraft normally not considered internal security equipment and in view fact Jordan frontiers already guaranteed against external aggression by present US land/sea/air power in area difficult understand urgent need jets. [41/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Comment: My opinion Hussein/RIFAI desperately need some tangible evidence demonstrate Jordan people US willing/able champion Jordan. This particularly true in view our recent recognition new government government Iraq, its acceptance by UN and fear upcoming UN General Assembly meeting will produce little favorable Jordan might even result UN demand British withdrawal troops. [91/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–658. Top Secret; Niact.

2 See footnote 4, Document 253.

3 Document 233.

257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt 257. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Egypt1

Washington, August 6, 1958—5:13 p.m.

436. For Murphy. We understand your appointment with Nasser has been postponed and accordingly hope these instructions will reach you in time enable you raise with Nasser in general terms situation of Jordan. In your discretion, you might discuss this matter with him in context of importance for Jordan and from viewpoint security ME of preventing further deterioration in Jordanian situation and explosion there which might shatter present uneasy truce in Palestine area. You could say that whatever may be differences between UAR and Jordan, or between US and UAR regarding Jordan, all parties genuinely interested in security ME would seem have real interest in seeing that security in these critical times is not further endangered by developments arising out of Jordanian situation. People of Jordan and refugees in that country should not suffer hardships because of differences of views between governments, and such measures as closing of borders and interruption normal travel and commercial arrangements are likely lead to creation of atmosphere in Jordan which may produce the explosion which we believe it so desirable avoid.

We realize Jordan has severed relations with UAR and has applied restrictions on entry into Jordan. We would be prepared urge upon Jordan Government the relaxation of these restrictions to degree believed consonant with security of Jordan, and would hope that UAR could see its way clear permitting relaxation of restrictions applied from its side with view to reducing to greatest extent possible interference in normal commercial interchange between Jordan and its neighbors and reducing harmful repercussions of present situation in lives of citizens of Jordan and refugees located there.

Our approach on this matter arises not only from our concern over effects within Jordan of violence resulting from continuation of present situation, but also from our belief that such a development could not be confined to Jordan itself. It seems to us that maintenance of stability in Jordan is essential to continuation of present relative calm in Arab-Israel situation which precarious though it may be, has not involved large-scale hostilities. We believe it in interests of everybody concerned that necessary steps be taken to prevent creation of a situation which might result in such hostilities. Realize foregoing line might give Nasser opening for attack and perhaps would be misused by him publicly. You and Ambassador Hare are best judges as whether subject should be broached at this juncture.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–658. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree. Also sent to Amman, Tel Aviv, and Damascus.

258. Editorial Note 258. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on August 7 on significant world developments affecting United States security, Allen Dulles offered the following assessment of developments in Lebanon and Jordan: “Mr. Dulles reported that the Lebanese rebels were pushing toward a victory involving withdrawal of U.S. forces and the exile of the President-elect. Guerrilla activity, but no serious fighting, was taking place. Chamoun still intended to serve out his term, but might change his mind in exchange for an important post abroad. General Chehab appeared relaxed, and was not pressing for withdrawal of U.S. forces.

“The situation in Jordan had not improved, Mr. Dulles reported. Syria had closed its frontier, cutting Jordan off from land contact with the outside world, a development which could have serious effects in the future. At present, the supply situation was somewhat easier— although POL remained close—because Israel had relaxed its opposition to overflights. The financial situation in Jordan was so bad that the money-changers would take dollars only at a discount. There was growing talk in Jordan that the King should abdicate. The British took a grim view of the situation, and believed that Jordan’s fate would be decided in the next thirty days.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 375th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Boggs on August 8; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

259. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 259. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut August 7, 1958—11 p.m.

993. Joint message Admiral Holloway and Ambassador. Pass JCS and DOD. We called this afternoon on General Chehab to discuss his view on a possible symbolic withdrawal of some element of US forces from Lebanon. It seemed to us this would have political advantages both from limited Lebanese point of view and from the aspects of US policy. From aspect of Lebanese political situation, opposition forces would find themselves undercut since they had so vigorously clamored for US withdrawal and would now find that US by voluntary agreement with Lebanese Government and President-elect was in fact initiating such a withdrawal.

From wider aspect of US policy objectives, it seemed to us there would be advantages if a symbolic re-embarkation commenced prior to convening of special session UNGA. It would likewise go far to disarm criticism of US by Russian and Cairo Radios over alleged “intervention”.

General Chehab was quick to see these advantages and said he agreed with idea in principle. However (so far has he come from his original attitude toward landing of US forces), he very much hoped we would not make more than a token withdrawal but would leave bulk of our forces intact in Lebanon until peace and security of country had been assured. General also said he could use concept of a token withdrawal as a bargaining point with opposition. He did not want “to give them this free.” General said he had some hope of being able to form interim government of non-political figures, and evacuation of our forces might be used, possibility as bargaining point in arranging for such a government. However in general, Chehab concurred in advantages of a partial redeployment provided our main strength remained here.

Accordingly, we recommend that discretionary authority grant be given CINCSPECOMME to initiate withdrawal of at least one and possibly two Marine battalions if this is concurred in by General Chehab. We are firmly of belief that a spectacular re-embarkation of one battalion across the beaches with attendant publicity if undertaken soon would have beneficial political impact both here and abroad. We have a date to meet General Chehab 1100 hours Monday 11 August to get his final review of situation and recommendation. If DOD and State concur, we would propose to commence redeployment one battalion early next week.

Other points discussed with Chehab may be summarized briefly: 1. Security situation: Although there were many individual acts of banditry, kidnapping and arson as well as a certain amount of internecine village fighting, Chehab said he would on the whole discern a distinct improvement in internal security. In fact he said he had concluded that situation had improved at least 50 percent in last few days. Much of this development he attributed to desire of the opposition to end insurrection and return to normal life. Through negotiation with various leaders (he named Jumblat, Saeb Salaam and Rashid Karame), he felt there was a general trend toward a return to peaceful conditions. By way of example he cited fact that yesterday at his request Rashid Karame had succeeded in reopening coastal road from Tripoli to the frontier. He added that Jumblat was sending a representative to Damascus to request Syria to keep hands off Lebanon and for UAR to cease any further intervention.

2. Safety of Americans: I told General I was currently reviewing security situation in view of my responsibilities toward Americans resident in Lebanon. He said he would not wish to give an outright estimate because since Chamoun had not indicated any intention of leaving country while still retaining his title as President, he could give no assurance that there would not be a recurrence of terrorism. He could see his way more clearly on a final security estimate within ten days.

We then discussed need for liberty for US forces aship and ashore. Admiral Holloway indicated joint staff planning between Lebanon and US forces had come up with an agreed plan for liberty within strictly delimited area of Beirut which would be under full joint US-Lebanese military police patrol at all times. Chehab said he accepted this in principle but wished merely to assure himself that zones agreed upon were in fact of a character as to prevent acts of provocation against our people on liberty. We shall go ahead in principle with initiating liberty on these terms tomorrow.

We likewise raised question of curfew and made suggestion that as security situation improved stores in Beirut increasingly opened, and idea of shore leave took hold, it might be possible to commence a gradual lifting of curfew restrictions. I suggested, for example, possibility of making curfew hours less onerous than at present. General said he thought this a good idea and made a note of it.

3. Censorship: I told General that although any nation had a complete right to censor news, as a good friend of Lebanon all I could say was that present censorship both military and civilian was building up a vast store of ill will, particularly in the very numerous and influential foreign press corps in Beirut. General took another note, and I plan to follow this further with Chamoun and Malik.

4. Admiral Holloway made a pleasant reference to highly effective services of Colonel Simon, Liaison Officer with General Admams, who is fourth senior ranking officer Lebanese Army, a recent graduate of Command Staff School Leavenworth and an officer who might possibly reach supreme command of Lebanese Armed Forces. Chehab fully reciprocated Holloway’s estimate of Simon’s qualities.

It is interesting that Simon has informed Admiral Holloway and Admiral there a universal feeling in higher echelons of the Lebanese army and public of friendliness toward US. Colonel added reservation that too obvious an association with UK (which is not held in equal high esteem) might seriously jeopardize US position.

Summary: We feel distinct progress is being made with General Chehab as a general and as a president-elect. Would appreciate prompt instructions on concept of a token or phased withdrawal of US forces. Holloway will report separately in more detail on this tonight.2

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–758. Secret; Priority.

2 In CINCSPECOMME telegram 0724 to CNO, August 7, Holloway outlined plans for an initial withdrawal of one battalion of the Marine landing force, as well as for the subsequent phased withdrawal of the entire U.S. force in Lebanon. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files; included in the microfiche supplement)

260. Telegram From the Embassy in Ethiopia to the Department of State 260. Telegram From the Embassy in Ethiopia to the Department of State1

Addis Ababa, August 8, 1958—3 p.m.

165. Cairo for Hare from Murphy. After a curious day of waiting August 6 for Nasser to make up his mind we received word at 7:30 p.m. that he would receive Hare and me at Nasser’s residence at 9 p.m. Reasons for delay were explained in my message from Cairo2 and related to Nasser perturbation when he was informed by somebody at 7 a.m. August 6 regarding Lodge’s procedural reference to July 18 US resolution on Lebanese complaint plus Secretary’s statement at Rio.3 We were informed by Mustapha Amin and Ali Sabri that Nasser’s immediate reaction was that he was to be made the whipping boy in what was essentially conflict between US and USSR. He was indignant and uneasy. Hare and I decided to sit out convinced that by evening realities would become apparent to Nasser. This proved to be the case.

At beginning of conversation Nasser was ill at ease and I thought uncomfortable because of his hasty morning reaction. There was a brief reference to “such things will happen” which we shrugged off as unimportant with a tactful suggestion we were happy our interpretation conveyed to him earlier proved correct. We also referred to constructive and friendly attitude toward ME problems manifest in President Eisenhower’s press conference yesterday.4 Hare read excerpts to which Nasser lent attentive and I think appreciative ear.

Conversation opened on rather heavy note when replying to our words of thanks for interrupting his vacation plans on our account Nasser stuffily said always glad to see anyone who came with understanding of dignity, equality, etc. He was even stuffier when he added that after Lodge’s reference to July 18 resolution he had asked himself whether any useful purpose would be served by talking to me in friendly fashion while USG was preparing to attack him in SC.

I said my visit to Cairo was simply another bit of evidence of desire of President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles to work cooperatively for solution of ME problems which will not only bring peace and stability but better living conditions and understanding of US purposes to the area. We welcome his views and ideas. Nasser pointed out Hare’s past efforts to convince him regarding peace and stability which had he said become stock words.

I asked whether he was interested in my conversations in Lebanon and other points visited. He seemed eager to hear about them and visibly relaxed when he felt he was receiving confidential fill in. (Mustapha Amin later said Nasser had in mind confining to courtesy call but that our forthcoming approach changed his mind.)

Lebanon: I described situation as I saw it, giving reasons US military intervention with references to public explanation of President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles. I referred especially to latter’s July 31 statement re withdrawal US forces.5 Nasser inquired why US build-up in Lebanon continued. I said “well you are a military man and President Eisenhower has, you will agree, a fair amount of experience in that field. When he decided to respond to the urgent appeal of the friendly Lebanese Government for military intervention, he was obliged to plan it on an urgent basis and to make provision for all contingencies. President Eisenhower is not in the habit of conducting military failures.” Beyond Lebanon itself was the problem of possible reaction from other sources. At time of Suez we had heard many threats of Soviet “volunteers” etc. We did not pretend to know what Soviet reaction would be to this test. Soviet reaction thus far had been a revelation to me personally and I thought Nasser also might have learned something from the operation. (He agreed with a smile that he had.) I said I was sure that he understood how a military pipeline operated once an operation had commenced, and the extent of the logistic features. Much equipment, administrative, medical items now necessity would continue to flow even after the primary purpose of the operation had been achieved as I firmly believed they had been in present case. He should relieve his mind if he entertained anxieties which Cairo press seemed to manifest over “aggressive” US intentions in ME. The foregoing seemed to be well received and led to a detailed discussion of Lebanon. Nasser demonstrated he fully acquainted with details of Lebanon political situation and personalities.

He declared UAR fully supports Lebanon independence and integrity. He personally convinced it in his best interest for Lebanon remain independent. His grievance rested in use of Beirut as center for anti-Nasser activity and propaganda spearheaded by Chamoun. He volunteered opinion that Chamoun because of hostility he had generated on part many Arabs would be well advised to take long vacation outside Lebanon. Even the lives of Chamoun’s children might not be safe. He deplored this but said it was a fact.

For Chehab whom he does not know personally he expressed respect and even admiration. He recognized the complications of Lebanon political and social structure. He would cooperate and there should be no fear he said of evil UAR intentions. He preferred to see Lebanon independent but did not want it hostile to Cairo. He indicated exaggerated information re US build-up at Adana. Again I said we had a strong striking force there because we did not want any risk failure.

Nasser said frankly as a military man he just could not believe it earlier but was quite willing now to be convinced that US military intervention limited to Lebanon. He honestly believed he said we originally intended to attack Iraq. I asked him why he thought so and he shrugged his shoulders. He just could not believe we were interested only in Lebanon. I said while we had to be prepared for all contingencies once operation started, in my personal opinion last thing President Eisenhower desired was to have US forces scattered all over area in Iraq, Syria, etc. Flying last Sunday over the inhospitable wastelands which make up part of Iraq I was convinced of the wisdom of that point of view. He said he thought unless evacuation process started soon he feared danger of incidents involving US soldiers and feared we would blame him.

[Here follows discussion of Iraq.]

Jordan: This subject became the center of our talk. It recurred several times. I expressed concern over the fragility of present position; told Nasser something of my impressions during recent Amman visit; Hussein’s abhorrence of the Baghdad brutalities and his obvious dread of assassination; Hussein’s confidence in fidelity of his army; his statement he would not abdicate and his reference to temporary character of British troop presence; the acute political and economic problems; Israeli sensitivity. I expressed opinion if UAR intervention should occur Israel would attack and that would be situation US could not control. I said I thought Jordan at present represents febrile point in ME complex. I inquired whether he had any solution in mind which would relieve tensions in area. Did he foresee some form of international guarantee of Jordanian independence in which for example UAR could participate? Nasser became grave and reverted to subject several times thereafter. He declared we could be assured UAR and he especially were not promoting an uprising or disturbance in Jordan and did not intend to do so. Jordan is a liability and is not viable. He failed to see how Hussein could survive with over 90 percent of population opposed to regime and a most adverse economic situation. Nasser said he personally abhors assassination and is opposed to it as a political means. He understands Hussein’s natural repugnance. He attributed his differences with Hussein to latter’s mother who he said blames Nasser for overthrow monarchy in Egypt. Nasser said overthrow of Farouk is in itself best example how wrong Hussein may be in his confidence in fidelity of army. Plot against Farouk regime had existed for ten years in secrecy before it was executed. Same thing was true in Iraq where even Nuri Said’s military aide was involved. As suspicious as Nuri was even he was completely caught by surprise by the Baghdad coup. Thus he felt sorry for Hussein who was a nice young man in an impossible situation.

He said he really does not know the answer to my question what solution for Jordan would be best and promote relaxation of tensions. Anything might happen and he said he is fully aware of Ben Gurion’s attitude. Of course if Israel attacked UAR would counter attack. That could be very serious. The danger is a source of grave preoccupation. Yet he fails to see how an international guarantee can cure an internal situation. At same time Hussein incapable he thought of action to cure it. Obviously Hussein cannot recall Nabulsi who is still under house arrest although he learns that Hussein considering doing just that. Large numbers of officers and civilians are in prison for security reasons. Many others he said daily are fleeing into Syria. He complained of scurrilous Jordanian radio attacks on UAR and himself.

We finally left the subject with my suggestion that if he develops any helpful ideas for solution of Jordanian problem which affects his own security much more than ours we would be glad to hear from him. He seemed to take kindly to this and to be rather flattered by it.

[Here follows discussion of a variety of issues relating to the Middle East: Israel, Arab nationalism, collective security, arms, Soviet and U.K. involvement in the area, propaganda, Saudi Arabia, and Sudan.]

However, in final survey of situation Nasser noted that causes for US–UAR conflict might be in process reaction as result Iraqi revolution, prospective solution of Lebanese situation and hope for improvement UAR-Saudi relations, although Israeli problem of course remains and corruption in Jordan could have unpredictable consequences.

I came away also convinced effective US military intervention in Lebanon may exercise excellent effect on Nasser’s outlook and attitude.

Bliss

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/8–858. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo. Murphy traveled from Beirut to Cairo on August 6 and left Cairo for Addis Ababa on August 7. For his own account of the background to and meeting with Nasser, see Diplomat Among Warriors, pp. 498–506.

2 Telegram 427 from Cairo, August 6. (Department of State, Central Files, 110.13–MU/8–658)

3 For text of Lodge’s statement and the draft resolution of July 18, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 990–991; for text of Dulles’ address at Rio de Janeiro on August 6, see Department of State Bulletin, August 25, 1958, pp. 304–309.

4 For the transcript of President Eisenhower’s press conference on August 6, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, pp. 587–597.

5 At his press conference on July 31, Dulles was asked to discuss the conditions under which U.S. troops would be withdrawn from Lebanon. Dulles indicated that a number of factors would bear on that decision, but he stressed that “we would not remain in Lebanon after we had been asked to withdraw by the duly constituted Government of Lebanon.” For the transcript, see Department of State Bulletin, August 18, 1958, p. 271.

261. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1958, 11:30 a.m. 261. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood), Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1958, 11:30 a.m.1

Washington, August 8, 1958, 11:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Special General Assembly and Jordan

Special General Assembly—The Secretary told Lord Hood there was a possibility the President might go up to New York and make a general speech to set the tone of the meeting. Hammarskjold had suggested this and had also urged that no Heads of Government take part and that if the President appeared in New York, it be as head of state. The Secretary made clear that if the President should go to New York, it would not be as head of delegation and he would not participate in the debate. He said that the decision would in large measure depend on whether we found it possible to prepare the kind of speech that would justify the President’s appearance in New York.

The Secretary said that Gromyko had applied for a visa and that he would therefore probably go to New York and hoped that in the circumstances Selwyn Lloyd could come. The Secretary was not sure of what extent he would take part in the debate but there would be a great deal to do in lobbying with other delegations and some quick decisions might have to be taken.

Jordan—Lord Hood said his government was most grateful for the very effective action taken by the Secretary with respect to the Israeli Government. The revived airlift would succeed in effecting a much better supply position and he thought that for the future the question of overflights would only arise as an ad hoc matter for humananitarian or emergency reasons. He reported that a battalion of troops had been moved from Aden to Aqaba, which took care of the problem of reinforcement.

Lord Hood then said that from the British point of view the main objective in the Special General Assembly was to get authority for the Secretary General to take action in Jordan. It was their hope that a resolution providing for United Nations presence in that country, possibly calling for an enlarged UNTSO, would make possible release of some Jordanian troops from the frontier for internal security duties. This should provide a breathing space.

The Secretary thought there was strong reason for United Nations action in Jordan. The problem was part of the general Palestinian question for if the Armistice collapsed, the Israelis had indicated they would move in. The Secretary pointed to the problem of obtaining Lebanese and Jordanian agreement to some form of United Nations guaranteed special status. Lord Hood asked whether we were worried about the Israelis and whether they should be warned against taking any action. The Secretary replied he was not yet completely caught up since his return from Rio but that he saw some advantages in the existence of an Israeli threat. Lord Hood said that Mrs. Meir would be in London on Sunday to talk with the Foreign Secretary. The Israeli had already raised with the British Government the question of guarantees, more arms, etc., and the British Embassy would like to discuss this problem with officials of the Department. The Secretary observed that we had received a similar request from the Israelis. In this connection, he pointed out that the Russians would probably have a proposal on arms embargo which we would have to deal with.

Economic Proposals—There was a brief discussion of the possibility of advancing some proposal for economic development. The Secretary said this raised many problems. He thought this might be dealt with in a general way but doubted that we could have anything concrete in time for the special session of the General Assembly.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–858. Secret. Drafted by Reinhardt. Lord Hood was Chargé d’Affaires.

262. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 262. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, August 9, 1958—2 p.m.

1017. London for Murphy. Yesterday I visited Jumblat at latter’s urgent request. Meeting took place in the Chouf at a village not far from Barouk.

Druze rebel leader said opposition were disappointed at inability of General Chehab to persuade Chamoun to form an interim government as a necessary prerequisite to immediate pacification of Lebanon. An even greater stumbling block was continued presence in Beirut of President Chamoun.

Upon questioning it became clear that Jumblat is now prepared to make a deal whereby Chamoun might leave country in invitation by some friendly government or even on an official mission, e.g. to UN, but without necessity of resigning as has been opposition’s consistent and most strident claim. At the same time Chamoun would appoint a caretaker government to be agreed upon between himself, Chehab and opposition. If these conditions were fulfilled, Jumblat said he could persuade other opposition leaders such as Rashid Karame, Sabri Hamade and Saeb Salaam to go along and indicated Lebanon could promptly be pacified through efforts of caretaker government, General Chehab and opposition leadership.

I said I had been consistent throughout Lebanon insurrection in stating belief that principle should be adhered to of Lebanon’s Presidents fulfilling their constitutional terms of office. In consequence, we had always felt Chamoun should remain President until September 23. As to formation of caretaker government, this was a matter of Lebanon’s domestic politics. However, it seemed essential if any compromise were to be worked out that one should know identity of Ministers who would make up Cabinet successor to present government. Although principles, as Jumblat was first to acknowledge, were important, in a country like Lebanon personalities frequently came first. I was certain that both Chamoun and Chehab would have to know who would replace Sami Solh and company before President could be asked to consider a mission abroad.

I gave no encouragement to Jumblat’s suggestion and made it explicitly clear that although I was interested in listening to his proposals, US was not a go-between.

Comment: If Jumblat indeed speaks for opposition leadership, his suggestions mark a significant shift in opposition attitude. I believe Department should give serious consideration to possibility of extending an invitation to Chamoun for an informal visit to the US. With such an invitation it is highly possible President might indeed absent himself from Lebanon throughout brief remainder of his term. Since it would be Chamoun who would appoint caretaker Prime Minister, his face would be saved and there could be a deal negotiated between Chehab, incoming Prime Minister and opposition leaders for prompt pacification of the country.

Key to such a compromise is Chamoun. I should not wish to approach him even indirectly (i.e. through Chehab or some other Lebanese personality) without knowing Department’s views. If I may be so bold as to offer a suggestion, I should say that a friendly invitation from President Eisenhower for Chamoun to visit him at Gettysburg would be eagerly accepted.

It is fairly clear that if some such compromise is not found, Lebanon will continue its present hazardous course until September 23 and task of new government in re-establishing security and national unity will be made more difficult.2

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–958. Top Secret. Repeated to London.

2 McClintock expanded on this prediction in telegram 1077 from Beirut, August 12. He noted that the situation in Lebanon had grown worse on the domestic political front, despite the fact that Chehab had persuaded the opposition to curtail their insurrectionary activities. McClintock concluded that he was becoming persuaded that, unless Chamoun left the country in response to an invitation from abroad, the situation in Lebanon would continue to worsen with prospects for the success of the Chehab administration after September 24 becoming correspondingly more difficult. (Ibid., 783A.00/8–1258; included in the microfiche supplement)

263. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 263. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 9, 1958—7 p.m.

434. Rome for McSweeney. Met with Prime Minister Rifai order secure his views current situation in light persistent reports coup imminent. Following highlights our conversation: (A) Re upcoming GA meeting Rifai originally planned head HKJ delegation if other Prime Ministers attended. In view decision keep representation to Foreign Minister level he has designated his brother Monem Rifai, Jordanian Ambassador London (expected shortly be transferred Washington), lead Jordanian delegation composed: Maj. Gen Sadiq Shara, Deputy Chief Jordanian Army; Brig. Muhammad Saadi, Director Army Intelligence; Midhat Juma, Under Secretary Press, broadcasting and tourism; Shukri el-Muhta Di, Legal Advisor Prime Minister. Rifai said he is preparing strong chronological case history Nasser aggression/subversion against Jordan dating from April 1957. He plans elaborate display photographs, documents, transcript radio broadcasts be used support Jordan case before UN body. [91/2 lines of source text not declassified]

(B) King Hussein will make precedent shattering speech commemorating Seventh Anniversary his accession throne August 11. He plans launch all-out attack Nasser in “rough language which personally distasteful King but only one that rogue, thief, liar understands.” Hussein will warn UAR particularly Syria that those who play Nasser game may be destroyed even as they are now trying destroy Jordan.

(C) King Hussein was concerned over reports US plans early withdrawal troops Lebanon. He requested Rifai inform USG HKJ would voice strong opposition any such withdrawal until it felt sure situation stabilized not only Lebanon but throughout area. I invited Rifai’s attention to BBC broadcast which said HMG after consultation HKJ had approached UNSYG with proposal designed make guarantee Jordan’s independence/integrity a UN responsibility permit withdrawal British troops. Rifai said although he had not heard broadcast had been informed about it. As result called in British Ambassador Johnston, made following points clear to him: (1) HKJ had no confidence UN ability provide adequate physical protection Jordan against either external aggression and/or subversion.

(2) King Hussein would not tolerate UNEF type force made up contingents small nations completely lacking military power enforce decision against world power, i.e. Russia.

(3) Idea UNOGIL along lines used Lebanon absolutely unacceptable.

(4) Jordan only asks be given arms with which defend itself then it would be only too happy say goodby to British troops which as matter fact are so few in number they could not even withstand attack by Jordan army if it turns against it.

(5) Both Hussein/RIFAI would reject outright any concept Jordan should be made “ward of UN”.

(D) Inquired if there was any basis UP report HJK/HMG had signed treaty giving UK military bases Jordan exchange annual subsidy $45 million. Rifai nearly exploded, shouted this was fabrication lunatic mind probably UP reporter, said we both knew nobody but USG gives Jordan anything, others offer loans or empty promises.

(E) I said in view persistent rumors effect army coup and/or uprising among West Bank refugees imminent would appreciate his personal appraisal situation. Rifai replied no sense attempt minimize danger revolt fact Hussein Government in tight spot. Events over which HJK had no control contrived block almost every course of action. [181/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Comment: Rifai realizes GA meeting will provide rare opportunity Jordan place its case before world public. Therefore he has forged as good a plan as possible do job. I recommend we establish as close contact as possible with men like Maj. General Sadiq Shara and Ambassador Monem Rifai who will be only too willing to grasp friendly hand. Rifai expressed hope we would assist Jordan delegation as much as possible. [9 lines of source text not declassified]

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–958. Secret; Niact. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, Jidda, Karachi, Tehran, Tel Aviv, USUN, London, Paris, and Rome.

264. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 264. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, August 11, 1958—2 p.m.

1041. Joint message Admiral Holloway and Ambassador. Department pass JCS and DOD. We called this morning on both General Chehab and President Chamoun further to discuss question of a token withdrawal of US forces. We had in mind valuable comment set out Deptel 779.2

General Chehab said he had given considerable reflection to ideas put forth as indicated Embtel 993 and had discussed question of withdrawal with leaders of opposition. He had now come to mature conclusion that a token withdrawal would be to Lebanon’s advantage. It would for one thing help moderate leaders of opposition to bring their more obdurate followers under control. In particular, it would undercut Syrian and Egyptian hard core element in the Basta. Chehab also had indications that opposition were sending an emissary to Damascus and Cairo to make urgent request that UAR cease and desist from further indirect aggression against Lebanon. Given this situation, General thought retraction of a BLT would not only serve as a catalyst in bringing opposition to terms but would place UAR on the defensive. He said if after this evacuation of one battalion infiltration continues, even Lebanese opposition itself will begin to ask “who is occupying power?”

On timing General Chehab said he thought it important for retraction of a Marine BLT to take place before GA session on Wednesday. He pointed out that if we started promptly to move voluntarily after conferring with Lebanese authorities, Russians would not have had their say and in consequence no one could accuse us of leaving under threat from USSR or under pressure applied by UAR (Deptel 779).

Chehab thought it important that there be a unilateral communiqué from US side recalling statements by President Eisenhower and Secretary Dulles on temporary and emergency character of our troop intervention in Lebanon. Communiqué could then point out that US forces in Lebanon are presently in excess of local security requirements. Communiqué would add that Lebanese and US military authorities were agreed that there had been a gradual but steady improvement in international security situation. In consequence, withdrawal of a BLT to increase strategic mobile reserve in Sixth Fleet was a logical movement and would still leave in Lebanon US forces of such strength and firepower as to be fully adequate to requirements of their primary mission; assisting Lebanese Government to maintain integrity and independence of the Republic and to protect American lives and property.3

On security situation Chehab said that although instances of terrorism and banditry would continue for months to come, he was in general convinced that nation-wide the situation has materially improved. He cited calm in Tripoli which has persisted almost since arrival of US forces; absence of fighting in the Chouf; and diminution of incidents even in Beirut. However General admitted that center of insurrection is now Beirut and his measures of pacification both by negotiation and use of his armed forces would be addressed problem in the Basta.

We subsequently saw President Chamoun and went over elements of our conversation with Chehab. President concurred that US military resources in Lebanon are currently in excess of their task and said he would have no objection to withdrawal of a BLT this week. For President’s comments on UN situation, see subsequent telegram.4

Our next following telegram sets forth suggested language of a possible US communiqué to be issued either by President, Secretary of Defense or Secretary of State in Washington or, if Washington prefers, by Admiral Holloway as Commander-in-Chief.5

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–1158. Secret; Niact.

2 In telegram 779 to Beirut, August 10, the Department responded to the request from McClintock and Holloway for discretionary authority to organize a limited reduction of U.S. forces in Lebanon, outlined in telegram 993 from Beirut, August 7. (Document 259) The Department indicated that it had in mind the psychological value of such a reduction, but was “deeply concerned" to avoid the interpretation that by withdrawing troops the United States was giving way before threats from the USSR or under pressure applied by the UAR. This consideration, the Department noted, was particularly pertinent in the context of the special session of the U.N. General Assembly. The problem was receiving careful and urgent attention. “Regret unable provide discretionary authority you request, but will keep you fully advised.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–758; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Admiral Holloway sent a message to Admiral Burke on August 11 proposing to initiate the withdrawal of one of the Marine battalions from Lebanon on August 13. (Telegram 1645 from CINCSPECOMME to CNO, August 11; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 In telegram 1048 from Beirut, August 11, McClintock reported that he had discussed the special session of the General Assembly with Chamoun and Chehab. Chamoun felt strongly that Malik should lead the Lebanese delegation, and that Lebanon should maintain its original position with respect to intervention by the UAR. He also felt that the United Nations should not be allowed to dictate when the U.S. forces must leave Lebanon. Chehab noted that the opposition was violently opposed to Malik as a spokesman for Lebanon, and added that he was fearful that if Malik was named to head the Lebanese delegation, serious trouble would break out again in Lebanon. He conceded, however, that it might be possible to send a delegation including Malik and some opposition figures. (Department of State, Central Files, 320.5780/8–1158; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 Telegram 1044 from Lebanon, August 11. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–1158)

265. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 265. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1

London, August 11, 1958—3 p.m.

859. From Murphy. Upon my arrival in London Ambassador Whitney and I accompanied by Morris and Burdett proceeded immediately to Chequers for working tea followed by working dinner with Selwyn Lloyd. Lloyd had with him Ormsby-Gore, Hoyer Millar, Patrick Dean, William Hayter, Evelyn Shuckburgh, Michael Hadow and Denis Laskey. British representatives questioned me closely about my Middle East trip and I gave them full and frank account. In staff meeting atmosphere ideas were tossed out and examined. I have tried to indicate below trend of British thinking and matters over which they are particularly concerned. Lloyd and his advisers clearly are still in process of formulating their position and obviously most receptive to suggestions from us.

Lebanon—Lloyd stressed “it is desperately important" for US and UK to keep together on Lebanon and Jordan, not necessarily regarding type of solution but on timing. He said he was thinking of need to save Western face. We would look very foolish if six weeks after withdrawal US forces General Chehab chose to join UAR. Perhaps neutralization along Austrian lines would be good idea. In 1860 West intervened in Lebanon and many Lebanese especially Christians might feel much safer if there were some international arrangements now. International convention might be formulated to effect Lebanon would not join Western alliance of Baghdad Pact and also would refrain from joining any other grouping. This might be accomplished by treaty or through agreement of great powers and UAR. I said I thought this line not entirely foreign to thinking in some quarters in Lebanon. I apparently more optimistic than they re Chehab’s ability to bring about reconciliation and his determination maintain Lebanese independence. Lloyd said Nasser should be made to sign on dotted line while our troops are still in Lebanon and Jordan. (He repeated this several times.) Also we must think of Persian Gulf. Neutrality treaty might be good precedent for that area. Once Nasser had affixed his signature incentive for internal agitation to force Lebanon to join UAR would be largely removed. Hoyer Millar commented that Lebanese lacked guts to maintain neutrality on Swiss model. Therefore great powers should establish neutrality for Lebanon on Austrian model.

Jordan—Lloyd and his advisers admitted position Hussein’s government very shaky. Lloyd supposed UK would like to make Jordan “ward of UN” for lack of something better. Hammarskjold’s mind seemed to be working in that direction. Hoyer Millar reported British Ambassador in Amman has pointed out that UN force would not solve internal problem in Jordan, succeed in keeping King on throne or provide economic sustenance.

Lloyd emphasized desire of UK to remove troops from Jordan but also to leave something behind when they left. If Western response to request for help from small countries failed, West would have “had it” all over world. He compared decision faced with that confronted by UK in 1941 when HMG determined to go into Greece although decision was military nonsense. [21/2 lines of source text not declassified]

[1 paragraph (2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Lloyd made clear he not interested in protecting West Bank from Israel for benefit of Nasser. William Hayter stated he convinced Israel would seize West Bank if Jordan collapsed. Lloyd and his other advisers did not dissent.

British representatives doubted Nasser in such circumstances would move militarily against Israel. Further they did not think USSR would back Nasser in military move against Israel.

Possibility of Jordan and Israel collaborating in development of waters of Jordan River suggested by Lloyd. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

[8 lines of source text not declassified] It would be terrific blow to West if two weeks after British troops withdrew Jordan joined UAR. In response to question from Ambassador Whitney, Lloyd said would be absolute disaster if US troops withdrew from Lebanon before there was some arrangement regarding Jordan. Attacks on British troops would immediately start and their position would be rendered untenable. Therefore, meanwhile important for US and UK to give appearance they intended to stay on in Jordan and Lebanon for ten years if need be. In this case Russians and Nasser would start working for something realistic. Lloyd had doubts about emphasis given to statements US prepared to leave Lebanon when requested by legitimate Lebanese Government.

Regarding Special General Assembly, Lloyd and his colleagues showed intense preoccupation that upcoming meeting provide “solution”, temporary at worse, for Jordan problem. Lloyd asserted “this is one time we really do want something out of UN”. He expressed opinion there was no chance of obtaining two-thirds vote if Western case is based on condemning interference by UAR. William Hayter pointed out only justification for requesting UN action was indirect aggression by UAR.

Ormsby-Gore remarked that if UN force for Jordan agreed to there might be temporary respite. Everyone would be somewhat hesitant over flouting UN authority. Lloyd added Hammarskjold is “redoubtable" figure and could be expected to work strongly to maintain UN authority in Jordan once it authorized by GA.

Regarding King Hussein’s request for two additional brigades, Lloyd said he inclined to respond favorably on theory that if something not done Jordan would collapse. He not satisfied Jordan inevitably would collapse since international stake in keeping country going so great there might be consensus this only course to pursue. Lloyd explained he did not have in mind providing fully equipped units, but rather form of subsidy to loyal Bedouin tribes, which perhaps could be organized into irregular force.

[Here follows discussion of Iraq, Egypt, Israel, the Persian Gulf, and Kuwait.]

Whitney

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/8–1158. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to Paris.

266. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 266. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 12, 1958—5 p.m.

468. King Hussein summoned British Ambassador Johnston/myself Palace 1400 local time today. On arrival found Prime Minister Rifai with King [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Hussein opened conversation by saying he concerned with press reports effect US/UK likely put forward proposal GA meeting calling for UN police force protect Jordan against external aggression/infiltration, same time request creation UNOGIL type organization guard against internal subversion. He said he had called in Ambassador Johnston/myself in order clarify HKJ position: [2 paragraphs (41/2 lines of source text) not declassified] [6 lines of source text not declassified] Re external aggression it will welcome UN declaration guaranteeing its frontiers but from practical standpoint it will continue rely principally on US/UK assurances.

(D) HKJ endorses any UN attempt halt misuse radio, press other mass media means propaganda as instrument one government interfere internal affairs other. [3 lines of source text not declassified]

(E) In view persistent reports US/UK delegations UN engaged working out acceptable formula deal Jordan/Lebanon problems with representatives other friendly states Hussein requested HKJ be informed any such proposal which directly affects Jordan before it is presented GA or even seriously discussed other powers.

Ambassador Johnston said while he fully appreciated Hussein’s views speaking personally and not officially felt UN could make substantial contribution Jordan security. Rifai snapped back Jordan’s experience UN past ten years was not such encourage faith/ability UN discharge any duties assigned it. [21/2 lines of source text not declassified] Ambassador Johnston made two or three additional attempts sell idea UN might have useful role to play in present situation but failed get any agreement from either Hussein/RIFAI except expression of willingness have UN monitoring group visit Jordan if UAR willing do likewise.

RIFAI said both King and he becoming increasingly concerned over foreign press reports effect Hussein should abdicate, internal security situation critical, impossible present government last another six months. He felt this approach not only reflection on HKJ but equally on intentions US/UK support country to which they had given unqualified assurances. I replied that although several stories Anglo-American press painted grim picture Jordan future HKJ is not entirely free blame. Cited complaint presented me by New York Times representative on behalf American correspondents pointing out English version King’s speech2 not available in time clear for morning state-side papers, censor received text only ten minutes before normal closing hour, result only coverage available American press was that picked off Reuters ticker. This most unfortunate for Jordan since initial impact millions American readers lost by purely mechanical breakdown HKJ Public Relations Office. Rifai apologized for foul-up, said he unaware conditions, made notes correspondents request that I remembered, promised he would institute immediate steps correct situation. Hussein asked that both Johnston/myself urgently convey his position re UN activity Jordan to our governments order forestall any proposal which might prove embarrassing if they were such as to require rejection by HKJ order protect its national sovereignty, avoid charge it unable deal with its own security problems.

Comment: I detected more than slight suspicion on part both Hussein/RIFAI they feel major powers might be tempted sacrifice Jordan interest in order achieve wider agreement entire ME problem. They left little doubt HKJ determined resist any attempt use UNEF for UNOGIL type organization deal Jordan problem and on basis UN record to date one can hardly blame them.3

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–1258. Secret; Niact. Also sent to USUN.

2 The speech was delivered on August 11 on the seventh anniversary of the King’s succession to the throne. (Telegram 466 from Amman, August 12; ibid.)

3 The Delegation in New York responded directly to this telegram, in telegram 3 to Amman, repeated to the Department as Secto 4, August 14. The delegation noted that the British thought they had dissuaded the Jordanian Government from its strong opposition to U.N. involvement in Jordan. The Embassy in Amman was instructed to make another attempt to do so. (Ibid., 785.5441/8–1458; included in the microfiche supplement)

267. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 12, 1958, 3–4:30 p.m. 267. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 12, 1958, 3–4:30 p.m.1

New York, August 12, 1958, 3–4:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

U.K.—Mr. Selwyn Lloyd, Sir Pierson Dixon, Messrs. Hayter, Beeley, Laskey, Rose, and Moore

U.S.—The Secretary, Messrs. Lodge, Dillon, Reinhardt, Rountree, Wilcox, Bergus (Reporting Officer)

SUBJECT

Forthcoming Special Session of the UNGA

The Secretary advised Mr. Lloyd that the President was coming to the General Assembly. It had been arranged that he would speak on August 13, at 10:30 a.m. after which he would return to Washington. The Secretary then reviewed the latest draft of the President’s speech2 with the British Foreign Minister.

In the course of the review Mr. Lloyd discussed briefly a conversation he had had on August 10 with Mr. Robert Murphy.3 Mr. Murphy had been uncertain as to whether any UN action “neutralizing” Lebanon was necessary. Mr. Lloyd felt that it was essential that some UN action with respect to Lebanon’s status be taken, otherwise it could well develop that after the departure of U.S. forces and the UN observers, Lebanon could be swallowed up. If, in such a case, this action were a violation of some sort of a treaty obligation that would be one thing, otherwise, it would be a major Western defeat.

In the course of the review the Secretary pointed out that the speech was more vague with regard to Jordan than was the case with Lebanon. Mr. Lloyd felt that there might emerge a common interest in keeping Jordan in existence. Perhaps the Egyptians and other elements would not like to see Jordan disintegrate at this time. Mr. Lodge reported briefly on a conversation he had had that morning with Egyptian Foreign Minister Fawzi who had seemed to imply that the UAR did not wish Jordan to accede to it now. Fawzi seemed to feel that perhaps Jordan should be linked with Iraq, then both of these states could ultimately come into the UAR.

In discussing that portion of the President’s speech dealing with economic development the Secretary pointed out that Mr. Dillon had been consulting with American oil companies. He believed these companies would be willing to contribute to an Arab development fund after it had been established by the Arabs themselves. The President’s statement that we would support such a fund implied U.S. financial support. We felt that such a fund should be operated by the IBRD. The Arabs seemed to get along with the IBRD and the Russians were not members of it. Mr. Lodge commented that Fawzi had indicated that Egypt would welcome assistance through the UN but would reserve its right to seek bilateral assistance from individual countries including the USSR.

The Secretary said that after careful consideration it had been decided to omit any reference to the Palestine refugees in the President’s speech.

The Secretary then read verbatim that portion of the President’s speech which dealt with possible UN arms control. It was put in terms of a suggestion that if the Near East countries themselves wished the UN to study the arms problem the U.S. would support a UN Commission. We had been rather dubious as to this position but had finally decided to put it in. If you were able to get a UN force in the area, a means of dealing with indirect aggression, a mechanism for economic development, then you might want to consider disarmament. This was, however, a matter which could raise complex problems.

A final point in the President’s speech was that the U.S. would continue to support national development programs. Regional programs would receive our support should the countries directly concerned desire it and if they took the initiative in developing sound projects.

There followed a brief discussion as to whether the USSR would raise the question of Chinese representation.

The discussion then turned to next steps in the Assembly. The Secretary stated that we had a number of draft resolutions but had not yet come to a decision as to whether they should be presented. His disposition ran toward suggesting that the Japanese reintroduce their resolution on Lebanon.4 The Secretary made clear that this was a tentative view on his part.

Mr. Lloyd said that British preliminary thinking with regard to Jordan was to give the Secretary General fairly wide latitude to arrange for a UN presence there and ultimately U.K. withdrawal. In the course of this discussion there was general agreement that an Indian draft resolution which “called for" the U.S. and U.K. to withdraw their forces or one which “requested" the withdrawal of forces would be unacceptable.

Mr. Lloyd returned to the need for maintaining momentum in the Assembly after the President’s speech. He was concerned that a great many resolutions might be introduced. The Secretary General’s feeling was that an interim resolution or resolutions covering Lebanon and Jordan should be passed authorizing the Secretary General to discuss with the governments of Lebanon and Jordan the means of expanding the United Nations presence so as to facilitate U.S. and U.K. withdrawal. The Secretary General then felt that the Assembly could adjourn for four weeks to resume its special session a week before the regular session was due to meet.

The Secretary inquired if Mr. Lloyd felt the position in Jordan could be held for four weeks. Mr. Lloyd said he did not know, that the situation was really “pretty ropey”. The King appeared to have a fair measure of support. Admittedly there was a great deal of opposition to him, but elements like the Palestine refugees would oppose any government. There was a chance that if they thought we would succeed in a UN arrangement for Jordan, the regime would survive. He did not like to leave the gap which the Secretary General’s plan would involve, where for a period of weeks there would be doubt as to the future of Jordan.

The Secretary commented that he did not think that more could be attained with regard to Jordan than a mandate to the Secretary General. None of us could make a case for a solution which the General Assembly could adopt. The only reason for Jordan’s existence was that it was preferable to its non-existence. The state was unviable, had a terrible refugee problem and had no tradition or history.

Mr. Lloyd felt there was just a chance that even the Egyptians would prefer Jordan’s existence to its non-existence for a while. The Secretary said that the question was that if Jordan collapsed, would the Israelis move in? What was important was what the UAR thought the Israelis would do. If the UAR thought the Israelis would touch off a big war, it was doubtful if the UAR would want Jordan. In such a war the UAR would suffer an initial defeat by the Israelis. The UAR would then need aid from the USSR. Aid to Israel would be forthcoming from Western countries. The area would be off to what would at least be something like the Spanish Civil War.

Mr. Lloyd said that he had spoken to Mrs. Meir on the previous day. She had left the impression that if Jordan collapsed, Israel would march in. She was concerned at the prospect of Israel taking jurisdiction over territory on which 850, 000 Arabs were living and seemed to recognize that there would be no prospect of these Arabs leaving that territory. She would be happy if the U.K. was remaining on. She had said that the present frontier between Israel and Jordan would be tolerable if there were some sort of international permanence in Jordan. The Egyptians also might feel they should let Jordan continue to exist. The Russians, however, might behave mischievously.

The Secretary commented that he was seeing Gromyko at six o’clock that afternoon.5 He had nothing particular to say to him but was acting primarily to return the courtesy of Gromyko’s call on the Secretary of last October.

Mr. Lloyd commented on discussions he had had with the Secretary General who had said that he already had pretty wide authority with regard to Lebanon. As to Jordan he was prepared, among other things, to stretch the authority setting up UNTSO. Would this give permanence to Jordan? It would depend on Egyptian good will. It might last.

Mr. Wilcox commented that the Secretary General would really have to stretch the authority of the UNTSO to place it on the border between Syria and Jordan. Mr. Lloyd said that the Secretary General felt he could do this. He wished some vague formulation which he could carry forward for some distance. He did not feel, when he spoke to Mr. Lloyd, that he could create a new UNEF.

Sir Pierson Dixon reported on a subsequent conversation he had had with the Secretary General, who seemed to be developing more ambitious plans for Jordan. He was now thinking in terms of something on the order of a new UNEF with perhaps as many as 4, 000 men in it. He was attracted by the fact that such a UN force would need a supply line through Lebanon and Syria. Mr. Hammarskjold wished to try out this idea on Fawzi. The Secretary General felt that it was to the UAR’s interest to sustain Jordan’s independence.

In the following discussion there appeared to be general agreement that Jordan should be handled in one stage by the General Assembly rather than the two-stage manner proposed by the Secretary General. We might wish to press the Secretary General to drop his idea of recessing the special session of the UNGA. Sir Pierson Dixon said that if it was decided to put a UNEF into Jordan, the two-stage operation would be necessary. If it were to be handled in any other way a single stage operation would be preferable.

Mr. Lloyd commented that the timing was connected with developments in Lebanon. It would be impossible for the U.K. to remain in Jordan after U.S. forces had left Lebanon.

The Secretary said that it was hard to predict how long our forces would be remaining in Lebanon. Some troops at least would probably leave when General Chehab came into office. We had taken one Marine battalion out this morning.6 It was being rotated back to the United States. We were, however, keeping another battalion afloat with the Sixth Fleet. Mr. Lloyd said that he had been asked at the airport whether the U.K. intended to follow the U.S. example and remove some of its forces from Jordan. He had replied that the U.K. would not have as many troops in Jordan as the U.S. in Lebanon. The Secretary said that we had about 15, 000 troops in Lebanon. Mr. Lloyd said there were about 3, 000 British troops in Jordan. Their situation would be extremely tenuous if matters got bad there. There might have to be a forceful evacuation involving the use of British airpower stationed on Cyprus. Mr. Rountree pointed out the possible consequences should there be British flights over Israel, at the same time Israel was attacking Jordan.

Mr. Lloyd returned to the question of tactics. The British had planned along the lines of first the Secretary speaking, then Gromyko, and then Mr. Lloyd, perhaps on Thursday.7 Mr. Lodge felt that Mr. Lloyd could still plan to speak on Thursday if he wished to make the necessary arrangements with Sir Leslie Monroe. Mr. Lodge inquired as to whether the Lebanese and Jordanian delegations had arrived. Sir William Hayter said that he was seeing Abdul Mun’im Rifa’i at 5:00 p.m. Mr. Rountree reported that according to our latest information the Government of Lebanon still had not worked out the composition of its delegation. Mr. Lloyd inquired as to when the Secretary planned to speak. The Secretary replied he would be speaking at some stage in the proceedings, perhaps toward the end.

Mr. Lloyd commented that the Russian objective was to turn the whole Assembly into an operation to get us out of Lebanon and Jordan. We should get the Assembly to take some action with respect to indirect aggression and hostile propaganda. Mr. Lloyd asked how sinister would the Indians be. Sir Pierson Dixon stated they would be a nuisance. He reported that Gromyko had that day had lunch with the Indians and the new Iraqis. He felt the Indian behavior was sympathetic of the behavior we would observe from a number of nations. This pointed up the need for our taking a positive line quickly.

There followed a brief discussion as to when we should introduce resolutions. The Secretary commented that if we sought to have the Japanese reintroduce their resolution we would have to wait until the arrival of Foreign Minister Fujiyama on Thursday. Mr. Lodge felt that we should not sponsor any resolutions. He believed the President’s speech would be the first step in the proper direction, then we would arrange for others to introduce resolutions.

Sir Pierson Dixon thought that our resolutions might be introduced Thursday or Friday. There was a need to consult further with the Secretary General, who was thinking along the lines of perhaps four resolutions. The first would be a general statement of principles, a resolution on Jordan, a separate resolution on Lebanon, and finally a resolution on the withdrawal of U.S. and U.K. forces. Mr. Lloyd said he did not like the idea of a separate resolution on withdrawal.

At this point Mr. Lodge read the text of a resolution which the Soviet Union had just submitted.8 It recommended that the U.S. and U.K. withdraw their forces without delay. It authorized the Secretary General to expand the activities of the observers in Lebanon as recommended in the second UNOGIL report.9 It proposed that the Secretary General despatch observers to Jordan to observe the withdrawal of British forces after which they should observe the situation along the frontiers of both countries. The Secretary commented that the USSR resolution was an extremely able piece of drafting.

The discussion returned to the problem of whether there should be separate resolutions on Jordan and Lebanon. Mr. Lodge said that he would like to see a combined resolution including language covering non-interference and economic development. We would then seek middle-of-the-road sponsorship for such a resolution. Mr. Lloyd suggested that a working party be formed to draw up such a resolution. There was further discussion as to whether economic development should be included in such a resolution. No decision was reached on this point. The Secretary felt it would be useful to set up a couple of people to draw up one resolution covering Lebanon and Jordan and the problem of indirect aggression and a separate one on economic development. On the question of a radio monitoring unit a separate resolution would probably be required. The Secretary said that while we would like to see such a resolution get through the Assembly, he had grave doubts as to its prospect of passage.

The final portion of the meeting was taken up with the discussion of our possible reaction to the Soviet solution. Mr. Lloyd pressed hard for the joint introduction as quickly as possible of a resolution which would clearly set forth the positions we had taken on Jordan and Lebanon. He felt this would put us in the best tactical position before the Assembly and allow for a compromise between our and the Soviet Union’s resolutions more nearly to our liking. The Secretary outlined briefly the points that such a resolution might contain. It was agreed that a draft of such a resolution would be prepared for further consideration.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1087. Secret. Drafted by Bergus. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite in the Waldorf Towers.

2 See Document 269.

3 See Document 265.

4 See Document 195.

5 See infra.

6 On August 11, General Twining reported to the President that the Joint Chiefs were making plans for the withdrawal of troops from Lebanon. He thought that any withdrawal of U.S. troops should be done quietly and with dignity, without making a fanfare. Eisenhower agreed, commenting that he would have to look at any specific proposal. (Memorandum of conference with the President; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries)

7 August 14.

8 U.N. doc. A/3870, August 12; printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, p. 1031.

9 U.N. doc. S/4069, July 30; printed in part ibid., pp. 1006–1009.

268. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 12, 1958 268. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 12, 19581

New York, August 12, 1958

SUBJECT

Lebanon and Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. Andrei Gromyko, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the U.S.S.R.

Mr. Arkady Sobolev, Soviet Permanent Representative to the United Nations

Mr. Valerian Zorin, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the U.S.S.R.

Mr. G Frederick Reinhardt, Counselor

Mr. Edward L. Freers, Director, Office of Eastern European Affairs Soviet Interpreter

The Secretary said he had wanted to talk with Mr. Gromyko in an effort to do something constructive about the situation of the Middle East. Things could happen there which could have serious consequences. The Secretary was particularly concerned about what would happen if Jordan collapsed—from the standpoint of the Arab-Israeli dispute. There was a lot of recrimination over the Arab-Israeli question and differences were serious. He had no real answer to the question. Jordan was not a viable country. The only reason for assuring its existence was that if it disappeared suddenly, there might be serious effects that could have other consequences. He hoped that it would be possible to find some solution to that situation.

Gromyko pointed out that the Secretary had mentioned Jordan. He asked, what about Lebanon?

The Secretary said that it was his belief that it might be given a neutral status somewhat along the Austrian pattern. It was a state that, because its population was half Christian and half Moslem, had always existed with a precarious balance between the two groups. They got along all right as long as they were not involved in troubles with the other Arab states. It has not historically been a part of Arabia. The Secretary said he thought a solution to the Lebanese problem could be found. It has a possibility of independent existence. It has been getting along well economically. Its currency is sound. It exists on trade and tourist business. He could see a stable situation in Lebanon. Jordan was more difficult and more dangerous. Its significance lay in its relation to the problem of Israel. He did not see clearly how to keep Jordan going or how to face the consequences of its collapse. Jordan was originally created by the British as a base as an alternative to the one they had at Suez. It was subsidized by them. After they left, it was subsidized by three Arab states. Now the United States is supporting it. It has no resources. No solution has been found for the problem of Arab refugees. It is nothing but a headache. The Secretary said that he had been unable to think of any program that would not reopen the Israeli war.

Gromyko said that it was one thing to touch upon the problem of the existence of Jordan and Lebanon. It was another question to achieve stability in the area where there was danger of serious conflict. There was the question of withdrawal of United States troops from Lebanon and British troops from Jordan. How could one deal with the question of Lebanon and Jordan without dealing with the question of the troops. He pointed out that the Soviet position remained unchanged. They believed the United States should withdraw its troops from Lebanon and Great Britain from Jordan. When the withdrawal took place, in spite of the difficulties and complexities of the situation, it would be possible to insure the independence and integrity of both states. It could not be impossible, between the United States and the U.S.S.R., to insure the existence of these countries as independent states. The basic question was how to solve the problem. In the opinion of the Soviet Union, the solution would be the withdrawal of United States and British troops. This would in no way affect the prestige of the United States or even less its security. The action would serve as a good example and would get good words, not only from the Arab states, but others as well. With regard to the internal questions of Lebanon and Jordan, which worry the United States and Britain, Britain seems more worried about the situation in Jordan. Let the Jordanese themselves solve their own problems. This goes for Lebanon as well.

The Secretary said that there was no problem in United States troops coming out of Lebanon—assuming a situation in which the continued independence of Lebanon was provided. He did not believe that the United States felt its prestige was enhanced by the presence of its troops in Lebanon. It has had its troops all over the world. It had withdrawn them and not sent them back anywhere unless they were invited. We are proud of this record. The first thing the United States wants to do is to get out of Lebanon. With regard to the latter’s independence, it has just chosen a new government. Thus, the allegation that we moved in to perpetuate Chamoun proved unfounded as had the allegation that we intended to attack Iraq. We had only one purpose—to stay in Lebanon only so long as our troops were needed and wanted by the Government of Lebanon to protect it against the danger of indirect aggression. As soon as the danger was removed, the troops would move right out. We did not feel that our prestige was engaged. The Secretary said he agreed that Jordan was a more difficult matter.

Gromyko asked that if the United States did not desire to keep its troops in Lebanon, what hindered their withdrawal right now, today.

The Secretary said that there was no adequate insurance that efforts from the outside would not be resumed if we withdrew. Not only have we not been asked to withdraw from Lebanon, but we have been requested to stay there.

Gromyko asked whether the question was one of penetration through its borders by arms and personnel. Although there was a different attitude toward the United Nations Observer Group in different quarters, the Group’s report2 seemed adequate. Why was it not so for the United States? What other danger was there?

The Secretary said that there had been some strengthening of the Observer Group and in view of the improved situation, we had announced today that one battalion was being withdrawn.

Gromyko said that, regarding this argument, there can be a difference in opinion as to whether or not the situation has improved or worsened. However, if it is considered improved then the situation is more propitious than ever for the withdrawal of American troops. Gromyko said that the withdrawal of one battalion lacks the force of conviction on our part. First, troops were put in and then one battalion withdrawn. This cannot make an impression on serious-minded people, not only those in the Soviet Union. The United States’ withdrawal would not only not aggravate the situation, but would pave the way for the settlement of various problems as he suggested a year ago should be done. If the United States is interested in moving in this direction, it cannot but take such a step. The Soviet attitude is well-known—it supports the withdrawal of American troops. It seems to the Soviets that the United States will have to face the question as to whether it should withdraw now and demonstrate good will rather than wait for the pressure of the Arabs, and not only the Arabs, which will bring this about. The presence of American troops there is contrary to the interests of the Arabs and contrary to the peace of the rest of the world.

The Secretary said that there was a difference of opinion about this. We considered that the presence of our troops there was, and still is, an important contribution to peace. There is nothing wrong with having troops in another country at the request of the government of that country.

Gromyko said that he would like to put a question to Mr. Dulles. He said the United States apparently claims that its action does not violate the United Nations Charter. He asked what provision of the Charter allows such action. The Soviet Union knew the Charter very well having taken part in drawing it up. There was no provision for sending troops to a country as a means of interfering in its internal affairs, even if this is done by the most legitimate request. This was not envisaged in the Charter, never was, nor never could be—leaving aside the question as to whether or not the request were legitimate.

The Secretary remarked that he had asked whether it was an international crime to have troops in other countries.

Gromyko said yes.

The Secretary asked whether or not the Soviet Union had troops in other countries.

Gromyko said when this is done in accordance with negotiated treaty obligations, this is a different matter. The United States also has troops in Europe. But you say the presence of your troops in Lebanon does not contradict the Charter. When troops are sent for the purpose of interfering, this is not in accordance with the Charter. It is a crime even when it is done at the request of the country concerned.

The Secretary said, yes, it is a crime to interfere in internal affairs. We did not go to Lebanon for that purpose. We have been accused of going there to keep Chamoun in office. This has been proved false.

Gromyko asked whether or not it was interference in internal affairs to bring about the election of this or that person inside another country.

The Secretary said, certainly it was—but we did not interfere in the election in Lebanon. Chehab was not our candidate.

Gromyko asked why the United States had landed there?

At this point, the Secretary strongly remarked that there was no use getting into a debate on pre-determined positions. He had come to talk with Mr. Gromyko hoping to achieve something constructive. There was no use in arguing and going over standard views. This could be done in the Assembly; we know the public position of the Soviet Union very well. He had hoped for something constructive.

Gromyko replied that the Secretary had referred to our reasons for introducing troops into Lebanon and that he had been answering the remarks made by the Secretary. As to finding a constructive basis, there was no lack of desire on the part of the Soviet Union. He asked what the Secretary had in mind. The Secretary said that we hoped to create the basic conditions for stabilizing the situation in Lebanon and making possible our withdrawal.

Gromyko asked what these conditions were. If it were a question of prevention penetration from the outside, then the Observer Group existed for this purpose. If there was dissatisfaction with the Group, it would be logical to reinforce it. There had been no proposal made by the Secretary and he had merely come to a logical conclusion.

The Secretary said that he was thinking along the lines that there should be some change in the character of the Observer Group. This was more important than any increase in numbers. Also, the neighboring states should make it clear that they intend to let Lebanon alone. Under these conditions, the Secretary thought that it would be possible for the United States to withdraw. It was not practical to have a large and continuously functioning Observer Group in order to patrol Lebanon’s borders and protect Lebanon by it alone. If there were some reliable indication that its neighbors really would let it alone, the numbers of the Group could be reduced. It would, however, be important for United Nations presence to remain there for some time. This would not require a large patrol if the neighboring states lent some cooperation. The newly-elected Government would be more acceptable perhaps than the previous one. The latter had been pro-Western and while we cannot criticize it on that score, the new one coming in in September would be less vulnerable to outside attack. If there were assurances from Lebanon’s neighbors and the character of the Observer Group strengthened, the resulting situation would permit our withdrawal.

Gromyko said that if it is assumed that the states the Secretary had in mind made statements indicating that any doubts about their furnishing aid to parties in Lebanon lack foundation—specifically, the UAR, which has made such statements—would these statements be enough to arouse the necessary confidence from the viewpoint of the United States Government? A second question: What did the Secretary have in mind when he said that the nature of the Observer Group might be changed? Perhaps that was something that could be discussed.

The Secretary said that, with respect to the first question, the UAR had been deeply involved in the Lebanon affair. Its efforts were largely suspended when Hammarskjold went to Cairo. The situation was better in that regard. If there were clear pledges in that respect and if there were enough of a United Nations presence to show its interest and create a good chance the violations might be exposed, he thought this would create the situation he had mentioned. In this view, United Nations interest and presence were enough. The frontiers could not be protected by surrounding the country. If the people outside wanted to penetrate the frontiers they would find some way of doing so. He attached more importance to whether or not there was a sincere willingness on the part of Lebanon’s neighbors to let Lebanon alone and to the United Nations showing continued interest even if on a lesser scale. If the Government of Lebanon considered this enough, we would withdraw quickly. The present Government might not ask us to do so, but he thought the incoming one would.

Gromyko asked whether this would mean postponing measures to withdraw our troops.

The Secretary said that it would, although we are already beginning to cut down.

Gromyko said supposing the two conditions the Secretary mentioned were met—that referring to the attitude of the neighboring states and that referring to the interest of the United Nations—would our withdrawal still be postponed.

The Secretary said that, if we were assured of these two conditions, we could move rather rapidly.

Gromyko asked, what about the British?

The Secretary said this would be more difficult.

Gromyko remarked that the British seemed to want to continue sitting on a war horse, but all that they had was a dead horse.

The Secretary observed he was not sure that the horse would stay dead. It might revive and even involve the Russians. The Jordanian problem was interlocked with Israel. Neither of us should want the British to withdraw until we see that the result will not be the reopening of the Arab-Israeli armistice. The Secretary said he did not see how this could be done. He then said that he was due to see Hammarskjold at 7:30 p.m., and would have to leave. He observed that he thought the talk was beginning to be more constructive.

Gromyko said that, if it were assumed that the United States and the U.S.S.R. would exert joint efforts, make some joint statement perhaps about the borders of Jordan being menaced, take some decision, perform some form of joint act—would that not remove doubts about the international affairs of Jordan? Then the Jordanese could be allowed to settle their own domestic affairs.

The Secretary said that there was a fiscal problem involved. We were putting up $50 million a year to maintain Jordan and did not want to do this forever.

Gromyko said that, if it were possible to reach agreement on the basic questions, it would be easy to settle the economic problem. This would not be serious if the others were settled.

The Secretary observed that there was a time when three Arab states—Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Egypt—subsidized Jordan to the extent of $10 million each per year. Perhaps the financial problem could be solved. There was an even chance, however, that Israel would move in to take over the right bank and war between her and the Arabs would follow. The Arabs would appeal to the Russians for help and Israel to the French and ourselves. (At this point, the Secretary arose to depart.)

Gromyko said that he believed the conversation had been useful.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1087. Secret. Drafted by Freers. A handwritten note on the memorandum reads: “Sec saw.” The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Soviet Delegation headquarters.

2 An apparent reference to the second report of the U.N. Observation Group in Lebanon; see footnote 9, supra. The third UNOGIL report, covering the period July 15–August 11, was submitted to the Security Council through the Secretary-General on August 14. (U.N. doc. S/4085; printed in part in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 1039–1041)

269. Editorial Note 269. Editorial Note

On August 13, President Eisenhower addressed the Special Emergency Session of the General Assembly called to consider the crisis in the Middle East. The session had opened on August 8 with statements by Soviet Representative Sobolev and U.S. Representative Lodge reiterating positions taken in the foregoing Security Council debate. (U.N. doc. A/PV 732) Eisenhower addressed the organization for the first time in 5 years and did so as a head of state rather than as a member of the U.S. delegation.

His speech touched on the specific issues involved in the debate initiated on August 8 largely as a point of departure for an overview of regional problems. He pointed out that U.S. and British forces were in Lebanon and Jordan at the invitation of the local governments, and he pledged that U.S. forces would be withdrawn whenever requested by the Lebanese Government or as soon as the independence and integrity of Lebanon was assured. He added that the crisis occasioned by indirect aggression in Jordan continued and urged prompt action by the General Assembly to prevent an expanding conflict of a “far-reaching nature.” To guard against this kind of indirect aggression, Eisenhower proposed the creation of a standby U.N. Peace Force to react to threats when they occurred.

Considering the region as a whole, Eisenhower also suggested that, to alleviate tensions between Israel and the Arab States, the nations involved in the 1948 hostilities should call for a U.N. study of the flow of heavy armaments into the area to determine whether arms control arrangements could be instituted. The centerpiece of Eisenhower’s address was a proposal to establish a regional economic development plan and corresponding Arab development organization to accelerate inprovement in living standards in the Arab States. He suggested consultations between the Secretary-General and the Arab States to ascertain whether a consensus existed in favor of establishing an Arab development institution. If such an organization was established and governed by the Arab States, and if it was supported with Arab resources, Eisenhower indicated that the United States would also be prepared to support it. (U.N. doc. A/PV.733, printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, pages 606–616)

President Eisenhower’s speech was drafted by C. D. Jackson, a long-time presidential adviser and speech writer, who was recruited from Time-Life in New York as a consultant to Secretary Dulles to help prepare the speech. Eisenhower had told Dulles on August 7 that he did not want to engage in controversial debate or head the U.S. Delegation to the emergency meeting of the General Assembly, but was willing to make a lead-off address couched in lofty terms that would rise above the immediate controversy. (Memorandum of conversation with the President, August 7; Eisenhower Library, Meetings with the President) Eisenhower discussed the speech with Jackson on the same day and told him that he wanted no more than a paragraph on the immediate crisis in the Middle East. He wanted the rest of the speech to deal with constructive and useful proposals, and demonstrate that the United States was practical as well as idealistic. (Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation, August 7; ibid., Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries)

Jackson submitted a 7-page memorandum to Dulles on August 7, outlining the nature of the speech he felt Eisenhower should deliver. Jackson saw the speech as an opportunity for the United States to demonstrate a positive attitude toward the “constructive” aspects of the nationalist movements emerging in the Middle East and around the world. Eisenhower should, he felt, reaffirm U.S. determination to oppose Communist disruption and expansion, but offer a program of economic encouragement to constructive nationalist movements. He did not feel that the speech should be framed in a negative vein as a condemnation of indirect aggression. (Department of State, Central Files, 320/8–758) There is a full account of the background and drafting of the speech in the log maintained by Jackson from July 24, when Dulles called to ask him to come to Washington, through the delivery of the speech on August 13. (Eisenhower Library, Jackson Papers, Log—1958) All these documents are included in the microfiche supplement.

270. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 14, 1958 270. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 14, 19581

New York, August 14, 1958

SUBJECT

Situation in the Middle East

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Mahmoud Fawzi, UAR Foreign Minister

The Secretary

Mr. Rountree

Mr. Bergus

Dr. Fawzi referred to Mr. Murphy’s recent talk with President Nasser2 and said that after an initial period of groping, the conversation had “sailed”. He hoped that Mr. Murphy had brought back the impression of the complete frankness of that discussion. The Secretary felt that it had been a useful conversation. He said that there had also come the impression that President Nasser believed that the Secretary had a personal unfriendliness toward him. The Secretary wished to dissipate such an impression. First of all, it was not true. Furthermore, it would be criminal to operate governments on the basis of personal likes and dislikes. Were this the case, the U.S. would not have taken actions favorable to Egypt and the UAR which were unfavorable to countries with which we had long and friendly relations. It was the Secretary’s ambition to leave the world more devoted to principle in the conduct of international affairs. The Secretary felt this was a critical moment because we could not countenance methods which, if generally prevalent, would bring the world to chaos and perhaps even war. This was perhaps the basic difference between us. The UAR felt it was legitimate to use methods which we felt were dangerous. This was, however, a difference of principle and not a personal one. The Secretary had the highest regard and respect for President Nasser who was an extremely able man. He was not surprised that the Arabs looked up to President Nasser. The Secretary wished to get on to a basis of good relations. As President Eisenhower had said yesterday, unification, if it took place as a result of the will of the people concerned, could and should be accomplished through peaceful processes.3

Dr. Fawzi said he could not take exception to the Secretary’s remarks. The impression that President Nasser felt that the Secretary disliked him personally was not accurate.

Dr. Fawzi said he wished to mention the importance of the fact that we were facing a debate which could run away. He trusted that efforts would be made to keep it in hand. Mr. Selwyn Lloyd might in his speech today say things which would make the task of restoring normalcy more difficult. The Secretary said he had no idea what Mr. Lloyd would say. He commented that Mr. Gromyko’s speech4 had not been helpful. Dr. Fawzi said that such a speech coming from Gromyko was not surprising. In fact, some delegates had even felt that it had been relatively moderate.

Dr. Fawzi continued that it was evident that the Jordanian delegate had instructions to make an onslaught against the UAR. This could open wide the controversy. The concensus among delegations was to try to patch things up.

The Secretary said he hoped that Dr. Fawzi felt that the President’s speech had been moderate. While it had contained anti-Soviet remarks, there had been no attack on the UAR. Dr. Fawzi said that the President had confined himself to general principles. If anyone said that there should be no interference in the affairs of other states, the UAR would agree. It would also agree to sensible measures to make others concerned feel more comfortable. The U.S. might agree that it was not a good thing to try to pin blame. The UAR could not object to any measure to bolster arrangements to safeguard any country’s independence.

The Secretary said that he was uninformed as to the nature of the Jordanian delegate’s speech. Dr. Fawzi said that he thought that the Jordanian was going to make his attack yesterday. Dr. Fawzi had prepared a reply. Since he had been quiet, Dr. Fawzi had been quiet. It was clear, however, that the Jordanian delegate had instructions to make a strong speech. Dr. Fawzi said that we were all here to be useful.

The Secretary said that he was worried about Jordan. It was an artificial state which had been created by the U.K. as an alternate base, perhaps, in the Middle East. It had been subsidized first by the British, briefly by the three Arab states, and now by the U.S. It took a lot of money to keep it going. The reason for its existence was that its disappearance might reopen the Arab-Israeli war. We were paying tribute to hold Jordan so that war would not break out. Jordan had nothing of interest to us. It was of interest to all, however, that there be no chaos in the area. We did not know Israel’s purposes, but there was a 50–50 chance that if Jordan collapsed, the Israelis would occupy the West Bank. This could start a lot of other things. There was a common interest to try to preserve peace so that Jordan’s future could evolve peacefully. The Secretary admitted, however, that he was at a loss to know how such a peaceful evolution might take place.

Dr. Fawzi thought that we could put things together and find a way. The UAR thought, of course, that we should not allow the situation in Jordan to start a chain reaction and was interested in not having this happen. The UAR felt that if sufficient assurances were given that neither an Israeli nor Arab attack would be tolerated, particularly by the two big powers, this would be a solid part of the structure of peace. As long as the U.K. military presence continued in Jordan, the horizon was blocked on the UAR side and there could be only unhelpful groping.

What would happen if the U.K. withdrew? The likelihood was that King Hussein could not remain. It was for the people of Jordan to decide who was to rule them. None of us should interfere. The U.K. said that it wished to be loyal to its friends. This might be a virtue but it should not be at the expense of creating an impossible situation in the area by imposing King Hussein and his government by force. If the Jordanian people wished to keep King Hussein, the UAR would not object. If they wished to remain a separate state, the UAR would not oppose. If they wished to join Iraq or Saudi Arabia, this was not the UAR’s business. The one thing that Dr. Fawzi could not promise was that the UAR would accept Jordan. He was not sure that this would be a good thing.

The Secretary pointed out that Jordan would be a liability to whomever took it over. Dr. Fawzi said that he declined the honor. It was more natural that oil-rich Iraq do so. The Secretary felt that this could be a logical step and could broaden the opportunities for refugees. Dr. Fawzi did not disagree but felt that this question should not be opened publicly. The Secretary replied that he would not say this out loud.

Dr. Fawzi said that he had crossed his fingers yesterday in the hope that the President would not link economic development to the refugee problem. It was pleasing that the President had not done so.

Dr. Fawzi then turned to the economic proposal which the President had outlined yesterday. This would take the UAR awhile to study. However, it was obvious to all that every living thing needed a proper atmosphere. It seemed to him that the indispensable thing before we went deeper was a rapid withdrawal of the troops from Lebanon and Jordan. Then the UAR and U.S. could consult if it were desired. A first point might be the exchange of assurances between Jordan and Israel that neither would attack the other. The UAR would approve such an exchange and would subscribe to it privately and publicly. These should not, of course, go so far as to represent a form of peace with Israel. This was too soon. The Secretary commented that the President had not mentioned the Arab-Israel problem.

Dr. Fawzi said that timing was all important to avoid missing a good train. Already there were people nibbling at the economic proposals with the intention of doing harm. The U.S. doubtless knew who were these natural saboteurs who came from both within and outside the area. While the U.S. should not be over-alarmed by expressions of hasty disapproval, we should not let such a feeling grow too much, too soon. The U.S. should not let happen what happened to the Eisenhower Doctrine. Dr. Fawzi stated that Egypt had remained silent two months about the Doctrine and then had taken a position against it. It would be a pity if this happened again.

Dr. Fawzi referred briefly to the Pella proposals5 which he felt had been badly timed and which gave the impression that their implementation would involve the expression of a NATO interest in the area. The President had made clear that the U.S. would not insist upon a preponderant role in the institution. Dr. Fawzi felt that it should not have too big a U.S. flag on it. It should be allowed to grow and the U.S. should encourage its friends in the area to contribute. Iraq was a natural contributor; Saudi Arabia could become one, although they had little money at present; Kuwait could be one. The thing did not have to grow too quickly but it could soon become a nucleus of economic sanity. The area was potentially rich. It wished to become dynamically rich. There would be a need for liquid capital. Dr. Fawzi preferred loans on easy terms, not called “foreign investment” which had unpleasant overtones. He did not exclude direct loans of this nature. Technical assistance would be paid for by the receiving state. Within a few years a viable Middle East, more robust and less subject to outside infiltration and subversion, could emerge. The UAR government, including President Nasser, was at the disposal of the U.S. to consult as to how not to allow a well-conceived economic program to disintegrate.

After the voting had taken place, high level consultations could be entered into between the UAR and U.S. We would have to face the matter of taking precautions against sabotage and misunderstanding coming from Moscow and perhaps Paris.

Dr. Fawzi felt perhaps that the time was too short. He had spoken to Mr. Gromyko whose response had not been positive. If the USSR wished to extend a helpful hand, that would be all right. If they did not, it would not be wise for them to sabotage the project but they might have their own reasons. How could we deal with this? It was not Dr. Fawzi’s business to advise the U.S. how to talk to the USSR. There was, however, no point in setting up something which could not live.

The Secretary wondered if Dr. Fawzi felt that there could be further useful talks between himself and the Secretary. Dr. Fawzi said he was at the Secretary’s disposal. The time had come when we should refresh our knowledge of each other’s thought and position. It may be that what we thought were serious differences would turn out to be less serious upon examination.

The Secretary said he would try to arrange for another talk perhaps on August 15.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1087. Secret. Drafted by Bergus. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite in the Waldorf Towers.

2 See Document 260.

3 See supra.

4 Gromyko followed Eisenhower in addressing the General Assembly on August 13. He charged that the special session was necessitated by “armed intervention by the United States in Lebanon and by the United Kingdom in Jordan.” He characterized the western intervention in Lebanon and Jordan as a “violation of peace” in which the fundamental rules of international law and the principles of the U.N. Charter were “flouted.” He called on the General Assembly to take the steps necessary to secure the withdrawal of U.S. and British forces from the area. (U.N. doc. A/PV.733)

5 Apparent reference to proposals advanced by Italian Foreign Minister Giuseppe Pella, and subsequently outlined by the Italian Representative Attilio Piccioni in the General Assembly on August 18. (U.N. doc. A/PV.739)

271. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in New York and the Under Secretary of State (Herter) in Washington, August 14, 1958, 12:54 p.m. 271. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in New York and the Under Secretary of State (Herter) in Washington, August 14, 1958, 12:54 p.m.1

Washington, August 14, 1958, 12:54 p.m.

[Here follows discussion of Taiwan and disarmament.]

H asked how things are here and the Sec said he does not know. He was talking with Engen2 to see if he will head up a group sponsored resolution we agreed on with the UK.3 There is some feeling to make it in two parts—the first just re Lebanon and Jordan and then the second for the longer-range things. Fawzi said let Jordan unite with Iraq and the Sec said we know they will take over.4 [5 lines of source text not declassified] The Sec said he had expressed the view partly for technical reasons etc., but not to the above extent. He was exercised and Lloyd thinks Murphy is largely responsible for the impression. M did not give the impression the Br agreed. H and the Sec had a different impression of what M said—Rountree was not here for the Sec to ask and H said he would ask M.5 The Sec said there are no great fireworks—Jordan is speaking this p.m. Lloyd spoke this a.m.6

[Here follows additional discussion of disarmament.]

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in New York by Phyllis D. Bernau. Dulles placed the call to Herter.

2 Hans Engen, Norwegian Under Secretary of State and head of the Norwegian Delegation.

3 Dulles met with Engen later in the day and explained that the U.S. Delegation had been working on a possible resolution which would cover the points made by the President on August 13 in his speech to the General Assembly. He told Engen that he had only discussed the resolution with the British Delegation before raising the matter with him. Dulles and Engen discussed the problem posed by Jordan at some length, and Engen agreed to consider acting as a sponsor of the resolution which was ultimately advanced on August 18 by Norway, Denmark, Canada, Colombia, Liberia, Panama, and Paraguay. (U.N. doc. A/3878, printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pp. 1042–1043) Engen was initially cautious, however, and discussed the draft resolution with the Secretary-General before agreeing to sound other delegations concerning cosponsorship. (Memorandum of conversation, August 14; Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1087; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 See supra.

5 [10 lines of text not declassified]

6 For text of Lloyd’s statement in the General Assembly on August 14, in which he called upon the United Nations to facilitate the withdrawal of British troops by underwriting the integrity of Jordan, see U.N. doc. A/PV.734.

272. Telegram From the Delegation at the United Nations to the Department of State 272. Telegram From the Delegation at the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, August 14, 1958—7 p.m.

Secto 7. Following based on uncleared memo conversation.2

In talk between Secretary and Lloyd which took place noon Aug. 14, there was general discussion Jordan situation including: 1. UK referred to request that US ship be made available carry supplies from Cyprus to British forces Aqaba via Suez Canal. Secretary stated only way in which we could do this would be through use MSP which would have be made known to Congress. We did not wish proceed along these lines, but had no objection UK endeavoring charter US ship for this purpose. British agreed.

2. Secretary referred UK requests that US send standby instructions to Embassy Tel Aviv strongly supporting a UK request for extensive use Israel airspace by RAF. Instructions could be activated in event there army revolt in HKJ and British forced undertake total evacuation under fire. Secretary doubted wisdom sending contingency instructions this kind which would risk spreading of rumors that evacuation impending. If such emergency actually developed we could then discuss how best US could support UK. British accepted.

3. British pressed hard for US affirmative response to HKJ request finance two new brigades. Rountree explained we had postponed this decision pending conclusion present UNGA since at this juncture we not sure this type support would be feasible or helpful to HKJ. Secretary said he would consider matter further before coming to decision.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–1458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

2 This telegram summarizes three separate memoranda of conversation dealing with Dulles’ discussions with Lloyd on August 14. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1087; included in the microfiche supplement)

273. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in New York and the Under Secretary of State (Herter) in Washington, August 15, 1958, 1:04 p.m. 273. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in New York and the Under Secretary of State (Herter) in Washington, August 15, 1958, 1:04 p.m.1

Washington, August 15, 1958, 1:04 p.m.

The Sec said there will be a meeting at 3 in the SYG’s office which will be important in formulating the res. Norway has weakened. The statement made by Jordan2 shook things badly. The SYG said he would not undertake to do anything for Jordan if in advance they say they won’t accept the means necessary to accomplish the result. That has shaken the people and has created the suspicion which the Sec thinks is unjustified this is cooked up between England and Jordan. He thinks the British are eager to get out. There are two critical points—try to get the Jordan Govt to change its position and they want a date for withdrawal put in. We can’t accept it. The Pres. mentioned it in his speech and the Sec said something re repeating the formulation. H agreed. The Sec said we must put the heat on Jordan. The Sec thinks Hussein is putting the heat on us to give the additional batallions. H said the Br have been weak on it. It is a saber-rattling performance.

[Here follows discussion of disarmament and Cyprus.]

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in New York by Phyllis D. Bernau. Dulles placed the call to Herter.

2 The head of the Jordanian Delegation, Abdul Monem Rifai, addressed the General Assembly on August 14 and called on the United Nations to take the measures necessary to ensure Jordan’s safety and independence. He said, however, that Jordan would oppose the dispatch of a U.N. force or observers to be stationed in Jordan or to guard its frontiers. (U.N. doc. A/PV.735)

274. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 274. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut August 15, 1958—4 p.m.

1130. Admiral Holloway and I had a lengthy review of situation this morning with General Chehab. Following points emerged: 1. Effect of US withdrawal: General Chehab said he was pleased with results of retraction second Marine Battalion. It had had effect he had predicted on opposition. Already he had noted a lessened stridency in their propaganda output; and he was certain from internal information that more moderate leaders had been enabled to get a firmer grip on rank and file than before. So far as Loyalists–Christian element was concerned withdrawal of Marine Battalion had not had repercussions which certain elements had feared. For example Gemayel and his phalangists had taken matter calmly and more reflective Christian elements such as the intellectuals had been forced to begin thinking on ways and means to find compromise solutions which would end Lebanese internal crisis.

2. He thought in a guarded way it would be possible to contemplate withdrawal of an additional battalion before his inauguration September 24. It was agreed however there would be no recommendation prior consultation keeping in mind political effect of such a movement. Chehab thought however it would have a beneficial result coming before he takes office.

3. General said several times during conversation that presence of US forces in Lebanon had been of decisive beneficial effect. He said that had we not arrived with strength we deployed in Lebanon, it would have been difficult to see how country could have been saved from complete anarchy.

4. Continuing on this theme the General said he had yesterday been approached by UNOGIL to ascertain his thinking on possibility of establishing a small UN armed police force in Lebanon. Chehab said he had told UN observers he was firmly opposed to any UN police force which might have internal responsibilities in this country although he was willing to study possibilities of establishing a small UN force which might do guard duty on the frontiers. In general however he felt UNOGIL should not expand its numbers and he is personally opposed to having its members armed. He plans to discuss this with Chamoun tomorrow.

Chehab said “The President and I look upon this matter in an inverse light; I regard it with a view to the future and he looks on it with a view to the past. So far as Chamoun and company are concerned, they would be willing to have any number of foreign troops in Lebanon. However, I must look to a solution reached by the Lebanese people themselves and I do not think it can be accomplished by the perpetual stationing of foreign forces in Lebanon whether American or UN.”

General said as he sees matters now UN could play useful psychological role in maintaining its small observer corps here for a short interval after final withdrawal of US forces. However, throughout our interview he made it very clear he does not desire nor would he request withdrawal of US troops until security situation has been restored; he also made it clear he did not himself favor replacement of US forces by any UN armed forces.

5. General confirmed information I had already received that Deputy Ali Bazzi had been sent by him to Damascus to discuss Syrian-Egyptian intentions regarding Lebanon in future. Chehab said he was extremely pleased that in addition to lip service assurance Ali Bazzi received from Serraj, his emissary had more explicit and affirmative assurances from Hakim Amer himself. In fact the Field Marshal gave instructions to Serraj in Bazzi’s presence for withdrawal of UAR “commandos" from the Basta. Chehab said first detachment of these commandos left Beirut yesterday; he hoped their entire member would be withdrawn into Syria in immediate future. With departure of these foreign hardcore agitators he hoped opposition in Basta would commence go although he did not think fact there would be cases of violence, of kidnapping, and extortion for some time to come.

6. As to security in Lebanon generally Chehab was guardedly optimistic. He said that despite constant individual reports of free-looting and banditry (some of which were highly colored) he had from his own intelligence sources as well as from tribal and religious leaders clear evidence that the security position was steadily improving. He was particularly heartened by offer of rebel leaders north of Tripoli to permit Maronite patriarch to send a mission to the Akkar area to see for themselves that security was being restored by opposition leaders in that area. The General likewise predicted security in South Lebanon would soon be back almost to normal; and added that he was receiving good cooperation from Jumblatt in restraining acts of vengeance and vandalism in the Chouf.

7. I observed to Chehab that in order to expedite restoration of security situation it seemed to me that in addition to police-type action by armed forces and gendarmes, it was likewise important to reestablish economic life of country. As root cause of much violence was fact men were becoming desperate because their families needed funds and food. I asked if army could not arrange for convoying truck caravan from Beirut to Syrian frontier. If we could open transit trade once more to Syria, Jordan and Iraq, Beirut would commence to regain its old position as an entrepot and thus by economic means we might redress security posture. Chehab said he would gladly guarantee security of truck convoys to Syrian frontier but asked what I could do with Lebanese Government. Specifically Sami Solh (which had by decree closed the border). I said I would very gladly approach Lebanese Government to get this decree rescinded. I also said I had been heartened by estimate of my colleague in Damascus who is currently visiting Beirut that Syrian authorities would probably be ready to give assurances for safe return of Lebanese trucks once normal commerce was restored. I plan to see Prime Minister and Chamoun to get Lebanese Government to open frontier.

8. Our general impression of Chehab was that of a man with much increased confidence in his own ability to confront a thorny situation and a man who is determined not to yield to partisan importunity or pressure from either side, whether opposition or government, Christian or Moslem. Certainly insofar as his attitude toward our armed forces and CINCSPECOMME is concerned, it could not be more cooperative and sympathetic.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–1558. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Damascus, Cairo, London, Paris, and USUN.

275. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy) to the Acting Secretary of State 275. Letter From the Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (Murphy) to the Acting Secretary of State1

Washington, August 15, 1958.

Dear Chris: I hesitate to burden you with another memorandum, but I have included in succinct form in the attached memorandum some thoughts regarding a Middle East settlement. The present opportunity would seem to be the best that has presented itself for a long time to make progress in this complicated problem. If we could settle on the lines of a program for the area, we might have some chance of success. Without a well defined line I should think our chances of losing out would be very much enhanced.

RM

[Enclosure]

MEMORANDUM2

From numerous conversations with a variety of personalities and information from other sources in the Middle Eastern countries visited by me during the period July 16 to August 12, the following thoughts emerge: 1) A temporary if precarious balance of power has been achieved between the determination manifest by the United States and United Kingdom in the deployment of military forces on the one hand, and the popular dynamism of Arab unity as symbolized by Nasser on the other. This breathing space should be utilized to launch a program which will promote a constructive era and peace and stability in the area.

2) Propaganda. The United States should make an effective effort to appeal to the Arab masses, to their desire not only for better economic conditions and especially their craving to be treated with dignity and as equals.

3) Lebanon. Coincident with the phased withdrawal of U.S. forces, and the establishment of law and order, some form of international guarantee of the independence of Lebanon should be provided.3

4) Jordan. This is the focus of the present danger in the area. The untenable position of the U.K. forces in Jordan requires that we carefully synchronize our withdrawal in Lebanon with theirs if possible. [10½ lines of source text not declassified]

[4 paragraphs (24 lines of source text) not declassified]4

5) Middle East Neutralization. With any success in dealing with the immediate problem of Jordan, the Conference could propose a neutralization of the area. The Powers in the Conference, having established the new boundaries of Syria, Iraq and Israel, could provide a form of guarantee of the boundaries of those states and Lebanon. A more ambitious program might include guarantees of the boundaries of the U.A.R., Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf Sheikdoms. An inherent feature of the program would be the establishment of a form of international control of arms in the area.5

6) A treaty would establish the Middle Eastern settlement. Its provisions could deal not only with the political features of the area but the economic and financial as well. It would contemplate large scale economic development and raised standards of living.

[Here follow Murphy’s recommendations with respect to Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Israel, Turkey, Iran, Pakistan, Oil, and Nasser.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.80/8–1558. Top Secret. The full texts of the attached memorandum by Murphy, and the assessments of the memorandum by Dulles and Berry, cited below, are scheduled for publication in volume XII. An August 22 memorandum from Hanes to Herter summarized IO’s comments on the Murphy memorandum, and an undated memorandum, attached to the source text, contains an assessment prepared in S/P of Murphy’s recommendations. (Both ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

2 Top Secret.

3 Dulles prepared his comments on Murphy’s memorandum on August 23, and noted in a handwritten observation at the end of the comments: “These are quick reactions, not to be given great weight.” His comment on Murphy’s recommendation with respect to Lebanon reads: “OK, if practical. Perhaps the ’guarantee’ will have to be implied rather than formally expressed.” (Department of State, Central Files, 611.80/8–1558) In an undated memorandum to Herter, Deputy Assistant Secretary Lampton Berry offered NEA’s comments on Murphy’s recommendations. NEA’s reaction to Murphy’s recommendation with respect to Lebanon reads as follows: “It is our hope that out of the present session of the United Nations will come an expression of United Nations interest in the Lebanon which will help preserve the independence and integrity of this country. It is clear that the Lebanese themselves have not reached a clear idea as to whether they desire an international guarantee of the future status of their country.” (Ibid.)

4 [8½ lines of text not declassified] NEA concluded that the best prospects for avoiding a serious upheaval in Jordan lay in obtaining an expression of interest by the United Nations which would permit the orderly withdrawal of British forces. Thereafter, NEA anticipated that with some change in the political situation within Jordan, Jordan’s Arab neighbors could be brought to recognize the importance of maintaining an independent Jordan.

5 Dulles expressed his doubts as to whether Murphy’s proposal for Middle East neutralization was either feasible or desirable, and NEA concurred, pointing again to the danger of involving the Soviet Union in such an undertaking. Dulles’ comments and NEA’s objections also applied to Murphy’s suggestion that a treaty be negotiated to establish the Middle East settlement.

276. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 16, 1958 276. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 16, 19581

New York, August 16, 1958

SUBJECT

Lebanon and the Special Session of the UNGA

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Charles Malik, Foreign Minister of Lebanon

The Secretary

Ambassador Lodge, USUN

Mr. Rountree, NEA

Mr. Bergus, NE

Dr. Malik said he had postponed his arrival in New York so as to have an opportunity for detailed discussions with Lebanese leaders, particularly President Chamoun and President-elect Chehab. They had two large questions in their minds of equal importance. The first was that of the presence of US forces. Both felt (Chehab even more than Chamoun) that too early a withdrawal of these forces could spell disaster to Lebanon. General Chehab was beginning to feel the weight of responsibility. They were concerned at press and other reports regarding the concerted onslaught of the Communists and their fellow travelers against the presence of US forces in Lebanon and apprehensive lest this affect US policy.

Their second question was what would come out of the present General Assembly with regard to Lebanon. If it were only words, this would be too meager an outcome for the genuine excitement which had gripped the world. What could the UNGA do to give Lebanon peace of mind? General Chehab had told Dr. Malik that he hoped that nothing would be done which would have the effect of tying his hands before he assumed power. Dr. Malik replied that he had no intention of tying General Chehab’s hands but felt that Lebanon should take advantage of the present situation. Dr. Malik had undertaken to keep in close touch with General Chehab.

The Secretary stated that we had been working intensively, particularly over the last twenty-four hours, on a possible UNGA resolution which touched upon both matters. There was a desire to get some assurances from countries such as the UAR, Iraq and even Israel that they would keep their hands off Lebanon and Jordan and to make such countries realize that if they did not, they would be subject to serious condemnation. It was not possible to get ironclad guarantees which we could be sure would work. The formula we were working on now would contain a reference to UN objectives including those contained in the “Essentials for Peace” resolution2 and link them to Lebanon and Jordan. The resolution would then go on to authorize the Secretary General to work out further practical measures.

With respect to withdrawal of US forces, we had in mind a US declaration which might contain the following elements: 1. The reasons why our forces were in Lebanon.

2. The conditions under which they would be withdrawn, including: a. a request from the duly constituted Government of Lebanon;

b. a United States decision that it was satisfied that Lebanon’s independence and integrity had been assured; (The Secretary stated this provision was essential so that we could retain our freedom of action.)

c. a UNGA request for withdrawal on the grounds that the forces’ continued stay in Lebanon was no longer required for the maintenance of international peace and security.

The Secretary pointed out that this last element was similar to a declaration made with respect to our Greek-Turkish aid program. It would require a two-thirds vote of the General Assembly to bring it into being, a possibility which we thought highly unlikely. We had not yet made this suggestion to others, but the Secretary planned to discuss it with Foreign Minister Lloyd very shortly. This proposal might be more dangerous to the British. There seemed to be fairly widespread recognition in the Assembly of our reasons for sending troops to Lebanon and our intention to withdraw them as quickly as possible. There was, however, some suspicion that the British might want to remain on in Jordan. We were quite certain that this was not the British intention. The Secretary thought that the course of action we had in mind would serve to protect Lebanon. Dr. Malik thought it might be better if we could dispense with point 2 c. The Secretary said that the British might not want to include such a point, in which case we probably would withdraw the suggestion.

Dr. Malik said he did not know how to disassociate the cases of Lebanon and Jordan, but they were very different. If Hussein went, Dr. Malik did not know what the future of Jordan would be. If Chamoun went, or if ten Chehabs went, there would still be a majority of people in Lebanon who wished to maintain the independence and integrity of their country. The Secretary agreed that the cases were different. He referred to Jordan’s unviability, need for foreign subsidy, etc., and the fact that our primary interest in Jordan was to prevent a reopening of the Arab-Israel war. He did not know what the future of Jordan was. Dr. Malik said that the Lebanese would be “insulted" to be bracketed with Jordan. Lebanon had a right to exist indefinitely. Perhaps some drafting device could be employed. The Secretary was not sure that this could be done.

Ambassador Lodge felt that about the most that could be done would be to make a distinction between the two in speeches in the Assembly. This General Assembly had, however, been called on questions relating to troops in both countries. The Secretary felt that it would be difficult to persuade the British to accept two separate resolutions. Ambassador Lodge pointed out that in all frankness this was a situation where we had a stronger case than the British and it was a matter of the stronger trying to carry along his weaker friend.

Dr. Malik said he planned to speak in the Assembly on either Monday or Tuesday. His speech would be simple, straightforward, conciliatory and non-provocative. He would state how Lebanon feels about itself and how it envisages its future. The Secretary expressed the hope that Dr. Malik would not drop entirely the statement that the disturbance in Lebanon had been fomented from without. This could cut the legal ground from under us. Dr. Malik assured the Secretary that he would make this point clear but in a way calculated to avoid controversy.

Dr. Malik asked how long the Assembly would last. The Secretary said he did not expect to be in New York beyond Monday. If a resolution were tabled this weekend the Assembly might terminate by Wednesday. The Secretary hoped this would be the case.

Dr. Malik asked whether the Secretary thought that the US views as outlined above were the maximum obtainable from this Assembly. The Secretary felt that they were. There could emerge from these proceedings a recognition by Nasser that he should keep his hands off Lebanon and Jordan for two different reasons; in Lebanon, its traditions and special situation; in Jordan, the possibility of reopening the Arab-Israel war. Even Gromyko accepted this latter view. Fawzi professed to, but one could never be certain of exactly what Fawzi said. The Secretary did believe that this consideration had caught them short.

Dr. Malik wondered if Nasser had really been caught short. He said that infiltration and inflammatory broadcasts were still going on. The Secretary referred to the President’s idea of a UN monitoring system. We probably could not get action on it during this special Assembly but intended to put it on the agenda of the next regular Assembly. The Secretary discussed briefly the problem of getting firm evidence of such activities. Often a broadcast which the press described as inflammatory turned out, upon examination of a tape recording, not to be that bad.

At this point the Secretary and Ambassador Lodge left to attend a meeting with Foreign Secretary Lloyd. Mr. Rountree continued the discussion.

Mr. Rountree had the general impression that the atmosphere in the Assembly was about as good as could be expected. The reaction to the President’s speech had been very good. While nothing dramatic in the way of concrete assurances could probably be obtained, there was a good prospect of getting a resolution which could establish a proper atmosphere in the area. The theme which the USSR and the UAR had been pressing was the need to get the US and UK forces out and only then discuss constructive measures. Against this background the USSR resolution3 had been judged by some delegations as moderate, even, in some quarters, constructive. Our effort, in which we had had some success, was to make it clear that the object of this special session was not to bring about the withdrawal of the troops but to create a situation in which the troops could be withdrawn. It was unfortunate, in Mr. Rountree’s view, that we had been delayed in getting a resolution tabled which would focus things in their proper order. He hoped we could table a resolution with the least possible delay, perhaps during the weekend. Mr. Rountree envisaged multiple sponsorship of such a resolution. In order to achieve wide support such a resolution could not represent the best of all possible worlds. It could, however, be very constructive. Dr. Malik hoped he could see the resolution as soon as possible. Mr. Rountree agreed and said that we wished him to see the resolution as soon as we were in a position to show it to him; hopefully this might be this afternoon.

Dr. Malik inquired as to how much the US Government really felt that there would be stability in Lebanon. Mr. Rountree replied that, while our evaluation was not, of course, as valid as that of the Lebanese themselves, we hoped that outside interference would, as a result of action being taken here, greatly diminish. On the internal side, we believed that the election of a new President would have a useful effect. Our evaluation was that in the absence of unforeseen developments, the chances of stability in Lebanon were good. We assumed that President Chamoun would serve out his term. We assumed that this would mean the continuation of some opposition and some disturbances in Lebanon. This could be justified in the light of the need to maintain constitutional procedures in Lebanon. After the new President assumed office, the opposition might assume a different attitude.

Dr. Malik seemed to accept the fact that from this session of the UNGA little more could be expected by way of guarantees to Lebanon. He felt, however, that there was a need for more ironclad guarantees with perhaps great power backing. He felt we should be working toward this end. Mr. Rountree discussed briefly in general terms various suggestions that had come to his attention with regard to attaining some sort of recognition of Lebanon’s status. Dr. Malik indicated that he intended in his forthcoming speech to point out Lebanon’s historic background and the fact that it has had a special position in the Middle East over a number of centuries. He felt the thinking on this question needed more time to mature so that an international instrument affecting Lebanon could in due course be worked out.

Dr. Malik inquired as to the prospects of a great power meeting. Mr. Rountree felt that the Soviets would continue to press for one and to create artificial crises which seemed to require one. As to a summit conference, our position remained unchanged. We would be happy to attend one if proper preparations were made. We would not discuss Lebanon and Jordan at such a conference as this was a matter for handling by the UN.

Dr. Malik asked if the US and the West intended to continue with full vigor a campaign to expose and point out the dangers encountered in the processing of indirect aggression and subversion. Mr. Rountree felt that the whole effort in which we were presently embarked demonstrated our intentions in this regard. Dr. Malik inquired as to how we intended to move forward on the President’s six-point program. Mr. Rountree said he hoped that most of the points would be incorporated in the resolution which would be tabled in the UNGA.

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199. Secret. Drafted by Bergus. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite in the Waldorf Towers.

2 Reference is to the “Essentials of Peace” resolution of 1949. (UNGA Resolution 290 (IV))

3 Reference is to the resolution introduced by Gromyko on August 12 calling for the strengthening of the U.N. Observer Group in Lebanon and the establishment of a similar group in Jordan to supervise the immediate withdrawal of U.S. and British forces from the area. (U.N. doc. A/3870, printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, p.1031)

277. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 277. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 17, 1958—2 p.m.

538. Reference: Embtel 532 repeated USUN 14.2 As reported reference telegram had dinner engagement Prime Minister Rifai last night, however, half hour before dinner scheduled begin Rifai telephoned King Hussein and Rais Diwan Talhuni had come his home unexpectedly requested I join them asking had urgent matter wished discuss with me. Following important points our conversation which lasted over three hours.

(A) Hussein asked Rifai fill me in latest developments Jordan complaint GA. Rifai said had received cable which gave text proposed resolution sponsored by group European/Latin American States and which supported by US/UK.3 Hussein said resolution most disappointing not only fails condemn UAR continuous subversive attacks Jordan/Lebanon but does nothing constructive only authorizes SYG Hammarskjold make another trip Jordan forlorn hope will be able sell HKJ some adaptation UN police force, UNOGIL secure agreement stationing team monitor radio broadcasts. King believes major purpose proposed resolution is “save face" UN which has once again demonstrated it either unwilling or unable come grips real problem world peace. He reiterated HKJ could not accept either UN police force observer groups and would only countenance monitoring team if UAR/Iraq agreed accept same. However, in order avoid charge HKJ unwilling cooperate UN, Hussein agreed “go along” resolution although he regards proposed Hammarskjold visit as waste of time. He has now come conclusion placing Jordan complaint before UN was mistake merely resulted loss valuable time during critical period which Jordan can ill afford. [12½ lines of source text not declassified]

(B) King said had another subject on which he wished me report my government soonest. Asked if I knew of British attempt establish Nicosia/Amman airlink using planes Eagle Aviation Company. At this point Rifai took over conversation. Said British approached HKJ requested views desirability finding some means partial replacement Cyprus/Amman military airlift. In due course advance proposal Eagle Aviation Company under exclusive charter British War Office should make bi-weekly flights transporting only military personnel/high priority supplies. No mention was made any stop Israel. Subsequently British without further consultation HKJ concluded agreement GOI providing overflight Israel with two way landing Lydda. Radio Israel immediately announced inauguration new air service Nicosia/Lydda/Amman, which came as bombshell Jordan Government prompted several cabinet members threaten resign if deal went through.

RIFAI summoned British Ambassador Johnston who said he not fully informed promised get all facts report Rifai. When he saw Prime Minister again he said HMG took position establishment airlink between sixteenth paratrooper brigade Amman with its rear echelon Cyprus mandatory. Johnston was instructed by Prime Minister Macmillan inform HKJ it must either agree landings Lydda or HMG would be compelled consider withdrawal British troops from Jordan. Rifai furious told Johnston British threat example “ballistic blackmail” mentioned President Eisenhower speech GA, if British thought they were back in days Glubb Pasha (RIFAI largely instrumental his removal) they were mistaken. Although he unable reply officially without consulting King Hussein, his personal reaction if British intend use such high handed methods better they withdraw troops immediately. Rifai reported British ultimatum Hussein who ordered special meeting Council Ministers. Their reaction unanimous condemnation British with several Ministers threatening resign if government acceeded British demand. Later King Hussein called in Ambassador Johnston, told him HKJ unable agree British proposal. If troops withdrawn that HMG decision. Johnston said he would transmit King’s answer Prime Minister Macmillan at once.

[Paragraph (C) (14½ lines of source text) not declassified]

(D) Hussein expressed opinion Saudi Arabia likely next target Nasser aggression. Said local Saudi Arabian Chargé Kuhaymi suspected passing out money at Crown Prince Faisal direction pro-Nasser elements Jordan. HKJ keeping close watch his activities, but on basis past experience, doubt if money will be effectively employed.

Comment: Gravity with which Hussein views situation reflected his drawn face emotional tone speech. Both King/RIFAI convinced nothing productive will come out GA, however, both agree HKJ must “go through with drill” order avoid stigma it presented case SC then refused accept any UN recommendations. I am convinced Hussein/RIFAI see US military/economic aid as last hope Jordan. Hussein said if this is abandoned by West, he will go down fighting. [9 lines of source text not declassified] Hussein reasons British “get tough attitude” over Lydda landings stems from their desire force Jordan reach modus vivendi with Israel. There is no doubt Hussein fully appreciates precarious position his country. I am sure time is not far off when he will demand know how much he can expect way tangible evidence US military support when he will get it, for without it, neither he nor Jordan can long endure.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–1758. Top Secret; Niact; Noforn. Repeated to USUN.

2 In telegram 532 from Amman, August 16, Wright reported on an exchange with British Ambassador Johnston in which Johnston discussed a recent conversation with Prime Minister Rifai. Johnson discussed the continuing opposition of Hussein and Rifai to the stationing of a U.N. peacekeeping force in Jordan. (Ibid., 785.00/8–1658)

3 See footnote 3, Document 271.

278. Telegram From the Delegation at the United Nations to the Department of State 278. Telegram From the Delegation at the United Nations to the Department of State1

New York, August 18, 1958—7 p.m.

Delga 651. Re Emergency GA.

1. Secretary met privately this morning with Dels of Norway,2 Denmark, Sweden, UK, Ceylon, Liberia, Colombia and Ghana to discuss Norwegian draft res.3

2. In response request for comments by Engen (Norway) who chaired meeting Secretary explained US position along following lines (cleared by Secretary):

Secretary said joint resolution was carefully thought out and well rounded resolution which US would support. If anything, some people might say US had gone too far in its willingness to accept moderate language on withdrawal. There was danger focus of GA might be shifted from complaints against interference in Jordan and Lebanon by UAR and from constructive action it might take to help bring stability to Middle East, into focus on Soviet demand for US and British withdrawal. This danger had to be carefully guarded against.

Secretary said US troops had been sent to Lebanon with great reluctance. It was case where decision to do so was not satisfactory, but decision not to have done so would have been worse. US had known for six weeks that Government of Lebanon might feel it necessary to request assistance. We had sought to dissuade Lebanese Government from doing so. When revolt occurred, Lebanese Government formally requested US assistance without prior consultation with US. In circumstances, we responded immediately. US troops went to assist in maintaining independence and integrity of Lebanon against civil strife fomented from without, and to assist in protecting American lives and property and for no other reasons. They would stay no longer than necessary. Two main concerns expressed about US action had already been dispelled. First of these was that US troops had been sent in to support President Chamoun for new term as President of Lebanon; this had been dispelled by election of General Chehab. Second was that US troops might attack Iraq. This was never any part of our intention and any suspicion that it may have been so was dispelled by our recognition of Iraq.

Problem now facing US is whether UN can take up task and make it possible for US forces to withdraw. Draft res will not work, and no draft res will, unless it has acquiescence of UAR. It was not vital whether UAR voted for res, or acquiesced by abstaining. Its real attitude was what was important. There could not be enough UN soldiers in Lebanon or Jordan to protect countries against determined efforts by UAR to penetrate. Many other things—its radio broadcasts and supplies of money—would be difficult to prevent. Willingness of UAR to keep its hands off was required.

Lebanon and Jordan were different from other countries in Middle East and raised key problems of concern. Lebanon was roughly half Christian and half Moslem. Jordan occupied key political position in respect to general armistice agreements with Israel, raising serious questions with respect to general Middle Eastern stability. Neither country had any oil. It was apparent that neither of them had assets of such value that anyone should risk peace of world to get them.

If SYG could obtain acquiescence of UAR to keep its hands off Lebanon and set up semi-permanent representation of UN in Lebanon, it should be possible for US to get its forces out very quickly. US wanted to do this very much provided it did so under honorable conditions and with full respect to right of one nation to help another nation that is imperiled. It is difficult to pin down this problem much closer. Given acquiescence by UAR in program set out in res, and especially paragraph A,4 we believe US troops can get out very soon. It is desirable they should stay until after change of government on September 23 or 24. General Chehab has already told us he is anxious that they stay until then. Chehab, of course, was UAR candidate for President of Lebanon number of weeks ago. In fact, UAR had suggested US and UAR jointly sponsor him. We rejected this because we did not think it was up to either UAR or US to pick pres of Lebanon. Now he has been chosen by Lebanese themselves. In light previous UAR position it now ought to be possible, therefore, to work out practical arrangements for an early withdrawal.

It is not possible to pick definite calendar date. However, we would be disappointed if there were not acquiescence by UAR and action by SYG so that he could report by September 30 that question was well on way toward being resolved. In earlier conversations with FonMin Fawzi we had gotten impression UAR would be prepared to go along with program such as res presented. If this is still UAR attitude, question can be resolved quickly.

Secretary also pointed out declaration US was submitting to SYG regarding its position on withdrawal included statement we would abide by decision of UN GA.5 This was remarkable position beyond that ever made by any other government in similar circumstances. If there was anyone who still compared US position in Lebanon to that of USSR in Hungary, it might be suggested that USSR make same type of statement with respect to its forces in Hungary.

3. Lloyd (UK) stated UK position was much same as that of US. UK reluctance to go into Jordan was much same as that of US re Lebanon. This could be easily understood when hazardous nature of supply lines was considered. On practical grounds UK was extremely anxious for other arrangements to be made under res. It was not question of UN force in Jordan or of large number of people. For UAR to hold off was most important. If UAR willing to reach “détente” all that would be needed was UN “presence”. UN commissioner in Amman might be enough. Sooner he was there sooner UK would be ready to leave Jordan. It would not serve world peace or UN if UK left in circumstances of dishonor.

UK was anxious to solve problem. UK action deserved more commendation than received. If UN was ready to take responsibility UK was ready to go provided it was done in position of honor and satisfactory substitute was put in its place.

He hoped very much action in Lebanon and Jordan could move on parallel basis. September 23rd has been mentioned, and it had certain standing with respect to Lebanon. He hoped that by that date SYG would have succeeded and could report on “détente” achieved. He could not be more precise than that.

4. Smith (Canada) asked if UK position on UN role in Jordan was restrictive or if Lloyd would think at least of commissioner and staff of observers. Lloyd replied this could be left to SYG. UN force was hardly practical or suitable, although SYG and “we to some extent” once favored it. He was “chary” of observers but thought there might be more than one man and immediate staff. Smith replied Canada would be satisfied that it would be for SYG to decide. He interpreted UK statement as not being restrictive or exclusive.

5. Corea (Ceylon) said he could not express his del’s position yet. Did UAR acquiesce? There was one problem in US–UK letters. That was statement referring to withdrawal when “no longer required”. He thought there was interest in having withdrawal when or “as soon as" UN action was taken.

6. Other dels did not speak.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320/8–1858. Confidential; Priority.

2 A handwritten note on the telegram at this point, in an unknown hand, reads “Canada (?)”. A chronology of the Secretary’s meetings on August 18, prepared by the Delegation, indicates that Canada, as one of the cosponsors of the resolution, was represented at the meeting by the Canadian Foreign Secretary. (Ibid., Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1097)

3 The meeting took place in a conference room of the General Assembly building at 10:15 a.m. The “Norwegian” resolution, cited in footnote 3, Document 271, was introduced in the General Assembly on August 18 by Norway, Canada, Colombia, Denmark, Liberia, Panama, and Paraguay.

4 Paragraph A of the draft resolution reads: “1. Reaffirms that all Member States should ’refrain from any threats or acts, direct or indirect, aimed at impairing the freedom, independence or integrity of any State, or at fomenting civil strife and subverting the will of the people of any State’;

“2. Calls upon all Member States strictly to observe these obligations and to ensure that their conduct, by word and deed, in relation to the general area of the Near East, conforms to the above-mentioned policy.”

5 In an August 18 letter to the President of the General Assembly, Dulles stated: “United States forces will be withdrawn from Lebanon whenever requested by the duly constituted Government of Lebanon, or whenever, as a result of the further action of the United Nations or otherwise, their presence is no longer required.” He added: “The United States will in any event abide by a determination of the United Nations General Assembly that action taken or assistance furnished by the United Nations makes the continued presence of United States forces in Lebanon unnecessary for the maintenance of international peace and security.” (U.N. doc. A/3876, printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, p. 1042)

279. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 18, 1958, Noon 279. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 18, 1958, Noon1

New York, August 18, 1958, Noon

SUBJECT

Situation in Lebanon and Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

Foreign Minister Fawzi—United Arab Republic

The Secretary

Ambassador Lodge

Mr. Rountree

Dr. Fawzi stated his concern regarding the Norwegian draft resolution2 which, he said, had been under active discussion by him with the Norwegian and other delegations. He did not think it adequately met the question of withdrawal. Until there were some more specific indications regarding withdrawal of US and UK forces, there would be serious problems for all of us. While American forces were in Lebanon, there was always the danger that “your boys and our boys” would become involved in difficulties which might spread against the wishes of both sides. From the UAR viewpoint, one half the problem involved the question of withdrawal itself and the other half public opinion. He wished the Secretary’s advice as to how the situation might be met.

The Secretary reviewed at some length the reasons for the presence of US and UK forces in Lebanon and Jordan. He said that it was difficult to capture in the precise words of a resolution the spirit that would be required to meet the situation adequately. We had, in fact, listened to the views of a number of delegations and had already made many concessions to those views. He thought the resolution in its present form provided a good basis upon which we could find a solution, provided there was the intention on the part of the UAR not to interfere in Lebanon and Jordan.

The Secretary said that in contrast to Lebanon, Jordan is an artificial state. You cannot do what is perhaps the natural thing, which is to have it divided up and absorbed by the surrounding countries. We therefore need an understanding that the UAR will accept the rather special position of Lebanon and Jordan.

Our purpose is to get out if it is your purpose to keep your hands off, the Secretary declared. If this condition exists, the problem can be solved quickly. If the UAR has fruitful talks here with the United States and the United Kingdom, it should make possible a resolution which you would not oppose. A bitter fight here would be very bad. In drafting a resolution like this it is difficult to find the right words. But if the UAR keeps its hands off we can get out.

Dr. Fawzi then alluded to what he described as “one minor point” in the resolution: the paragraph referring to the United States and British troops and their withdrawal. Dr. Fawzi thought the paragraph makes it appear that the General Assembly would approve of their presence there.

The Secretary commented that this paragraph is only a historical reference and does not imply approval. Mr. Lodge recalled that the word “presence” was in and we dropped it in the belief, which we got from Ambassador Engen (Norway), that this would meet with UAR approval.

Dr. Fawzi observed that the idea of endorsing the US–UK presence is still there by implication.

As far as Lebanon is concerned, the UAR is ready to accept the presence of observers and to throw as much light as possible to show that it is not interfering. The UAR, Dr. Fawzi said, will offer friendly advice to Lebanon to calm the situation down, particularly after Chehab is in.

As regards Jordan, the UAR accepts the fact that arrangements—that is observers and UN presence—should be made to ensure there is no interference by the UAR or anybody else. The UN presence had better not be in Amman, Dr. Fawzi thought, because if it is there it will be regarded as being the government.

As regards Jordan’s future, Dr. Fawzi went on, if it is a fact that Hussein can be safe in his own country, well and good. If some desire him to go to the UK to finish his studies, well and good.

We cannot envisage, Dr. Fawzi said, any union with Lebanon or Jordan if the people do not want it—and we do not want Lebanon. Dr. Fawzi said that Egypt would never have wanted Syria if the people in Syria had not wanted to join with Egypt. If Jordan wishes to continue as a nonviable state for a while, we shall say nothing, Dr. Fawzi said, “Jordan is either too much of an expense for us or else it is too much of a danger to us.” It seems, Dr. Fawzi observed, that her association with Iraq is the most logical course, but it is up to the Jordanians—the UAR cannot force them. The UAR wants neither too great a burden nor too great a danger.

The Secretary observed that the US pays 50 million dollars to support Jordan. The moment we stop, the Secretary said, the situation collapses.

Dr. Fawzi thought that the change-over should be reasonable, not sudden.

The Secretary said that the problem of Jordan’s future seemed to him almost insoluble. Perhaps, he thought, there is a future with Iraq. The Israelis believe that Iraq is dominated by the UAR. The Secretary commented that he did not know whether they would differentiate between Iraq and the UAR or not.

Dr. Fawzi said he did not know what direction Jordan will go, but thought there was a need for a breathing spell. We must not be in too much of a hurry. If we make clear to the Israelis and the Arabs, and if the UN makes it clear, and if the two Big Powers—the US and the Soviet Union—make it clear that they will not tolerate any aggression from either side, then there can be no such aggression. Dr. Fawzi said that he had told this to Gromyko (USSR) the other day, and he did not dispute it.

The Secretary observed that paragraph A of the joint draft3 covers

this.

Dr. Fawzi said the UAR wants direct contacts outside the GA parallel to the action of the GA. It would be good, he mentioned, if we could envisage an agreed draft resolution—neither East nor West—something which would not make this an area of the cold war. We should not delay.

The Secretary said we should not tinker with this resolution any more in order to please the Latin Americans or India. The important thing is to get an agreement with the UAR. You tell us you will keep hands off, and we can get our troops out. The Secretary said he had been observing international events since the Hague Conference of 1907 and had become somewhat cynical about the words that governments use. The Secretary said he had concluded that countries usually operate in accordance with what they think is to their own best interest. It seemed to him that the best interests of the UAR are to keep hands off Lebanon and Jordan.

There are not big enough stakes in Lebanon and Jordan, according to the Secretary, to take the risks of starting a war. He knew that the US wants nothing. While the UK once wanted to establish a base in Jordan, the Secretary was convinced they want nothing now.

Dr. Fawzi affirmed that there is nothing the UAR wants. We accept observers and all the guarantees, he said.

Dr. Fawzi observed that he had had no indication at all of how long the troops would stay and the date of their withdrawal.

The Secretary replied that the heart of the matter is: what is the attitude of the UAR? If the UAR does not keep hands off, the UN cannot find enough troops to stop them. But if the Secretary General could act quickly and the UAR does not interfere, we would pull out right away. We can be well under way by September 30.

Dr. Fawzi asked if all the troops could be out by September 30.

The Secretary said no, since it takes longer to get out than it takes to get in; it may take at least 30 days to get them out.

Dr. Fawzi said that he wanted an approximate idea.

The Secretary said he could not be precise. Chehab doesn’t want anything drastic done about troop withdrawal until after September 24th. After that he probably would not object to our definitely beginning to withdraw. If the United Nations acts and we get the UAR’s assurances, it could happen quickly.

Dr. Fawzi said he needed a parallel understanding with the United Kingdom.

The Secretary said we know that it has been UAR money and UAR direction coming from Cairo and from Damascus which has been behind much of the present situation. The UAR can exert a big influence to quiet things down and make it easier for us to get out, and make it easier for Chehab to want us out.

Dr. Fawzi said there is no point in his denying or admitting what the Secretary said about UAR activities. There is no point in saying things about other interventions which have taken place. The main thing is to end this confusion. We want to work in a constructive spirit, Dr. Fawzi said. We want the United Kingdom’s assurances too because if they cannot withdraw, it will make your withdrawal difficult.

The Secretary said we are not committed to a concurrent withdrawal with the United Kingdom but we have agreed to consult and we believe that the United Kingdom is sincerely anxious to get out.

Dr. Fawzi said he thought a third resolution is the best answer in the United Nations.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1097. Confidential. Drafted by Rountree and Lodge. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite in the Waldorf Towers. The text of this memorandum of conversation was transmitted to the Department in Delga 655, August 18. (Ibid., Central Files, 320/8–1858)

2 See footnote 3, supra.

3 See footnote 4, supra.

280. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 18, 1958, 3 p.m. 280. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 18, 1958, 3 p.m.1

New York, August 18, 1958, 3 p.m.

SUBJECT

Resolutions

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Ambassador Lodge

Mr. Reinhardt

Mr. Freers

Foreign Minister Gromyko

Mr. Soldatov

Soviet Interpreter

Mr. Gromyko opened the conversation by saying that he thought it was useful at this time to exchange some views concerning the work of the current Session of the General Assembly.

He recalled that the Secretary had expressed his opinion that it would be worthwhile to find a basis for constructive decisions.2 In return, he had put forward the Soviet considerations especially regarding their resolution3 which had just been submitted that day. Subsequently, the Norwegian resolution4 has been submitted. Since Mr. Dulles had indicated interest in the possibility of doing things on a constructive basis, he wanted to make clear that the Soviet attitude was that the Norwegian resolution was completely negative and the Soviet Union could not give it support. Everyone, including the US,

UK, USSR and the Arab countries, concurred that what was involved was an immediate withdrawal of US and British troops from Lebanon and Jordan. In the Norwegian resolution, one condition after another was piled up. Therefore, the Soviet Union not only could not support it but resolutely rejected it. The Soviet resolution provided for the immediate withdrawal of troops from Lebanon and Jordan. If the United States truly favored withdrawal, there should be no objection to this. The Soviet resolution also envisaged a definite role for the UN in the matter. Gromyko recalled that he had spoken to the Secretary in their earlier conversation about strengthening the UN Observer Group in Lebanon and sending a UN Group to Jordan. The presence of UN representatives on the spot would remove any concern about external interference in the affairs of Lebanon. What was there in such a position that was not acceptable to the United States?

The Secretary had said the situation was more complicated in Jordan. There was no reason to prevent the immediate solution of this question. The presence of a UN Group in Jordan would solve this problem. Furthermore, this General Assembly would have its say with regard to the question of non-interference from the outside. How does this not accord with the views of the United States and the United Kingdom? These considerations were being put forward with the thought in mind that it might be possible to achieve a mutual understanding in accordance with everyone’s views.

The Secretary said that, as he understood the situation from his earlier talk with Mr. Gromyko, he did not feel that there was a very great difference between us. He did feel that the Norwegian resolution conformed to the principles we had discussed. The principal differences between us seem to be two. The US contemplated that any withdrawal of troops would have to be fitted into two other things. One, a declaration by the Arab countries, particularly the UAR, reaffirming the principle of non-interference in the affairs of other states. We understood from Foreign Minister Fawzi that the UAR did not object to this. There was, however, no such declaration in the Soviet resolution. Two, while the Soviet resolution does seem to recognize a certain connection between US and British withdrawal and the establishment of a strengthened UN Group in Lebanon and Jordan, there is the implication that the Soviet Union’s plan calls for troops to come out immediately. Of course, it would take some time to set up a UN Group. Such a Group, however, is a common element in our positions and brings us closer together. Since there is no objection by the Arabs to a declaration of non-interference in a UN resolution, there seems to be no basic objection from any quarter to what the US has in mind. In considering the relation of withdrawal of troops to the establishment of UN machinery, it is not possible to withdraw without seeing how the machinery would function. There is a connection between the two, and there could be no serious objection to this. The Secretary said he did not see the differences that seemed to underlie the strong Soviet position against the Norwegian resolution.

Gromyko replied that when the Soviets talk about a definite role of the UN and the necessity of having an Observer Group, they do not have in mind that there should be any delay in the withdrawal of American and British troops. Since there was no UN Group in Jordan, one should be set up immediately and sent within a few days. Experience showed that observers could be on the spot in several days—five or six days and even earlier as far as the capital itself was concerned. If there were agreement, observers could be sent simultaneously with the withdrawal of troops. Agreement could be reached and expressed in one or perhaps two resolutions. The Soviets did not want to derogate from the role of the UN in this situation. There should be no difficulty in coming to agreement on the thesis of non-interference in internal affairs. There would hardly be any delegate of the Arab countries directly concerned who would not support this. It was Gromyko’s understanding, however, that they would do so only if a solution were reached satisfactory to all concerned, which appeared a reasonable viewpoint to him.

The Secretary recalled that he had said in the previous conversation with Gromyko that the important thing was to know whether or not the UAR wants to take over Lebanon and Jordan. This question could not just be determined by a resolution. Failure of the UAR to accept the principle of non-interference would amount to a suspicious circumstance, but even if it did accept it, there was no assurance that it would abide by its promise. The important thing was to make sure that the Governments of Lebanon and Jordan could be confident in their own minds that their two countries would be let alone. UN presence would serve as a reminder that no violation of pledges could occur without those responsible being caught. If these two things he had been talking about took place the US would withdraw quickly. This could not be done in 15 minutes, of course. The initial contingents had been combat troops, but various support elements had followed them up. It would take some time to carry out the withdrawal, but if there were a genuine feeling that the UAR intends to keep hands off and if the UN were present, there could be no reason why the US withdrawal would not take place expeditiously. The Secretary mentioned that in his earlier talk with Gromyko he had indicated he saw no reason why the UAR would want to take over Lebanon. It would be a direct liability to her. If the UAR wanted Lebanon it would at least have to face war with Israel. There was a balance of Christians and Moslems in the country. Disruption of this balance would make the country a real liability for the UAR. The Secretary thought that the UAR would stay out if there were a UN presence in Lebanon. The US wanted to get its troops out. It had not, as alleged, sent them there to keep Chamoun in power nor to attack Iraq. There was no other reason for their being there except to keep the Republic of Lebanon from losing its independence. Once it was satisfied this danger did not exist, it would manufacture no pretext for delay but would leave promptly. Mr. Gromyko should understand that all sorts of resolutions could be passed, but if war broke out in the Middle East it would be difficult to keep world peace. Thus we must work to make a settlement that will be effective.

Gromyko observed that there was a difference between the internal problem of the area and the external problem which should be the subject of UN concern. He would deal only with the latter and the Soviet Union would only approach the problem of the Middle East and of Lebanon and Jordan from this point of view. With regard to the role of the UN no one wished to minimize this role or its significance. The US stressed it, so did the USSR, and the British and the Arabs. Why was it not possible to come to agreement? The question of the UN’s role could be linked with the main question of the withdrawal of troops. A UN group could be sent to Jordan within 4 or 5 days. This would reflect the general feeling here. It should be possible to reach an understanding on this score with the Arab delegations. Mr. Dulles, however, went further. He discussed future plans of the UAR. Mr. Gromyko said he had no information about any plans of the UAR. This was going a bit far. It was a hypothetical approach and could hardly be productive.

The Secretary replied that, as he had said before, the important thing was to be satisfied that there existed no destructive purposes. If this could be achieved, there was really not much difference between the Soviet and US positions. The Soviets spoke about immediate withdrawal and related it to some kind of UN action. The situation in Lebanon was not quite this simple. There was, on the other hand, some relation as far as Jordan was concerned between withdrawal and the international situation. If Jordan disintegrated a very serious situation would result. The problem of Jordan could not be easily and quickly dismissed. It would not be solved just by sending a handful of observers to Amman. Thus, there was a reason for dealing with withdrawal from Jordan in such a way as to achieve sufficient order and stability there to prevent the Israelis’ claiming that the Armistice Agreement had been dissolved. Withdrawal from Lebanon was less complicated from this standpoint, but it would be necessary to pay some attention to the views of the Governments of Lebanon, both the outgoing and the incoming one. They are entitled to get some help. We could not accept the view that they are not entitled to help, but we could accept the possibility that help could be worked out in other ways. It was necessary to have the situation worked out through dealings with the other Arab countries. The Secretary General would be negotiating with them and their cooperation would be necessary in order to obtain the use of their territories to get assistance to Jordan. All this was not a problem that could be solved simply in 4 or 5 days.

Mr. Gromyko remarked that it was necessary here to differentiate between two questions—the internal situation which concerned only the Government of Jordan, and the external situation. With regard to the internal situation, how was he to understand the question outlined by Secretary Dulles? Was the UN somehow to play a part in the internal affairs there? As to the external situation, it was possible to achieve a satisfactory solution aimed at securing the political independence and territorial integrity of Jordan. There were two considerations involved. First, the UN group, apart from other functions it may have, would supervise the situation along the frontiers of Jordan. Would not that be a guarantee even against interference? Second, declarations or statements would be made by other states regarding non-interference. Would not these aim at the same purpose? This would solve the question of the preservation of Jordan as a state. This being the case, the question of the Armistice Agreement would not, in his opinion, arise at all.

The Secretary said that the sending of observers to Jordan would certainly help preserve the territorial integrity and the political independence of that country. Nevertheless, it was obvious that the group could function only in agreement with the Government of Jordan. Just what they did agree to he did not know. The Secretary repeated that he felt there was no basic difference between the American and Soviet positions, except perhaps that the Soviet delegation wanted the US to agree in advance to withdraw regardless of whatever would happen and the US wanted to see what would happen before it withdrew.

Gromyko wondered what possible happenings there might be and what time period was envisaged. He suggested that the talk be concentrated more specifically on the time element in order that there might be a better understanding.

The Secretary replied that the reference in the Norwegian resolution to a report by the Secretary General by September 30 meant that we expected that there should be something substantial to report by that time.

Gromyko remarked that during a previous conversation the Secretary had spoken of the possibility of US withdrawal without a request from the Government of Lebanon to do so. Now the Secretary did refer to such a request and was talking in terms of a longer period. Reference was made to “happenings”. Reference to “obscure happenings” and “unknown happenings” made it difficult for the Soviets to agree to our position. They felt that all this not only led to unnecessary delay but would not improve the situation. Thus they felt it was necessary to reach agreement on the question of withdrawal, which would be useful to the great powers and to the peace of the world—that is, if everyone were interested in assuring peace. Gromyko said he had the impression that, while Secretary Dulles’ line of reasoning touched many aspects of the situation, in the end it was limited to the provisions of the Norwegian resolution. If all this reasoning were simply leading up to the Norwegian resolution then he believed the scope of the usefulness of the talks had been narrowed down.

The Secretary pointed out that, as Gromyko undoubtedly knew, the Norwegian resolution had gone through much rewriting. There had just been another change this morning. There was nothing any more sacred about its language now than there had been a few days ago. Its principles seemed sound to us. The resolution reaffirmed the dangers of indirect aggression. It asked the Secretary General to make arrangements to uphold the principles of the Charter with respect to Lebanon and Jordan. This might involve the people on the frontier or it might not. The Secretary General would have to come to a conclusion on this. The Secretary had made a declaration for the US that it would withdraw as soon as the Government of Lebanon requested it to do so, when the Secretary General had made the arrangements called for by the resolution or if the General Assembly itself called for the withdrawal. The provision for a report by September 30 presupposes that something would happen by that time. The language of the resolution had been changed many times. The US was not stubborn about its views. He believed that our basic ideas were not very different from what Gromyko had suggested. He hoped something like the Norwegian resolution would form a basis upon which we could all agree.

Gromyko remarked that he had already voiced his opinion about the resolution and if he spoke at greater length would only be repeating himself.

The Secretary stated that it seemed that Mr. Gromyko desired a mechanistic formula in the present situation. On the other hand, the United States supported a formula involving the principles of the United Nations. The Soviet resolution calls for a withdrawal of troops without delay.

Gromyko interrupted to say that he meant in a reasonable time, of course.

The Secretary continued if a suitable resolution were passed and talks held with the UAR and we were convinced that the situation was a stable one with regard to interference from the outside—, we would begin to reduce the size of our forces there. We had already made some reductions. There was no desire on our part to continue the present level which served no useful purpose. It was not possible, however, to talk about a specific date of withdrawal. We did not know what the Secretary General would do or what he would recommend.

Gromyko said that while the Soviet resolution called for withdrawal without delay of American and British troops the Soviets naturally understood that this could not be done with rocket speed. The technical problems would require some small space of time. The withdrawal should, however, be carried out without delay and without its being surrounded with many conditions as provided in the Norwegian resolution. It was his opinion that Secretary Dulles was not correct when he expressed the view that there was not much difference between the US and Soviet positions. The Soviet resolution would be more productive since it was based on general agreement and settlement in the interests of all concerned. He did not lose hope that Secretary Dulles would think over the considerations he had put forward and that the US would, on its own part, seek to contribute toward finding a solution in the interests of all concerned, the Soviet Union included.

The Secretary remarked that no resolutions are perfect and that it is difficult to capture in them exactly what was intended. If the Soviets wanted the US and the British out, the Norwegian resolution would do it better than the Soviet one. When he examined the Norwegian resolution he did not see much that the Soviets objected to. The solution would be difficult if the Soviet Union injected a mechanistic resolution. Scheduling progress by ten days here and ten days there would not work. Much depends on what the Secretary General does and what the UAR does. If arrangements between them are effective, the Soviets would see US troops moving out in a hurry. The Soviets had to do something on faith. If these arrangements were made, they would see results in a few weeks.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1097. Secret. Drafted by E.L. Freers. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the U.N. building.

2 See Document 268.

3 See footnote 8, Document 267.

4 See footnote 3, Document 278.

281. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 281. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 19, 1958—5 p.m.

564. For Rountree. Shortly before noon today Prime Minister Rifai telephoned, requested I come Foreign Office immediately. He asked that I treat what he was about to tell me as Top Secret, transmit it my government soonest: (A) Despite oblique support Norwegian resolution gives Jordanian position UN has failed provide HKJ any practical assistance deal its most crucial problem internal security. Therefore mandatory USG make clear at once its intentions re King Hussein’s proposals for conclusion US/HKJ mutual defense treaty, establishment MAAG Jordan, expansion Jordan Army by two brigades.

(B) GA debate has made stationing British troops Jordan intolerable, exposed present pro-western government to charge it consorts with colonialism.

(C) After much soul searching Rifai has reached decision British troops must depart Jordan not later than October 1 with understanding if US forces leave Lebanon prior that date British withdrawal will be speeded up coincide.

(D) If USG response King Hussein’s request is unfavorable Rifai has come conclusion his pro-western policies no longer serve Jordan national interest, will tender his resignation King Hussein, permit him form government which willing/able reach accommodation UAR/pro-Nasser neighbors. However in order he may not be accused abandoning country to imperialist forces Rifai will demand withdrawal British troops before making resignation effective with distinct understanding in any event they must be out of country by October 1.

RIFAI with tears in his eyes said “I have tried best my ability serve both King and country, it now appears I have failed. Jordan is besieged on every hand by Nasser-dominated states, national economy is tottering, we are all but isolated from outside world, we depend for our daily bread on foreign aid, only US military assistance can save my country, even that in absence Nasser’s destruction would appear be short lived.” I thanked him for his confidence, suggested in view very serious decision he had made might be advisable give me minimum level US assistance he would consider sufficient maintain his government in power. He replied if USG will sign mutual defense treaty with Jordan I would be willing make a fight otherwise situation is hopeless. I assured him I would communicate his views my government immediately.

Comment: Although I have known Rifai only seven months he has always been honest and straightforward in his dealings with me and I have no reason doubt he means what he said re his resignation. My opinion time has come USG must decide whether it wishes maintain “fortress Jordan” as a non-viable western satellite in the heartland Nasser hoped-for Middle East empire with clear understanding this can only be accomplished by force and against will majority Jordanian people or if in broader context our international relationships we should permit Arab nationalism of Nasser brand take over country leading to eventual incorporation within UAR, for I am convinced if Rifai government falls sooner or later that will happen.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5/8–1958. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution; Noforn. Repeated to USUN.

282. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 282. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 20, 1958—11 p.m.

581. USUN for Rountree. Reference: Embtel 564 repeated information USUN 16.2 King Hussein has sent me word [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] that Prime Minister Rifai has informed him intention resign as outlined reference telegram. According Hussein Rifai set August 30 as deadline receipt USG reply. If none received by that time indicated he would resign shortly thereafter. Significant in his conversation with me yesterday Rifai made no such stipulation.

Hussein said unless USG comes forward promptly commitment provide military/economic assistance including large scale budgetary aid which will assure Jordan adequate support not “for a week or a month but for at least two years” he about reached conclusion pro-western policies present HKJ government futile. His opinion when/as/if government changed there can be no half-way measures. Circumstances will dictate new government must be completely pro-Nasser/UAR.

King said under present circumstances has moral obligation Hashemite dynasty as well those loyal supporters whose lives and fortunes like his own are now placed in jeopardy. [7 lines of source text not declassified]

“In response query as to his personal plans King replied has not yet made up his mind but said he not interested building in any brakes once decision made change government.”

Comment: Quite evident both Hussein/RIFAI have within last few days come conclusion only American miracle can save Jordan [5½ lines of source text not declassified].

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–2058. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution; Noforn. Repeated emergency niact to USUN.

2 Supra.

283. Telegram From the Delegation at the United Nations to the Embassy in Jordan 283. Telegram From the Delegation at the United Nations to the Embassy in Jordan1

New York, August 20, 1958—7 p.m.

7. Embtel 564, August 19.2 FYI. We are of course conscious of deep concern which King and Rifai must have over present situation and their uncertainty that any action taken by GA can assure continuation Jordanian independence. We ourselves are far from clear as to what future holds for Jordan. Nevertheless, we consider it important that King and Rifai be given maximum encouragement particularly since any adjustments which situation might require can best be made by retaining in control during crucial period immediately ahead regime unwilling simply to turn country over to UAR, which among other things would involve risk of hostilities with Israel. It should be somewhat easier to decide upon our future policy vis-à-vis Jordan after smoke has cleared from current GA debate and, as result talks which we propose having with UAR, we have better idea of what to expect from that quarter concerning Jordan. End FYI.

In light foregoing, suggest you respond to Rifai and inform Hussein along lines set forth below, which have been coordinated with UK representatives in New York.

1. Interest of US and UK in preserving Jordanian independence has been demonstrated in many forms, and our sincerity in this regard cannot be doubted by King and Rifai. Presence of British troops in Jordan, large US military, economic and political assistance and role we are now playing in GA are examples our willingness to support Jordan. We have greatest admiration for courage and leadership exercised by King and Rifai and every confidence that their determined efforts will continue. We can say with all sincerity that we see today better prospect for Jordan than at any time recently.

2. While it has not always been possible for us to meet specific requests of GOJ, our action has helped King and his govt retain Jordanian independence against efforts of formidable opposition. We believe that certain further measures may be extremely valuable in this regard: (a) It expected that outcome of GA consideration will be establishment of greater UN presence in Jordan and thus a greater moral responsibility on the part of the UN as a whole with respect to the preservation of Jordanian independence and integrity as against outside interference;

(b) We hope that there will emerge from Assembly as well as from separate talks with UAR in undertaking on part of UAR to refrain from interference in Jordan and from efforts to overthrow present regime. While we cannot now estimate accurately the degree of success which we might expect in this regard, we have reason to believe that something really constructive might be achieved. GOJ can be sure US would work strongly to see to it that UAR lived up to any commitment it might make in this respect.

(c) Although we do not believe that solution can be found in strengthening Jordanian armed forces, we are not unmindful of importance which King and Rifai attach to this matter. Notwithstanding heavy costs already being borne by US in maintaining existing Jordanian armed forces, we are nevertheless giving urgent consideration to joining with UK to support additional program involving establishment of new units. Study of requirements to support such new units now underway and we will shortly be communicating further with King and Rifai.

3. We regret that it is not feasible at this time for us to consider mutual defense treaty with Jordan, an important factor being that US constitutional procedures would involve Congressional consideration and approval which not possible in view imminent Congressional adjournment. As GOJ knows, one reason why US has not adhered to Baghdad Pact is that such action likely give rise to strong pressure to undertake treaty relationship with Israel. This consideration would apply also to treaty with Jordan. As practical matter, however, US policy with respect Jordan has been made clear, and joint Congressional resolution on Middle East3 set forth US determination to assist nations in their efforts to preserve their independence.

4. While we can understand Jordanian concern re continued presence UK forces, we believe it would be serious mistake to take unduly hasty action with respect to their withdrawal. Objective of all of us should be as quickly as possible to establish situation in which UK forces can withdraw with prudence, and without undue jeopardy to Jordan. We believe that GOJ, UK and US should maintain closest consultation as situation unfolds in days and weeks ahead, and we hope that with developments set forth above it will be possible not only for UK forces to be withdrawn from Jordan but also for US forces to be withdrawn from Lebanon. We fear, however, that our objective with respect to Jordanian independence could be rendered unattainable if there should be unduly precipitate action by GOJ in this regard.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2058. Top Secret; Niact. Repeated to the Department as Secto 11. The source text is the Department of State copy.

2 Document 281.

3 Reference is to the joint Middle East resolution, signed by the President on March 9, 1957. (P.L. 7, 85th Congress, printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1957, pp. 829–831)

284. Editorial Note 284. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on August 21 concerning significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Allen Dulles offered the following assessment of developments relating to Jordan: “The Jordanian situation, said Mr. Dulles, remained tense. Late last night a telegram had come in indicating that King Hussein was aware of his Prime Minister’s ultimatum to the United States and generally agreed with its reasoning. Mr. Dulles was very worried that the proposed UK resolutions would not automatically deal with the internal situations in countries like Jordan. Secretary Herter observed that the move in the UN was essentially an Arab League move and was designed to be a means of asserting authority not only over the Near East proper but over adjoining countries like the Sudan. This would pose quite a problem for the United States.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 377th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason on August 22; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

285. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 21, 1958 285. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, August 21, 19581

New York, August 21, 1958

SUBJECT

Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

Dr. Fawzi—Egyptian Foreign Minister

The Secretary

Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge—U.S. Mission

William M. Rountree—NEA

The Secretary said the primary reason he wanted to meet with Dr. Fawzi was to talk about Jordan. He said that if the Arab resolution2 were passed, as he hoped it would be, it would involve extensive commitments regarding respect by the nations in the area for the independence and integrity of each other. The resolution would lead to an expectation throughout the world that the situation in the Near East would be greatly improved. If in these circumstances the situation in Jordan should soon explode, the good faith of certain countries would be called into question. He therefore welcomed an opportunity to talk about this with Dr. Fawzi on a friendly and intimate basis.

The Jordan Government wanted more in the way of financial and other commitments than we felt able to extend. They were thinking in terms of some 50 to 100 million dollars per year, over an extended period. On the other hand, if the situation in Jordan should be permitted to disintegrate, that would almost certainly bring about internal chaos giving rise to a real danger of renewed Arab/Israel hostilities. We, therefore, should find some basis for cooperation in deciding what should be done with respect to Jordan. If the UAR really wanted to take over Jordan, they could probably do so since the United States was not willing to go to all lengths, including a commitment for substantial financial assistance over an extended period of time, to keep Jordan out of UAR hands. One question was, however, what would happen to Jordan, including the many refugees there, if the present regime should be ousted and the UAR should not be in a position to assume the enormous financial responsibility for the country. That was apart from the question of the likely Israeli reaction to various contingencies.

Dr. Fawzi recalled that he had spoken briefly with Ambassador Lodge about this question, and that he had said the UAR was ready to keep an open mind regarding various alternatives. He could state that the UAR was willing to cooperate in a policy of non-intervention in the internal affairs of Jordan. He thought the choice of Jordan’s future might well be between the Arab states assuming the burden for that country, or in continuing a situation in which Jordan would constitute an opening for intervention by foreign countries. The UAR itself would be very happy to see some close relationship between Jordan and Iraq.

The Secretary inquired whether Dr. Fawzi foresaw any possibility that King Hussein would accept an association with Iraq, to which Dr. Fawzi replied that “neither the bride nor the bridegroom would be eager, but perhaps they could be persuaded”.

The Secretary emphasized the need for bringing about in an orderly way whatever change was to be made, since a change through disorder would be extremely dangerous. Time, therefore, would be required. He would prefer that nothing be precipitated in Jordan but that it be held as at present for at least two or three months until things could be permitted to settle down. Whether or not this could be accomplished, the Secretary did not know.

Dr. Fawzi said that Mr. Murphy had told them in Cairo that he did not think Hussein would abdicate. He realized, of course, that that could not be taken as a last answer. If Hussein’s friends felt that he could be safe in Jordan, he might continue on there, but frankly Dr. Fawzi thought this doubtful. He considered it to be better advice to King Hussein that he continue his studies in England. In any event, however, the UAR would not resist his staying in Jordan.

The Secretary did not see a permanent future for Jordan as an independent nation. It had always been maintained by foreign contributions. There was, however, no easy alternative. It would be more logical from the political and economic viewpoints to bring about an association of Jordan with Iraq. He did not think that could be achieved at the moment without violence. Dr. Fawzi agreed and said there was no need to rush. Several months might be required to bring about an orderly transition. Meanwhile, the UAR would willingly accept appropriate UN arrangements.

The Secretary inquired whether Dr. Fawzi thought that, if the British should withdraw and the UN establish a presence in Jordan, King Hussein could stay on for a few months longer. Dr. Fawzi replied that he might be able to do so; the UAR would cooperate.

The Secretary observed that if Hussein should go and if an interim government should come in which was committed to the UAR, it would not be possible for the US to put up the money to maintain the Jordanian economy. Thus the inauguration of a new regime in Jordan would immediately precipitate that issue which we would not wish to arise right away. He said we would continue to support King Hussein for a few months longer, but if he should be overthrown by violence and a pro-Nasser regime installed, American public opinion would preclude any financial aid. That was another factor which rendered it highly desirable to bring about in an orderly way any change that might take place.

Dr. Fawzi said that these considerations were very much in his mind. If Hussein should be overthrown and the new regime should ask the UAR to take over financial responsibility, the UAR could not afford to do so. He was aware that there was a whole complex of problems including the question of who would care for the Palestinian refugees now in Jordan. It would be sensible to explore how far the Iraqis might be prepared to go back to the Arab Union concept. If UAR advice meant anything, they would certainly advise their friends in Jordan, particularly of Palestinian origin, to keep quiet for the time being. The Secretary said that we would continue to put up money in Jordan on a temporary basis. We should try to figure out together how there could be developed a satisfactory solution to the problem in order to give Jordan some basis for its existence other than foreign contribution, and how to bring about any changes that may be decided upon without precipitating an Arab-Israel war. He said the young King had shown great courage and determination, but he was now in a mood whereby it was hard to predict what action he might take. If he felt himself too hard-pressed, he might assume the attitude of Samson and endeavor to pull down the pillars, bringing about a collapse of the whole situation.

The Secretary concluded by saying he was worried about the Jordanian situation and hoped that Dr. Fawzi would seriously consider what might be done in the context of the problem as they had discussed it.

Dr. Fawzi seemed to welcome the discussion.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2158. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rountree. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the U.N. building.

2 See Document 287.

286. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel 286. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Israel1

Washington, August 21, 1958—7:24 p.m.

164. Beirut pass CINCSPECOMME. British have informed us their forces Jordan have urgent need anti-tank rifles and ammunition to protect themselves in event Jordanian army should turn against them and use tanks in Jordanian hands. We have provided rifles and ammunition from US stocks and they being flown Cyprus. British requested us obtain overflight permission from Israel but we informed them we preferred UK seek this permission. We stated we would provide airlift, and would strongly support British request with Government of Israel. UK has decided approach GOI.

You should coordinate with your UK colleague and strongly support his request with Israel authorities. You should state US providing airlift. You might add it would seem in obvious best interest Israel that British forces in Jordan be able defend themselves if attacked. You might say we are deeply aware political problem involved for Israel in connection with overflight request and for this reason gave full consideration to possibility these rifles and ammunition might be sent to Jordan by sea. We concluded however it would be unwise leave British forces in Jordan without this defensive arm for the relatively long time which would be involved in sea transportation.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2158. Top Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Berry and with C and JCS. Repeated to Amman, USUN, London, and Beirut.

287. Editorial Note 287. Editorial Note

On August 21, the U.N. General Assembly unanimously adopted a resolution sponsored by 10 Arab states which called upon the Secretary-General to consult with the governments involved and make “such practical arrangements as would adequately help in upholding the purposes and principles of the Charter in relation to Lebanon and Jordan in the present circumstances, and thereby facilitate the early withdrawal of the foreign troops from the two countries.” (U.N. General Assembly Official Records, Third Emergency Special Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/3905), page 1, printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 1047–1048) The sponsoring states were Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Tunisia, and the United Arab Republic.

The U.S. Delegation consulted with Representatives of Lebanon, Jordan, and the United Arab Republic concerning the language of the resolution before it was introduced. (Delgas 671 and 672 from New York, August 21; Department of State, Central Files, 320/8–2158; memorandum of conversation between Dulles and Malik, August 21; ibid., Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1088) Permanent Representative Lodge described the resolution to United Arab Republic Foreign Minister Fawzi as a “constructive development.” (Delga 672)

Secretary of State Dulles, in his remarks to the General Assembly, indicated that the United States would have preferred the language of the Norwegian resolution, but concluded that in substance the two resolutions were similar. He applauded the fact that the countries involved in the controversy had found it possible to agree on concerted action as a result of the emergency session of the General Assembly, and he reiterated that the United States desired “at the earliest possible moment" to withdraw its forces from Lebanon. (USUN Press Release 2983, printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 1044–1047)

In a telephone conversation with Herter on August 21, Dulles stated that it was better to have the Arab States sponsor what amounted to a rewrite of the resolution supported by the United States in that they would then have the responsibility for its implementation. Herter agreed and felt that “pinning the responsibility on them” was a “great victory”. (Memorandum of telephone conversation; Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations) Dulles told Eisenhower, however, in another telephone conversation on August 21, that the resolution would rehabilitate and invigorate the Arab League, and the Israelis were unhappy about that. Eisenhower still felt that the Arab resolution looked good and Dulles agreed. (Memorandum of telephone conversation; ibid., White House Telephone Conversations) Dulles talked with Eisenhower again after the resolution was adopted, and Eisenhower asked, in light of the resolution, how soon the troops could be withdrawn from Lebanon. Dulles said that he had discussed that question with Rountree and Reinhardt, who were instructed to follow up “with a view to not dissipating the advantages gained by the Resolution.” (Memorandum of telephone conversation; ibid.) The three memoranda are included in the microfiche supplement.

V. Reestablishment of Political Stability in Lebanon and Jordan and the Withdrawal of U.S. and U.K. Forces, August 22–October 31, 1958: The “Arab Resolution”; Hammarskjöld’s Trip to the Middle East; U.S.–U.K. Coordination on Planning for Withdrawal; Negotiations with Lebanon Concerning U.S. Withdrawal; Negotiations Concerning Jordanian Security; Establishment of the Chehab Government; Withdrawal of U.S. Forces From Lebanon; Withdrawal of U.K. Forces From JordanV. Reestablishment of Political Stability in Lebanon and Jordan and the Withdrawal of U.S. and U.K. Forces, August 22–October 31, 1958: The “Arab Resolution”; Hammarskjöld’s Trip to the Middle East; U.S.–U.K. Coordination on Planning for Withdrawal; Negotiations with Lebanon Concerning U.S. Withdrawal; Negotiations Concerning Jordanian Security; Establishment of the Chehab Government; Withdrawal of U.S. Forces From Lebanon; Withdrawal of U.K. Forces From Jordan

288. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 22, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2258. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, Beirut, and USUN.

289. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 22, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2258. Top Secret; Niact.

290. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 23, 1958—1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2358. Top Secret; Niact.

291. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in New York and the Under Secretary of State (Herter) in Washington, August 23, 1958, 11 a.m.

Washington, August 23, 1958, 11 a.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in New York by Phyllis D. Bernau.

292. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, August 23, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2358. Top Secret; No Distribution Outside Department.

293. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, August 23, 1958—4:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2358. Top Secret. Drafted and approved by William C. Lakeland.

294. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, August 24, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2458. Top Secret. Repeated to Cairo, Damascus, and USUN.

295. Letter From Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Secretary of State Dulles

London, August 25, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret. The text of this message was conveyed to the Department on August 25 under cover of a note from Hood to Herter, who was Acting Secretary while Dulles was on holiday. Hood noted that Lloyd’s message was in response to a request for London’s views on the recent telegrams from Amman to Washington which Berry and Rockwell had discussed with him on August 23; see Document 293.

296. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, August 25, 1958—6:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2258. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and D.L. Gamon in IO/UNP and approved in IO by Hanes. Repeated to Beirut, Cairo, and USUN.

297. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 26, 1958—5 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2658. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.

298. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Rountree), Department of State, Washington, August 27, 1958

Washington, August 27, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–2758. Secret. Drafted by Dorman.

299. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, August 27, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783C.00/8–2758. Secret. Repeated to Cairo, Damascus, London, Paris, and USUN.

300. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, August 27, 1958, 5:30 p.m.

Washington, August 27, 1958, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.0085/8–2758. Secret. Drafted by J. F. Shaw.

301. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, August 27, 1958—7:52 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2358. Secret. Drafted by Rountree and cleared by Dillon, Herter, and FitzGerald in ICA.

302. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 28, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2858. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

303. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 28, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2858. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

304. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 28, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2858. Secret; Priority; Noforn; Limited Distribution.

305. Airgram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, August 29, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2958. Confidential. Also sent to Ankara, Baghdad, Damascus, Cairo, Jidda, London, Paris, Tel Aviv, USUN, CINCSPECOMME, and COMLANFOR.

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 30, 1958—noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 315/8–3058. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to USUN.

307. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, August 30, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–3058. Secret. Repeated to Damascus, Cairo, London, and USUN.

308. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, August 30, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–3058. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 4, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 315/9–458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, and USUN.

310. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Rountree), Department of State, Washington, September 5, 1958

Washington, September 5, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5411/9–558. Secret. Drafted on September 9 by William L. Hamilton.

311. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, September 5, 1958—10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–558. Secret. Repeated to Amman, Cairo, Damascus, London, Paris, and USUN.

312. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 6, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–658. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

313. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, September 9, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5411/9–958. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

314. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 9, 1958—midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/9–958. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution; Noforn. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, and USUN.

315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, September 10, 1958—7:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–3058. Secret. Drafted by Lakeland and Rockwell and cleared by Rountree. Also sent to London.

316. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, September 11, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320.5783A/9–1158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Amman, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, Tel Aviv, and USUN.

317. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at the Department of State–Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, September 12, 1958

Washington, September 12, 1958

Source: Department of State, State–JCS Meetings: Lot 61 D 417. Top Secret. A typewritten note at the top of the source text reads: “State Draft. Not cleared with Department of Defense.”

318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, September 15, 1958—6:47 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5441/9–1558. Confidential. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Berry and in IO by Walmsley. Repeated to London, Beirut, and USUN.

319. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, September 15, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1558. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Amman, and USUN.

320. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m.

New York, September 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m.

source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1107. Secret. Drafted by Wilcox. The source text indicates the conversation took place in the U.N. Building. Dulles headed the U.S. Delegation at the Thirteenth Session of the U.N. General Assembly, September 14–20.

321. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, September 17, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1758. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Received at 9:11 a.m.

322. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, September 17, 1958—8:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1758. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Berry in NEA, Walmsley in IO, Godley in C, Murphy, and Herter. The JCS was informed. Repeated to USUN.

323. Editorial Note

324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, September 18, 1958—6:26 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–658. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Lakeland and cleared by McClelland and Berry in NEA and with U/MSC, ICA, and Defense. Repeated to London.

325. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, September 19, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1958. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

326. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Herter) and the Secretary of Defense (McElroy), Washington, September 19, 1958

Washington, September 19, 1958

source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1958. Confidential. Drafted by Special Assistant to the Under Secretary Krebs.

327. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, September 20, 1958—2:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1958. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and Godley. Repeated to London and CINCNELM REAR.

328. Editorial Note

329. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 24, 1958—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/9–2458. Top Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

330. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State

London, September 24, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5441/9–2458. Secret. Repeated to Amman, Cairo, Damascus, and Tel Aviv.

331. Editorial Note

332. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, September 25, 1958, 6 p.m.

New York, September 25, 1958, 6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5/9–2558. Secret. Drafted by Rountree. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in Lloyd’s suite at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel.

333. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut September 25, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–2558. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

334. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, September 26, 1958, 10 a.m.

New York, September 26, 1958, 10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5441/9–2658. Secret. Drafted by Rountree. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel.

335. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, September 26, 1958—5:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/9–2458. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Parker and Rockwell and cleared by Berry.

336. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, September 27, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–2758. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

337. Editorial Note

338. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, September 30, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–3058. Secret. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

339. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 1, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–158. Secret. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

340. Editorial Note

341. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, October 2, 1958—1:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/10–258. Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Sisco and Rountree.

342. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 2, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–258. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Cairo, and USUN.

343. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 3, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–358. Secret; Priority.

344. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, October 4, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/10–458. Secret; Priority.

345. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 4, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

346. Editorial Note

347. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 9, 1958—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–958. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Amman, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, Tel Aviv, London, Paris, Rome, and USUN.

348. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 9, 1958—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–958. Secret; Priority.

349. Letter From the Chargé in Jordan (Wright) to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell)

Amman, October 10, 1958.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.86/10–1058. Top Secret; Personal; Official–Informal.

350. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 11, 1958—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–1158. Secret; Priority. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Cairo and London.

351. Telegram From the Consulate General at Geneva to the Department of State

Geneva, October 14, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5-MSP/10-1458. Confidential. Repeated to Beirut.

352. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, October 15, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/10–1558. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, London, Paris, Rome, and Tel Aviv.

353. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 15, 1958

Washington, October 15, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/10–1558. Confidential. Drafted by Lakeland. The conversation took place at the request of Ambassador Rifai, who came from New York to meet with Dulles. The conversation was recorded in three memoranda. In addition to the memorandum of conversation printed infra, a third memorandum of conversation was prepared covering the question of a proposed visit to the United States by King Hussein. (Ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199; included in the microfiche supplement)

354. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 15, 1958

Washington, October 15, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/10–1558. Confidential. Drafted by Lakeland. See footnote 1, supra.

355. Editorial Note

356. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 16, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–1658. Secret. Repeated to Amman, Ankara, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, Paris, Rome, Tel Aviv, and USUN.

357. Editorial Note

358. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 28, 1958—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 883A.10/10–2858. Confidential.

359. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, October 28, 1958.

Source: Department of State, INR Files. A covering note indicated that this special estimate, submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, was prepared by CIA, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. All members of the United States Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate on October 28, with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and the FBI who abstained on the grounds that the topic was outside their jurisdiction.

360. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, October 29, 1958—12:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/10–2058. Secret. Drafted in NEA/NE by Hamilton, Meyer, and Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and, in draft, with NR, W/MSC, Defense, and ICA.

361. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions and Consular Offices in Europe and the Middle East

Washington, October 29, 1958—7:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/10–2958. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Brewer and cleared by Hamilton, Rountree, and with DRN. Sent to Amman, Aleppo, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jerusalem, Damascus, London, Paris, and Tel Aviv.

362. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 31, 1958

Washington, October 31, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/10–3158. Confidential. Drafted by McBride.

288. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 288. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 22, 1958—5 p.m.

594. Reference: USUN 10, sent Department 671,2 Beirut 39, Cairo 14. During course conversation Prime Minister Rifai on other matters I took occasion request his views effect Jordan so-called Arab resolution adopted last night GA.

RIFAI replied both King Hussein and he generally pleased, gave reasons closely paralleling those provided our UN delegate by his brother Monem Rifai outlined reference telegram. However he said from practical standpoint it offers little assistance Jordan whose most pressing problem one internal security since effective implementation resolution depends largely UAR “good faith” in which he personally has little confidence. He did agree that resolution might cause Nasser adopt more reasonable attitude outwardly but insisted he would continue pursue basic subversive program using covert means. His opinion at best resolution could only provide “breathing spell” which in view Jordan’s isolation provides its enemies opportunity continue their attack by means economic attrition which could only benefit Nasser/UAR. I inquired when he expected visit UNSYG Hammarskjold, he replied probably next week/ten days. Rifai again reiterated oft-repeated HKJ position of no UN police force, no UNOGIL, no radio broadcast monitoring teams unless UAR agreed accept same. I remarked if this HKJ attitude what could SYG do implement GA resolution within Jordan territory. Rifai invited my attention to that part resolution providing for “UN presence” within affected area, proceeded advance pro-position under which UNSYG would establish office Beirut headed by high ranking personal representative to whom he would delegate authority act in his place coordinate UNOGIL activities, receive reports, prepare recommendation UN. As part such office Rifai would be willing accept one officer inherent right Jordan appeal direct UN if circumstances require.

RIFAI made clear while he encouraged fact Arab states have demonstrated ability/willingness reach agreement within “own family” including implied condemnation UAR interference other states he firmly convinced UN lacks necessary authority/capacity/desire provide adequate protection Jordan against further external aggression and/or subversion.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2258. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, Beirut, and USUN.

2 Delga 671, August 21, cited supra, summarized a conversation with the Jordanian Permanent Representative concerning the Arab resolution.

289. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 289. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 22, 1958—9 p.m.

596. Re Deptel 606 and USUN 7.2 Since today holiday called on Prime Minister Rifai his home, conveyed substance reference telegrams, following are his observations: (A) While deeply appreciative US high regard Hussein/his own courage, leadership this in itself cannot overcome very practical difficulties under which HKJ labors nor can it be considered adequate substitute tangible physical military support.

(B) Although generally pleased outcome GA meeting particularly implied condemnation UAR subversive activities Rifai has little hope constructive action particularly since successful implementation GA resolution based on large extent on “UAR good faith” in which Rifai has little confidence.

(C) Rifai disagrees with our position re strengthening Jordanian armed forces, contends anything short their massive expansion will not permit government deal effectively internal security situation without use foreign troops UN/others, a policy which is politically intolerable for independent/sovereign state.

(D) Rifai opinion US Government unwillingness conclude mutual defense treaty with Jordan (he dismissed as excuse necessity congressional action) holds key our over-all approach Middle East problem. He said convinced certain arrangements have already been made between ourselves and British at Foreign Office level under which we have abdicated our short-lived position leadership Middle East, turned over implementation joint Anglo-American policy to British while we agree provide necessary funds. I asked him to explain this statement. He replied Jordan is a non-viable state, created originally by British in their own national interest. As such it can exist only so long subsidized or permitted federate other states, alternative is its dismemberment/absorption. US Government never had compelling military/economic reasons take on burden subsidizing Jordan, did so only under extreme pressure events result abortive Suez affair when British forced withdraw temporarily Middle East stage. British position quite different. Jordan their creation, feel have prior claim its use, achievement their national objectives Middle East which now requires Jordan be brought into line with its Arab neighbors. Under present circumstances Hashemite Jordan only Kingdom among modern sister Arab States. Saud can be dealt with as paramount Sheik along with Emirs of Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, but Hussein is recognized King, creates embarrassment any attempt work out broad approach common problems other Arab states which are republics. Rifai conclusion British have decided Hussein must eventually go as price Jordan accommodation its surrounding neighbors who have economic noose securely fastened around its neck. New government would be republic orientated toward UAR/Iraq. Federation with Iraq along lines defunct AU possible if Hashemite monarchy overthrown, replaced by republic. However order accomplish foregoing essential Jordan be weakened militarily to point it no longer constitutes threat UAR neighbors. To this end British do not desire expansion Jordan Army, what they really want is dissolutioned 10, 000-man national guard further “weeding out” present army now at only 65 percent strength and creation two additional units which would be considerably less than total strength former national guard. Army would not be streamlined or equipped new weapons but rather be permitted deteriorate into glorified policy force capable bearing only small arms/light weapons. Rifai said information I had brought fitted perfectly into his already nearly completed picture of British return power Jordan, acceptance/endorsement this fact by US policy makers.

I expressed appreciation his views and reminded him extensive US military/economic aid which continued flow into Jordan. Rifai swept this aside saying “you have not given me a favorable reply to any major requests since before Iraqi revolt. Whatever is being done in Jordan now is result negotiations concluded months ago.” I replied that despite fact our response may not have been as specific or to the

degree he might have wielded [wanted?] I hoped it was sufficiently reassuring to cause him continue his splendid fight against Communism in defense integrity/independence Jordan. He replied on contrary it had given him conclusive evidence that Jordan could not rely on US Government provide King/quantity military/financial (to support expanded armed forces) assistance with which present pro-western government could long remain in power. He was absolutely sure best course for him personally perhaps Jordan lay in change government, complete reorientation its foreign policy re sister Arab States. He intends: (A) Present formal resignation King Hussein take effect on/about September 15.

(B) Issue formal request withdrawal British troops by September 30. This request would be made next week/ten days.

(C) Inform UNSYG his (RIFAI) intention resign, suggest UNSYG might wish postpone implementation GA resolution until new government takes over.

In view his far-reaching decision I said I would appreciate opportunity see King Hussein (I have an audience with King tonight). As I was about leave I inquired of Rifai what he thought King Hussein’s reaction reference telegram likely be. He replied it will be just about what you have heard from me. I asked in event Hussein refuses accept Rifai’s resignation would he be willing continue on temporarily. He replied negative, said Amman too small place keep such secret long, opposition would seize opportunity press King immediate change in government.

Comment: Rifai reaction about what I had expected, significant he remained unusually calm throughout our two-hour meeting but gave appearance “beaten man”. Although he will undoubtedly pin blame on us for what he will term “letting him down” I believe overwhelming economic/internal/political problems likely cause his decision. There is of course always possibility he may reconsider or King may ask him to continue for limited period. I hope learn more about this aspect during my conversation King Hussein tonight.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2258. Top Secret; Niact.

2 Telegram 606 to Amman, August 21, instructed the Embassy to convey the substance of telegram 7 from USUN to Hussein and Rifai immediately. (Ibid., 785.5–MSP/8–2058) Telegram 7 is printed as Document 283.

290. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 290. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 23, 1958—1 a.m.

597. Re USUN 7 sent Department Secto 11, Embtel 596.2 According pre-arranged plan went Palace tonight meeting King Hussein, found Prime Minister Rifai who had already conveyed King substance reference telegram.

Hussein opened conversation by expressing appreciation USG generous support during past two years, said he wished explain why both he/RIFAI felt vague generalities reference telegram could not be considered firm enough basis on which present pro-Western HKJ Government able continue in office, proceeded make following points: (A) While GA resolution had accomplished indication Jordan case before UN by means of implied condemnation UAR interference internal affairs other states it was at same time Nasser victory since it in effect brought Jordan/Lebanon case back to Arab League on whose policies Nasser will undoubtedly exercise great influence due recent revolt Iraq, neutralist role Saudi Arabia, presence “imperialist occupation forces” Jordan/Lebanon.

(B) Hussein believes good possibility Nasser will seek develop idea put forward during GA meeting that Arab states “one family,” should resolve own differences. Under UN compulsion temporary restraint over subversive activities within other states Nasser will take position neither Jordan nor Lebanon in danger external aggression/subversion, therefore US/UK troops should be immediately withdrawn. Should either Jordan or Lebanon protest they will be left open charge they “imperialist satellite.” Hussein opinion this very probably be raised by UAR representative at September 6 meeting Political Committee, Arab League, which may develop into full League meeting. Furthermore, if troops have not left before opening regular session GA next month Soviets already on record place withdrawal issue on GA agenda. Hussein takes position in light foregoing British troops must be out Jordan not later than October 1. American forces due number involved may be able “stall along for month or so” but size British contingent Amman cannot justify similar procedure.

(C) Hussein convinced Nasser “handmaiden” Russia, believes it not unlikely at September meeting Arab League he will make appeal rid Arab world dependence “Western aid”, will make counter-offer (with Soviet money and due apology for past failure fulfill commitments) replace US aid Jordan with financial support from the sister Arab States.” Hussein points up refusal any such offer regardless whether or not real source money, true motive behind scheme known would be most embarrassing Jordan, make it target Nasser charge being “imperialist satellite.” This is reason why Jordan insists on some kind formal and public arrangement with USG which will provide complete package military/economic/budgetary aid for sufficiently long period permit HKJ refuse any Nasser/Arab aid on grounds it bound under prior international commitment US which obliged honor.

(D) Rifai interrupted, pointed out unless HKJ had good grounds turn down any Arab aid public opinion within country would create very difficult internal security problem, leave government exposed charge it “tool imperialist.” Hussein concluded with statement because foregoing reasons he convinced unless USG willing comply his request re mutual defense treaty, expansion armed forces, sufficient financial support alleviate budgetary difficulties he would have no alternative but accept Prime Minister Rifai’s resignation with its obvious anti-West consequences. [4 lines of source text not declassified] I thanked him for his very detailed informative explanation, expressed my conviction if Hussein/RIFAI realistic their approach problem amount/nature US assistance no reason present pro-Western government should resign, suggested we get down to hard facts.

I asked on assumption British troops withdrawn October 1 (obvious Jordanian security forces could not be expanded within next few weeks) whether Hussein/RIFAI believed HKJ could exercise effective control internal security. Hussein replied “Yes” providing: (A) Nasser continued abide UAR commitment contained GA Resolution, refrain from interference internal affairs other states.

(B) HKJ could announce either simultaneously with or shortly before British withdrawal friendship treaty with US which would have tremendous psychological effect Jordanian people, reassure them they were not alone on free world side. This must include specific tangible evidence US support. For example: (1) Immediate dispatch US military mission Jordan with appropriate publicity which would be charged with evaluation condition Jordan defense establishment, make specific recommendations designed improve its equipment/efficiency.

(2) Pledge sufficient funds provide budgetary support cover normal governmental expenditures exclusive expansion armed forces through fiscal year ending March 31, 1959.

(3) Economic program designed provide reasonable level employment together development Jordan’s limited resources including rehabilitation Amman/Ma’an railway, Aqaba port development, some assistance completion desert road. Hussein said he wished make clear he would not entertain any proposal which would make it appear to Jordanian people and/or other Arab States he had entered into defense agreement with British. He emphasized that when British paratroopers left he wanted “former Glubb Pasha crowd now in Jordan go with them.” I cautioned Hussein/RIFAI on viewing everything British did with suspicion pointing out from personal observation many ex-Arab Legion officers had deep affection Jordan as well their old comrades in arms which should not be regarded as part some sinister plot. Furthermore, US/UK policies many areas world quite parallel. British sources military supplies/equipment often used under OSP which affords considerable benefit not only UK but all free countries by keeping needed industrial military plant capacity available non-Communist world. I pointed out for reasons contained reference telegram any US/HKJ military defense treaty out of question this time. As matter of fact, USG already doing in large measure what they requested particularly in economic/financial support field with military assistance in form planes, tanks, artillery, vehicles already delivered or on order running into millions of dollars. Furthermore, as near as could be determined no one including Hussein/RIFAI knew precisely whether Jordan Army needed or could usefully employ additional two brigades contained original proposals.

In light foregoing it seems to me hard-core Hussein request was for some kind public announcement by USG its support Jordan at same time spelling in economic/military/financial terms size/nature assistance. I said if Hussein/RIFAI agreeable I would forward this suggestion my government with understanding no action Rifai resignation and/or notification British withdrawal their troops should be made meantime. Hussein/RIFAI agreed with stipulation USG response must be received prior UNSYG departure from Jordan for reasons outlined reference telegram. Further, all dates re resignation/troop withdrawal cited reference telegram should be considered firm unless favorable reply received. On this note our meeting lasting over three hours terminated.

[1 paragraph (14½ lines of source text) not declassified]

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2358. Top Secret; Niact.

2 Supra.

291. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in New York and the Under Secretary of State (Herter) in Washington, August 23, 1958, 11 a.m. 291. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in New York and the Under Secretary of State (Herter) in Washington, August 23, 1958, 11 a.m.1

Washington, August 23, 1958, 11 a.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM MR HERTER

They mentioned the cables in from Amman.2 Sec. said he did not think we could keep that show going. We had to have an orderly and honorable evolution. To maintain this citadel is not profitable and the Sec. said he did not think we could succeed even if we spent all this money. Herter agreed. The Sec. said we must concentrate on the peripheral areas—Lebanon, Tunisia, Libya, Sudan (if willing to stand up), and Ethiopia. Sec. said it would be difficult to maintain in the heart of the Arab world. Herter said he wondered if we could send someone out there to talk with him (Hammarskjold). He mentioned Dick Berry. He was going to work out the withdrawal of troops. The Sec. said there was no need of his doing that. He knows basically our situation and our point of view there. Sec. said he did hope this situation could be sustained for at least a six-month period. Sec. said he told Fawzi they would have to help do it. If this thing would collapse it would make everyone look like fools, including him. Fawzi said he would send a cable to Cairo. Herter said Cairo had stopped mentioning it.

[Here follows discussion of negotiations relating to nuclear testing.]

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Dulles Papers, General Telephone Conversations. Transcribed in New York by Phyllis D. Bernau.

2 Documents 281, 282, 288, 289, and 290.

292. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 292. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, August 23, 1958—11 a.m.

1255. Admiral Holloway has sent comprehensive telegram to JCS describing his interview August 21 with General Chehab.2 Holloway is under no illusions as to dilatory nature of the General but feels pressure on him to take some effective measures to redress security situation had best wait until after Chehab takes office as President.

Holloway’s tentative recommendations to JCS for phased withdrawal of US forces are to embark one Marine BLT on September 15; withdrawing a second BLT toward October 1. Final retraction of army battlegroup would be scheduled for October 15; all of this dependent on overall strategic situation in ME, political and security situation in Lebanon itself, and outcome of Hammarskjold negotiations. Holloway and General Adams are concerned for “winterization” of forces if they remain here much beyond October 15.

Admiral Holloway, General Adams and I are in agreement on need for more decisive measures to clean out the Basta, which is a continuing source of political and security infection in Lebanon’s capital. Admiral believes that suggestions re phased withdrawal of his forces may exert a sort of negative pressure on Chehab to get moving with his own forces before American withdrawal becomes complete.

I desire to emphasize foregoing time schedule is a tentative one designed to assist JCS in forward planning. Admiral Holloway proposes to move his flagship to Rhodes toward mid-September but will maintain fairly frequent contact by personal visits here.3

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2358. Top Secret; No Distribution Outside Department.

2 Not found.

3 On August 28, the Department responded that it has no objection to the contingency planning timetable proposed by Admiral Holloway, and had so advised the JCS. The Department, however, “would of course concur in actual withdrawal orders only after careful consideration political factors which under continuous review.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2358; included in the microfiche supplement)

293. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 293. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, August 23, 1958—4:59 p.m.

2077. Gist Amman’s 596 and 597 to Department2 (repeated separately London) conveyed British Minister Lord Hood who undertook to take matter up urgently with FornOff. Without going into Rifai’s interpretation US/UK policies we told Hood it appeared to us Hussein and Rifai saw handwriting on wall. In putting price for their continuing in business so high, probably in realization we would be unable meet it, King and Rifai may be seeking justify decision to get out. It was our view that precipitate departure of King would be most undesirable although change of government might not be too bad a development in post-GA atmosphere.

US–HKJ treaty and massive financial and military support out of question. Since it unlikely US could make public statement which would satisfy King and Rifai, problem seemed to come down to whether limited program of assurances and tangible support could be devised which would have effect inducing King at least refrain from precipitate decision throw in his cards.

In view Jordanian request for reply prior SYG’s departure from Jordan we hope have FornOff views early next week.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2358. Top Secret. Drafted and approved by William C. Lakeland.

2 Documents 289 and 290.

294. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 294. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, August 24, 1958—3 p.m.

1269. During visit which Admiral Holloway and I made this morning on General Chehab to make a firm representation over shooting of American soldier by rebels from the Basta which is being reported separately by Admiral Holloway to JCS,2 General informed us that tomorrow he is arranging a meeting of all rebel leaders in Lebanon with objectives of opening up Beirut and other towns.

Chehab said he had sent Jumblatt to Damascus to discuss with Syrian authorities cessation of further intervention here. Jumblatt had now returned and would attend tomorrow’s meeting. Chehab described change in situation following passage of GA resolution as almost miraculous so far as Lebanon was concerned. Fact that Arab League delegates had devised resolution had impact on Moslem half of population; while fact UNGA as a whole had unanimously adopted resolution gave feeling of reassurance to Christian half of population.

It was against background of Jumblatt’s negotiations in Syria plus acceptance of GA resolution that Chehab felt there was a 90 percent chance that tomorrow’s meeting would be successful in securing progressive opening of Beirut and in particular the Basta. Apparently he envisages a time phasing by which shops would initially open until noon with eventual restoration of normal trade throughout city in a short time.

Although Chehab initially was apprehensive that limited military action called for by Admiral Holloway might jeopardize his negotiations with opposition leaders tomorrow, I later had definite impression that our representation and his consequent action will in fact be used by General to strengthen his hand in dealing with rebel leaders, because

he can indicate a very firm intention on part of US command to protect its forces by US means unless Basta leadership gets rank and file under control.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2458. Top Secret. Repeated to Cairo, Damascus, and USUN.

2 In CINCSPECOMME telegram 241401Z to CNO for JCS, August 24, Holloway reported on the representations he had made to Chehab that day concerning the wounding of a U.S. soldier near a roadblock in the Basta. Holloway insisted that Chehab take forceful action against insurgent forces defending the roadblock or he would use U.S. forces to do so. He further insisted on action before the end of the day. Chehab felt that it was critical that any such action be taken by Lebanese forces. Although he had scheduled a meeting for the following day with rebel leaders to discuss opening the Basta, he issued immediate orders for the action which Holloway demanded. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files; included in the microfiche supplement)

295. Letter From Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Secretary of State Dulles 295. Letter From Foreign Secretary Lloyd to Secretary of State Dulles1

London, August 25, 1958.

Dear Foster: Since my return to London I have been discussing with Harold the future of Jordan, and I have also heard that there has been discussion about this between the Embassy and your people.

To my mind the main point is this. The West cannot be expected to carry Jordan indefinitely, and the time may come when it will suit us best that the burden should be taken over by her neighbors or by some international organisation. But this must take some time and unless something urgent is done Jordan may well disintegrate in the immediate future. I believe that if this were to happen it would be disastrous from the point of view of U.S./U.K. prestige. It will stultify all the efforts you and we have put forward if the moment our troops leave the Middle East Jordan collapses and the country is taken over by the U.A.R. If this occurs, we will be regarded as having suffered a major diplomatic and actual defeat. It will be a great blow to our prestige in the Middle East and no one there would rely on either of us again. It might even be unwelcome to the U.A.R. itself which would be presented with a burden too difficult for it to carry (I got very much this impression from my talk with Fawzi in New York). Finally there will be a serious risk of war breaking out, since the Israelis would clearly not stand by and see the whole of Jordan taken over by Nasser.

I doubt if there is any possibility of Jordan carrying on if the King and Samir throw in their hands. It is clear from the messages they have been sending you that they are not prepared to carry on unless they get some firm assurances. Though the regime may not be a perfect one in many ways, I see no possibility of replacing it by anything better in the immediate future, and I therefore think we ought to consider what we can do to help.

What seems to me necessary to keep Jordan going is: (a) immediate easements of specific difficulties, e.g. cessation of propaganda, facilitation of oil supplies, reopening air communications, etc.;

(b) help in raising of new units;

(c) a promise of assistance to the country’s finances for the time being.

As to (a), I have asked our Ambassador in Amman to put certain points to Hammarskjold when he arrives2 so that he can discuss them in the area.

As to (b), we are informing your people that we are prepared to offer one million dollars and to discuss how equipment shall be provided.

As to (c), we are very anxious to know your intentions. We assume that you have already to some extent budgeted for support for Jordan over a certain period, but we understand that you have not been prepared so far to let them know for more than a month in advance how much you are prepared to do. I quite see the reason for this in the present precarious situation, but I think that unless we can allow them to see a little further ahead than this they will not consider it worth while to carry on. I think it is really essential to give the King and Government some kind of assurance that their budget will be taken care of for at least a year from now. Your people probably know better than mine what the amount involved is, but I fear it is not likely to be less that $50 million. You know of course how difficult our own financial situation is, but if the above estimate turns out to be approximately correct I am prepared to recommend to my colleagues that we should produce $5 million towards this (in addition to the million dollars already promised for equipment of the extra brigade), if you can meet the rest.

My feeling is that we ought to make an early offer of this kind to the Jordanians, in order to keep Jordan afloat while a United Nations operation there is put into effect. We must hope that as part of this there will be set up some form of Middle East Development Organisation on to which we can eventually unload the responsibility for supporting Jordan; indeed I think the Jordanians themselves would prefer this to indefinite support by Western aid. But unless we can bridge the gap in this way the whole situation may collapse before Hammarskjold can build anything up, and perhaps even before our troops can get out. It looks as if we ought to be able to tell the Jordanians something about this at the very latest before they go to the meeting of the Political Committee of the Arab League on September 6, and clearly it will be much better for them to be informed about it during Hammarskjold’s forthcoming visit to Amman. I hope that you can take an early decision in this sense.

Yours ever,

Selwyn3

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204. Secret. The text of this message was conveyed to the Department on August 25 under cover of a note from Hood to Herter, who was Acting Secretary while Dulles was on holiday. Hood noted that Lloyd’s message was in response to a request for London’s views on the recent telegrams from Amman to Washington which Berry and Rockwell had discussed with him on August 23; see Document 293.

2 Secretary-General Hammarskjöld arrived in Amman on August 26 for 3 days of talks with Hussein and Rifai, in pursuance of the resolution adopted by the General Assembly on August 21. (Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations. Vol. IV: Dag Hammarskjöld, 1958–1960, p. 200)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

296. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 296. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, August 25, 1958—6:50 p.m.

643. You should inform Rifai (urtel 594)2 that USG believes Arab resolution passed by UNGA offers constructive possibilities as regards working toward solution problems in Lebanon and Jordan. We hope that governments concerned will collaborate closely with UNSYG to achieve above end. Admittedly, much of success in carrying out resolution depends on attitude which UAR adopts toward it. We have received strong impression UAR in light developments GA now does not wish to see further deterioration Jordan situation. We also have the view that implications of unanimous vote of nations representing virtually whole world will not be lost on Nasser.

In circumstances we would hope HKJ will enter conversations with UNSYG in spirit of exploring maximum extent to which resolution can help achieve objectives toward which we are all working. One of these is removal of threat to security of Jordan.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2258. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and D.L. Gamon in IO/UNP and approved in IO by Hanes. Repeated to Beirut, Cairo, and USUN.

2 Document 288.

297. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 297. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 26, 1958—5 a.m.

632. Reference: Department telegram 644;2 Embassy telegram 597,3 626.4 My opinion which in some measure supported by British Ambassador Johnston conversation King Hussein Embassy telegram 626 “beneficial repercussions Arab resolutions” have not caused either Hussein/RIFAI change their positions/attitude for following reasons: A) While paying lip service theory revival Arab League signals “dawn new era Middle East relations" neither Hussein/RIFAI believes Nasser will abandon his aggressive policies although he may make temporary tactical shift with greater emphasis on covert means.

B) Both Hussein/RIFAI realize British troops must be withdrawn near future otherwise Jordan position vis-à-vis other Arab states untenable.

C) Opposition Hussein/RIFAI within Jordan has not diminished as result GA action and while actual coup may not be as imminent as July 16 slightest relaxation police state control could start slide down slippery slope. [6 lines of source text not declassified]

D) Hussein/RIFAI realize Jordanian public senses country’s geographic, political, economic isolation fear of being left alone surrounded hostile (despite reaffirmation Arab brotherly love) states. I believe present regime has accurately gauged public opinion when they say Jordan must have a champion who will demonstrate in unmistakable terms its determination support pro-Western government against all opposition both within/without country regardless its source or political coloration feel anything less will fail achieve its purpose.

Lessening tension and feeling of imminent disaster noted Embassy telegram 6295 are surface reactions which have little bearing on attitude Hussein/RIFAI both of whom appreciate basic problem as far they concerned remains same or on those determined destroy them who are convinced both time/Nasser are on their side.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2658. Secret; Niact; Limit Distribution.

2 In telegram 644 to Amman, August 25, the Department asked, in light of the problem posed by the possible resignation of Rifai whether the Embassy felt that the “beneficial repercussions” of the Arab resolution adopted by the General Assembly might have caused the King and the Prime Minister “to take less gloomy attitude regarding future Jordan vis-à-vis UAR and their own immediate personal positions.” (Ibid., 785.00/8–2358; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Document 290.

4 Telegram 626 from Amman, August 25, reported on an exchange between Wright and British Ambassador Johnston. Johnston discussed a conversation with King Hussein in which Hussein conveyed the impression that he would have to change the Rifai government for one which would reach an accommodation with the UAR if his requests for increased financial and military support were not met by the Western powers. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.11/8–2558)

5 Dated August 25. (Ibid., 785.00/8–2558; included in the microfiche supplement)

298. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Rountree), Department of State, Washington, August 27, 1958 298. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Rountree), Department of State, Washington, August 27, 19581

Washington, August 27, 1958

SUBJECT

Jordan

Mr. Rountree said that Mr. Lloyd’s message to the Secretary2 had raised several questions. We could not at this time address ourselves to the long range problems of Jordan, nor could we now spell out the manner in which we might achieve our objectives. However, our thinking seemed to be along the same general lines as that of the British. Our immediate and pressing problem was how we might reply to the questions put to us by Hussein and Rifai.

There seemed to be some confusion in the minds of Hussein and Rifai, Mr. Rountree said, as to what they actually wanted. For example, they had requested a mutual defense treaty with the United States, knowing that it would be impossible for us to agree. One could only speculate on the motives behind their threats to resign: possibly they were attempting to pressure us into giving them additional aid and possibly they were seriously contemplating such action and were setting the stage for such an eventuality.

Lord Hood suggested that Hussein and Rifai were putting pressure on us now so that they might go to the Arab League meeting on September 6 with full assurance of aid from us.

Mr. Rountree agreed that it was desirable to give Hussein and Rifai a feeling of security but at this stage we were limited as to what we might do. We must be careful not to give the Arab countries an opportunity to place on us the onus for failure to implement the Arab Resolution. Furnishing two additional brigades to the Jordanian Army might have this unfortunate result. Mr. Rountree handed Lord Hood a draft of our proposed telegram to Amman,3 which Lord Hood read.

Lord Hood commented that in his opinion the draft telegram was too vague and made no concrete offer. He wondered if we might suggest to the Jordanian Government that we were prepared to begin discussing with them plans to equip the two brigades. Mr. Rountree said that we were not now prepared to discuss this subject with the Jordanians. We did not have the funds available and, should we decide to equip the brigades, the money would have to be taken from a different program. We were not even convinced that the two brigades were desirable. The existence of the Arab Resolution raised grave questions in our own minds as to the extent of aid we should give Jordan at this point. We were not now prepared either to say we would equip the brigades or that we would not.

Lord Hood said that in his opinion the two brigades were the absolute minimum of what we might do to encourage Hussein and Rifai to continue in office. We should give them these assurances now. It was apparent that the King needed additional reliable troops and the equipping of two Bedouin brigades seemed to be the answer. Current thinking, he added, was that arms for the two brigades might come from unreliable units of the Jordan Army which were being demobilized on the West Bank. It would be important to discuss what we were willing to do in this line with the Jordanians before the Arab League meeting on September 6. The second important factor, Lord Hood continued, was to give Hussein and Rifai some assurance for the future on the financial side and to spell out exactly what might be available to Jordan. The Secretary of State had hoped that the US could commit $50 million for FY 1959 rather than to dole out relatively small sums on a month-to-month ad hoc basis. Mr. Rountree pointed out the difficulty of committing long-term funds to a country such as Jordan, whose bookkeeping is far from efficient. If we were to carry the financial burden of equipping these brigades, our economic assistance to Jordan would necessarily have to be reduced.

Lord Hood commented that the US was apparently not prepared at this time to undertake to supplement the UK offer of $5 million of aid for FY 1959. He again reiterated that the telegram was unfortunately too vague and asked if it could not be more precise.

Mr. Rountree suggested that he and Lord Hood discuss this matter further with Under Secretary Herter and Under Secretary Dillon at a meeting which was arranged for 5:30 the same afternoon.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–2758. Secret. Drafted by Dorman.

2 Document 295.

3 The telegram, as revised and sent to Amman on August 27, is Document 301.

299. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 299. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, August 27, 1958—5 p.m.

1311. General Chehab and I made a 360 degree “tour d’horizon” this morning of Lebanese political, economic and military situation. Despite rather clipped accents which I had been forced to use Sunday night when I declined General Chehab’s request that General Adams tanks not be deployed along our lines of communications, Chehab could not have been more forthcoming and friendly. Following points emerged: 1. General said he had been furious when opposition leaders came to his house Sunday night (cf Embassy telegram 1269)2 with seven-point manifesto summarized Embassy telegram 1293.3 He had told rebel leaders who gathered with him at Junieh (Jumblat, Rashid Karame, Fuad Ammoun, Abdullah Yafi, Hassan Queini and Sabri Hamadeh) that what he wanted was a declaration opening Beirut and foreswearing acts of violence. Instead he had a political manifesto which did not help matters at all but would in fact give ammunition to Christian loyalists to insist on reprisals against Moslem opposition. General said rebel leaders who visited him were of more moderate stripe and he had noted that leaders from outside Beirut were much more inclined to take a reasonable position than those locked up with Saeb Salaam in the Basta. He said it was clear that manifesto took its truculent tone from fact it had been drafted in Saeb Salaam’s house where each leader felt he had to outshout the other.

2. As to realities of situation, General said that despite apparent intransigence of opposition, in fact more moderate leaders had intimated that progressively Basta would open. Vast majority of population in that quarter were eager to resume business and despite insistence on a continuation of “Pacific general strife,” he was confident rebel leadership would turn a blind eye toward shopkeepers who gradually lifted their shutters.

3. On security situation General said he was prudently optimistic. He admitted stationing of United States tanks on United States line of communications along airport road had had a beneficial effect on opposition. They knew we meant business and also were aware that presence of American fire power made task of Lebanese army more easy. Although after elections Chehab had given orders for his troops to observe a cease-fire, these orders had been changed following recent acts of sniping and terrorism and, as last night’s fire fight near airport road revealed when rebels lost half a dozen men, fire was now horizontal, not vertical. So far as safety of Americans was concerned, General said our families could return at once.

4. Reverting to opposition attitudes and in particular insistence on immediate withdrawal of American forces, General Chehab said he had told opposition leaders Sunday that they were creating a vicious circle for themselves. He has said flatly US forces would not be withdrawn until security situation in Lebanon had been restored to normal. It was therefore up to opposition itself to cooperate in restoring security if they wished to achieve their goal of departure of US forces. Chehab had reminded opposition US command was just as eager as they for withdrawal of our troops and had given earnest of this by reembarkment of a Marine BLT. He, the General, would favor our remaining here however until acts of violence had ceased.

5. Re Hammarskjold’s visit to Middle East and attitude toward retention of UNOGIL, Chehab said he was inclined to feel UN observer force could be built up in numbers to act as a sort of umbrella over Lebanon until future was more clear. He thought this particularly important in connection with eventual withdrawal of US troops.

6. General confirmed report Embtel 12924 that he had arranged transportation for Syrian commandos from Basta back to their homeland.

7. Chehab said he had taken action on my suggestion (para 7 Embtel 1130)5 for attempting to reopen channels of commerce with Syria and Arabian hinterland. His negotiations in Damascus had borne results. Syrians had indicated their readiness to provide full cooperation for free transit of trains, trucks, people and goods but with caveat “they wanted no credit to accrue to Chamoun”. Chehab grinned and said he thought this could be arranged. He likewise said he had been pleasantly surprised when Syrians and Egyptians had informed him Egyptians were prepared to drop embargo on Lebanese apples, again with proviso Chamoun would not get credit. Apparently a delegation will be cooked up to call Chehab as President-elect and literally offer him the apple of accord.

8. Noforn: General wishes following information to be closely held. He says he contemplates a 6-month period of emergency powers during which Parliament will be asked to stand down “as I do not want to be bothered with antics of those politicians”. He contemplates appointing a government of relatively little known moderates accepting no outstanding leaders either from opposition or fanatic loyalists. He looks toward a businesslike half-year in which to bind up the nation’s wounds, conciliate factional strife, and get ahead with being a peaceful small country once again. From his reference to opposition fears of arrest under present regime I got broad inference an amnesty would be an early order of business once Chehab assumes power.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783C.00/8–2758. Secret. Repeated to Cairo, Damascus, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Document 294.

3 Telegram 1293 from Beirut, August 26, reported that opposition leaders met on August 25 at the house of Saeb Salam to adopt a seven-point program of concerted action affirming a unity of purpose and calling for support for Chehab’s announced national program, and for the immediate evacuation of U.S. forces. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2658; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Dated August 26. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2658)

5 Document 274.

300. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, August 27, 1958, 5:30 p.m. 300. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, August 27, 1958, 5:30 p.m.1

Washington, August 27, 1958, 5:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Aid to Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

Lord Hood, British Embassy

The Acting Secretary

W—Mr. Dillon

NEA—Mr. Rountree

NE—Mr. Dorman

NE/E—Mr. Shaw

Pursuant to Lord Hood’s inquiry on whether the United States could say something more definite to the HKJ on budgetary aid than proposed in the earlier draft telegram Mr. Rountree said technicians within the Department had been at work on a revised draft message. They have prepared a new draft which is acceptable to them and which should be satisfactory if Mr. Herter approves. Mr. Rountree then read the proposed telegram.2 In the discussion which followed Lord Hood said that the British offer to contribute $5 million against a United States contribution of $45 million was intended to provide support to Jordan over the next 12 months and that if the United States planning covered only the next six months, i.e. to the end of the current HKJ fiscal year (March 30, 1959), then the UK contribution would presumably amount to $2.5 million. Mr. Rountree, while evidencing disappointment in the effect of this on current budget planning, did not think the United States could commit itself beyond the present Jordan FY 59. In reply to Mr. Herter’s concern that the United States offer might be construed as a commitment to any Government in Jordan, Mr. Rountree said this would not be so, since our offer was being made only to King Hussein and Rifai.

The second aspect of the telegram in which Lord Hood was interested related to the establishment of 2 brigades. Mr. Rountree said this had given us considerable difficulty; he prepared to say more than that the matter was under consideration and that the Department hoped to be able to inform HKJ of our views as soon as possible. It was agreed that the United States would seek the views of our Chargé on these brigades: on whether both are necessary, the purpose for which they are to be organized, the problem of financing them, and his recommendations. Mr. Dorman was to prepare a message asking for the Chargé’s views on these points and requesting the Chargé to consult with the British Ambassador in the preparation of his reply.3

In response to Mr. Herter’s inquiry as to whether Secretary General Hammarskjold should be informed of our intention to supply economic aid, it was agreed our Chargé in Amman would be instructed to so inform him; if the Embassy had difficulty, however, in reaching Mr. Hammarskjold the Chargé would advise the Department and some other channel would be used to keep him informed of our offer.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 711.0085/8–2758. Secret. Drafted by J. F. Shaw.

2 Infra.

3 A telegram posing these questions was sent to Amman on August 28. (Telegram 677 to Amman; Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2858; included in the microfiche supplement)

301. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 301. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, August 27, 1958—7:52 p.m.

666. Embtels 596 and 597.2 You should speak with King Hussein and Rifai along following lines: 1) US giving most serious study to requests of King and Rifai for additional support in preserving independence and integrity Jordan. We believe past role we have played in this regard, particularly within last year, could leave no doubt in their minds of our sincerity of purpose, and that close relationship thus developed will continue to provide basis of mutual confidence in which we can work out problems together. We have great admiration for courage and determination of King and Rifai and are confident of their unwillingness take any action which would jeopardize achievement of objectives for which we have all worked.

2) It is our earnest belief that situation has been created as result special UNGA which provides greater hope for Jordan than has been the case in the recent past and lessening of tensions which may provide better climate for constructive efforts. It would be tragic indeed if opportunity which has presented itself should be lost as result precipitate action, particularly if such action were based upon misconception of motives or intentions of those nations, including US and UK, which have come to assistance of Jordan at time of peril and which are still striving to assist. As result “Arab Resolution” moreover there now exists substantial parallelism of interests in stability and well being Jordan.

3) As King and Rifai were recently informed, we are giving urgent consideration to joining with UK to support additional program involving establishment of new Jordanian military units. We not yet in position to give definitive reply but hope soon be prepared discuss with HKJ.

4) King and Rifai can be assured of our interest in economic aspects of problem and our firm intention to continue assistance in this regard. Re budget support: US has already granted $18.83 million through August current JFY and has indicated that local currency counterpart from POL sales can be utilized meet budget expenditures. Although total POL generated counterpart cannot be firmly estimated at this time, the POL program expected eventually amount to equivalent about $5 million of which perhaps $3 million will generate counterpart. Total above budget aid should substantially cover HKJ’s essential budget needs through September. As for remaining two quarters current JFY, US prepared make available budget aid up to $10 million each quarter. US would thus be providing approximately $42 million of budget support during JFY 1959. It is our understanding that UK also prepared provide some budget aid during remainder current JFY. Thus Jordan should have available sufficient foreign aid to cover its essential budget expenditures. (FYI. We recognize that our estimate Jordan’s minimum requirement budgetary assistance current JFY—i.e., $45–$50 million—is somewhat lower than the HKJ projection set forth Embtel 539.3 However, as we have stated in ICATO 454 and Deptel 645,5 HKJ projections appear considerably overstated. End FYI.)

Re development aid: It should be recalled that most of $10 million made available from USFY 58 MSP funds will actually be spent during current JFY.

Other aid. Foregoing does not include other aid such as PL 480 and military assistance which might be provided. While we cannot at this stage cite sums for subsequent fiscal years, in view US appropriations procedures, our assistance in current and past fiscal years should we believe be reassuring not only to King and Rifai but also to Jordanian public.

5) US attitude toward Jordan and US policy re preservation Jordan independence has been repeatedly made known publicly and we believe there no doubt this respect. With attention now focused upon UN efforts in framework UNGA resolution sponsored by all Arab countries to bring about situation in which Jordan security better assured, we believe it would be unwise detract from these efforts particularly at moment UNSYG undertaking his important mission to area. We confident that GOJ will cooperate fully with UNSYG.

6) At present critical juncture we earnestly hope that King and Rifai will not lose confidence in those who have proven themselves willing to assist them, and that they will continue in their staunch and heroic efforts based upon high order of statesmanship. It is our hope and expectation that we will remain in closest touch as situation unfolds.

Request substance foregoing be passed by Embassy in confidence to Hammarskjöld either personally or through one of his trusted aides. Advise soonest if this not possible.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2358. Secret. Drafted by Rountree and cleared by Dillon, Herter, and FitzGerald in ICA.

2 Documents 289 and 290.

3 Telegram 539 from Amman, August 17, outlined budget projections for the remainder of the Jordanian fiscal year provided by the Jordanian budget director. (Department of State, Central Files, 885.10/8–1758)

4 Not found.

5 Dated August 25. (Department of State, Central Files, 885.10/8–1758; included in the microfiche supplement)

302. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 302. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 28, 1958—2 p.m.

665. Re Deptel 6662 and Embtels 596, 597. Conveyed substance reference telegram Prime Minister Rifai this morning, made following points: (A) View promised budgetary support no question USG intention “stand with Jordan: in future as in past.”

(B) Regardless size/nature any new military units they at least would represent definite increase Jordan Armed Forces, provide necessary reassurance present pro-Western government, have capacity deal effectively internal security problem.

(C) Present US FY-58 funds economic development program opinion qualified technicians probably as much if not more than HKJ could effectively use current FYJ.

(D) USG had demonstrated beyond any reasonable doubt it willing/able make substantial contribution maintenance Jordan’s integrity/independence. Question now remains whether Hussein/RIFAI on their side prepared continue fight which to date characterized by their great courage/determination defend free world principles. Rifai said first wished me convey my government his personal appreciation as well that Jordan Government “this indisputable evidence USG faith HM King Hussein/those loyally serve him.” Added although US proposal failed provide favorable answer re mutual defense treaty, establishment MAAG Jordan, left expansion Jordan Armed Forces in doubt, kept level budgetary aid approximately that last year, nevertheless he felt it did demonstrate US resolve not “throw Jordan to wolves,” provided sufficient basis on which he personally and he believed King Hussein would agree present pro-Western government could continue in office. He pointed out due unlikelihood any substantial amount POL funds will be available meet September army payroll additional $6 million [needed?] and which to be provided by USG (see Embtel 539).3

I said hoped that what I consider be generous US offer would put end further talks his (RIFAI) resignation as Prime Minister or King Hussein’s abdication. He readily agreed adding while undoubtedly negotiations would be required work out details general framework USG proposal sufficiently broad provide room maneuver. I said while statement this position welcome/appreciated, I felt obliged request audience with King in order hear at first hand his reaction. Rifai said he had meeting with Hussein scheduled this afternoon in order report progress his talks with SYG, promised telephone from palace when King could see me, added he confident Hussein attitude will parallel his own.

Comment: Acceptance by Hussein/RIFAI USG offer is constructive forward step but only one step along rocky road ahead Jordan. Resolution its economic plight due geographic/political isolation, its encirclement by presently hostile states (radio broadcasts Baghdad/Damascus last few days worst ever), undiminished opposition Rifai government large majority Jordanian people lack any diminution Nasser appeal Arab world all still remain plus unpleasant but inevitable fact UK troops must soon be withdrawn. My opinion [response?] we gave convinced Hussein/RIFAI “stay in there pitching” but unless widespread international change over which they have no control takes place outcome ball game very much in doubt.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2858. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

2 Supra.

3 See footnote 3, supra.

303. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 303. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 28, 1958—6 p.m.

672. Re Deptel 6662 and Embtel 663.3 Palace protocol officer telephoned 1400 local time requested I come palace immediately. On arrival found Prime Minister Rifai with King to whom I conveyed substance reftel.

King who obviously had been thoroughly briefed by Rifai expressed his deep appreciation US offer, requested I convey President Eisenhower his personal thanks “this timely assurance our good great friend stands firm with Jordan in our common cause.” Rifai again raised question lack funds cover September normal governmental expenditures, requested I invite Washington’s attention this matter which will become urgent as civil service, army payroll due dates approach next few weeks.

Hussein probably as result Rifai coaching said he wished take opportunity assure USG as result its most generous response his request that both he and Rifai would continue wage relentless fight against enemies free world. Rifai responded in flowery terms that so long he is able will continue serve King and country make Jordan freedom fortress Middle East.

I told Hussein/RIFAI their determination continue fight maintain independence/integrity Jordan most welcome, should set at rest press speculative stories re Rifai’s resignation/Hussein’s abdication. I said in light decision present pro-western government continue in office I assumed this meant all reference demand withdrawal UK troops prior October 1 likewise dead issue. Rifai replied this matter being pressed very hard by UNSYG who wished make it first item agenda their talks. I pointed out any withdrawal UK troops should be closely coordinated departure US forces Lebanon, expressed hope HKJ would not make any commitment re withdrawal without prior consultation USG, avoid mutual embarrassment. Both Hussein/RIFAI assured me they would obtain our views before any decision made this problem.

Comment: Hussein like Rifai apparently well pleased USG response but he has not illusions as to future his regime, made point testing time will be period immediately following withdrawal British troops. He hopes UNSYG can secure some kind Middle East truce, provide sufficient time HKJ train/equip additional units Jordan army so that should “Arab honeymoon” be short lived government will have “force in being” willing/able cope any internal security problem which he quite rightly believes looms as greatest challenge his government’s survival.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2858. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

2 Document 301.

3 In telegram 663 from Amman, August 28, Wright reported that Rifai had provided a progress report on his talks with Hammarskjöld. Rifai indicated that a three-point agenda for the talks had been agreed upon, involving the idea of Arab reconciliation as a first step, followed by arrangements for a limited U.N. presence in Jordan, and finally arrangements to facilitate the withdrawal of U.K. troops from Jordan. Rifai noted that Hammarskjöld had agreed that no U.N. police force should be established in Jordan, and also accepted Jordan’s refusal of the type of U.N. observer teams which were sent to Lebanon. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2858; included in the microfiche supplement)

304. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 304. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 28, 1958—7 p.m.

674. Re Deptel 666.2 Met with UNSYG Hammarskjold his hotel this evening, conveyed substance reference telegram, advised him it passed on highly confidential basis which he promised protect. During our conversation lasting more than an hour Secretary General provided following information: A) Has great personal admiration Prime Minister Rifai whom he regards as intelligent/able negotiator dedicated best interest his country, expressed hope he would continue act as stabilizing force on young King Hussein whom he (SYG) believes somewhat prone “make snap judgments”.

B) Secretary General has no explanation sudden violent attack by Damascus/Baghdad Radios against Hussein/RIFAI, called it act “neurotic children who may not be understood but must be lived with.” He intends seek agreement among Arab states put stop this type psychological warfare, same true press.

C) Although he believes both Hussein/RIFAI men of high principle he concerned their utter lack appreciation present government unpopularity, fact impossible put all your political enemies in jail. He said he knew several opposition leaders who were good men against whom police-state tactics lowest order had been used. His opinion unless Hussein/RIFAI at least make honest attempt enlist people’s support internal situation, extremely explosive, cannot be contained indefinitely. He said he had attempted bring this point home Hussein/RIFAI by asking them spell out so-called threats external aggression; unfortunately they had missed point or deliberately avoided it.

D) Secretary General intends return Amman after Cairo talks,3 hopes work out some form “practical approach” implement GA resolution, but admitted at best it only question “buying time” in absence any fundamental change Jordan internal situation which cannot be attributed entirely external subversion no more than case Lebanon. Secretary General said he had prepared draft paper covering points at issue which he intended discuss Hussein/RIFAI later tonight, felt at least two more sessions required before general picture clear enough evaluate chances success, even then this contingent compromised with views other Arab states. As I left he said if possible would like talk with me again either before he departs Geneva or on his return Cairo.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–2858. Secret; Priority; Noforn; Limited Distribution.

2 Document 301.

3 Hammarskjöld left Amman on August 29 for Geneva, where he participated in the opening session on September 1 of the second U.N. Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. He returned to the search for a Middle East settlement in Cairo on September 3 with talks with UAR officials which lasted until September 5. He visited Baghdad on September 7 and 8, returned to Amman on September 8 and 9, and concluded his trip to the Middle East with a visit to Beirut September 10–12. At the conclusion of his trip, Hammarskjöld prepared a report to the General Assembly on his activities under the mandate established by the resolution adopted on August 21. The report was submitted to the General Assembly on September 29. (Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations, Vol. IV: Dag Hammarskjöld, 1958–1960, pp. 203–216)

305. Airgram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 305. Airgram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, August 29, 1958.

G–46

We are now midway in uneasy interim period between election and actual takeover of Chehab. It continues difficult assess fluid situation which obtains here, particularly with respect degree govt control of country and overall security picture. Info available on conditions outside Beirut still fragmentary and not completely reliable. One prominent political figure estimates 80 percent Lebanon and over half towns outside govt authority. Emb believes 60 percent more realistic estimate. Following represents attempt by Emb to present as clear a picture as possible subject foregoing qualifications.

1. Outside Beirut: Govt or govt sympathizers generally control seacoast from Tripoli south to Israeli border. EmbOff recently in Tripoli told by local Leb army commander there were still several hundred Syrians in or about Tripoli; there are strong armed bands of PPS and Phalangists as well, and govt has made no attempt disarm them. Tripoli itself calm but with serious unemployment problem. Same informant estimated a thousand Syrians still in Akkar.

Area south of Tripoli and east to Bekaa (traditional Christian Mount Lebanon) under nominal govt control, largely because in hands Christian feudal families. These families not all pro-Chamoun; they carry on traditional family feuds which cut across political lines and make it difficult judge events in terms loyalists and opposition. However, area definitely not in Moslem opposition orbit, although one faction Zghorta area irreconcilably anti-Chamoun and cooperating with opposition.

In south Lebanon govt appears in loose control of area bounded by line Sidon–Marjayoun on north and Leb-Israeli border on south. This does not exclude feuding such as ancient quarrel between Shi’a factions in Tyre area. Sidon and Tyre open except for old cities, which are restricted areas of Basta type. South Bekaa and area east to Syrian border no-man’s land occasionally penetrated by govt patrols in daylight. Central Bekaa north of Beirut–Damascus road to Rayak apparently under govt control. North Bekaa situation one of lawlessness, brigandage and spotty control by local elements strong enough exercise own authority.

Beirut–Damascus road open to border but probably not hundred percent safe. Railroad to Damascus has on several occasions been reported ready resume; now appears in operation but could easily be interrupted again.

In sum, may be said seacoast from Tripoli south to Israeli border plus corresponding territory inland to crest Lebanon range is either in nominal govt control or at least not in hands active opposition. One exception is Upper Chouf area held by Kamal Jumblat and his Druze followers. Should also be noted that in some cases control by local leaders who, although violently anti-Chamoun, are not for opposition, extends over Lebanon range to edge Bekaa. Kairouz clan, Bcharre, best example this situation. Worst area is Akkar.

2. Beirut: Security conditions still unsettled. Confessional kidnappings and brutality have shown increase in past week. Leb army action against insurgents August 22 inconclusive (Embtel 1250).2 August 24 Lebanese destruction insurgent barricades near public gardens following shooting U.S. soldier in area not challenged by opposition and no exchange of fire occurred. However, barricade re-erected in evening.

According press reports Beirut town commander, Colonel Jamil Lahoud, ordered town garrison take more active measures terminate violence in city. Press also reported arrest of defected gendarme who placed bomb in post office. During past week number of guards and patrols on streets have been noticeably increased. All this may represent attempt gradually tighten security measures. Phalange and Najjade continuing negotiations end kidnappings and terrorism. Results meeting opposition leaders August 25 negative on ending strike despite optimistic predictions last few days. Details separate telegram.

3. UNGA developments: Recent developments UNGA adopting Arab States resolution—SYG Hammarskjold return Mideast—Arab League meeting Sept 6—viewed as clearing stage external problems permitting President-elect Chehab when he assumes office Sept 23 concentrate internal problems.

Though details behind doors debate NYC where unanimous Arab agreement reached still not known here, many view UAR acceptance adopted resolution as evidence: (A) UAR realization there was no other way effect evacuation US and UK forces, (B) Reaffirmation to Arab League possible because with Nuri Said gone UAR returns unchalleged position dominance Arab League affairs; (C) UAR wants consolidate gains Iraqi revolution and willing ride time because believe time in their favor, particularly in Jordan but elsewhere Arab world as well.

Only major Leb party dissent UN resolution is PPS which in its party organ stated “Arab League failed because it stood on wrong foundations. In effect, it was nothing more than tool in hands Egyptian authorities. We believe in establishment Arab bloc which unlike Arab League would decide on collective Arab interest on basis equality.”

4. Internal political: Despite recurring rumors, seems unlikely “neutral” or “caretaker” Cabinet will be constituted. Chamoun seems determined round out term on laissez-faire basis and turn over problems to Chehab at proper time. Chehab has seemed just as determined not play active role until he takes over, although many elements attempting persuade him conditions may deteriorate beyond easy repair if he does nothing during what amounts to interregnum. Many reports indicate growing disillusionment with Chehab among Christian elements, although some action his part to reduce tension could still save reputation.

If kidnappings, shootings, hoodlumism come to end, however, Chehab may well turn out to have been better judge of own people than many give him credit for. Also, he may benefit from easing tension through Arab States proposal at UNGA, through no effort of his own.

Certain amount bombings and grudge killings expected continue even after Chehab inaugurated but on decreasing scale. No army move against rebels likely which could possibly be misinterpreted as action against organized opposition. If conclusion effective political understanding between Chehab and moderate opposition leaders reached opposition would presumably discontinue violence and perpetrators of terror would be limited to communists and lunatic fringe, possibly including Baathists. Army might then take more firm stand improve security. PPS and Phalange not expected undertake campaign of terror or instigate widespread violence after Chehab’s inauguration, although they will remain armed and watchful. Violence eventually expected to arrive at negligible level but not cease completely for indefinite future.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2958. Confidential. Also sent to Ankara, Baghdad, Damascus, Cairo, Jidda, London, Paris, Tel Aviv, USUN, CINCSPECOMME, and COMLANFOR.

2 Dated August 22. (Ibid., 783A.00/8–2258)

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 306. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 30, 1958—noon.

689. Reference: Embtel 686.2 Prime Minister Rifai called today, requested I confirm UNSYG’s statement made to him that “he (SYG) had received indication USG prepared consider early withdrawal its troops Lebanon” which has prompted him (SYG) hope it may be possible set September 30 for simultaneous movement US/UK troops out of Lebanon/Jordan. Rifai said he anxious that his tentative agreement September 30 withdrawal date not be used as lever on USG by Secretary General in order force “premature withdrawal counter what USG considers best interest free world.”

I expressed my appreciation his consideration re timing US/UK withdrawal, promised inform my government desire be kept fully informed this subject.

In light press reports he (RIFAI) might attend upcoming Arab League meeting I inquired if any definite plans yet formulated. He replied original meeting which was of political committee only scheduled September 6 likely be changed to full League meeting September 15–16 at either Prime Minister or Foreign Minister level in which case Prime Minister level he will attend, if not probably will designate his brother Monem Rifai HKJ Ambassador London, who led Jordanian delegation recent GA session.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 315/8–3058. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to USUN.

2 Telegram 686 from Amman, August 29, reported on the text of the agreement reached that day by Rifai and Hammarskjöld concerning the implementation of the resolution adopted by the General Assembly. The agreement provided, in part, that there would be no U.N. police force or observer teams established in Jordan, that the U.N. presence in Jordan would be brought about through the establishment of a “UN Representative Office” in Amman headed by a U.N. official with the rank of ambassador, provided that similar but subordinate offices were established in Cairo, Baghdad, and Beirut. The agreement further specified that the withdrawal of British troops would be subject to satisfaction on the part of the Jordanian Government that other Arab States had demonstrated willingness to live up to their pledges under the U.N. resolution. Hammarskjöld pressed for a specific date to be established for the British withdrawal, and Rifai agreed that September 30 was a reasonable target date, providing that the conditions for withdrawal had been met. (Ibid., 315/8–2958; included in the microfiche supplement)

307. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 307. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, August 30, 1958—4 p.m.

1362. During call which Holloway and I paid this morning on General Chehab (military aspects of which are separately reported to JCS by Admiral),2 I continued review of political and security situation from point of my last meeting with General (Embtel 1311).3

Chehab said that following his stormy reaction to rebel manifesto last Sunday, he had discerned a definite trend toward second thoughts in opposition leadership. He was particularly encouraged that Rachid Karame, leader of rebellion in Tripoli, had come to Beirut for sole purpose of attempting to reason with leadership in the Basta with view to gradual re-opening of that quarter and a phased lifting of general strike throughout Lebanon. Other elements at work included Takieddine Solh, Chehab’s political adviser, and Yusef Salam acting as head of the powerful syndicate of industrialists and merchants.

An important factor of Chehab’s negotiations with opposition would be offer of possibility of reembarkation of additional US troop units. Chehab in consequence welcomed Holloway’s suggestion for possible retraction of a marine BLT by 15 September. However, we all agreed this plan should be most closely held in order to permit Chehab to make offer to rebel leadership to use his best influence on CINCSPECOMME for withdrawal of BLT in return for real progress on their side in opening Beirut and reestablishment of security.

Chehab seemed reasonably confident that by a combination of carrot and stick methods the Basta could commence to return to a normal state and seemed to anticipate strike might at least be alleviated tomorrow or Tuesday.

My current reading of situation that provided means can be found of saving oriental face and above plan (as I expect) Chehab can intimate to rebel leaders they may anticipate amnesty after he takes office, general strike should commence to wane next week. I therefore fully concur with CINCSPECOMME’s recommendation both as to phased withdrawal and return of official dependents by mid-September.

Re formation of new government following his assumption of presidency September 24, Chehab said he was insisting to both opposition and loyalist factions on three principles: (1) unity, (2) pacification and (3) work. He said no person would be invited to enter next cabinet who did not observe these 3 principles. He added wryly this would eliminate a number of politicians.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–3058. Secret. Repeated to Damascus, Cairo, London, and USUN.

2 Not found.

3 Document 299.

308. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 308. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, August 30, 1958—7 p.m.

700. Reference: Deptels 666,2 6673 and Embtel 694.4 King Hussein summoned British Ambassador Johnston/myself Palace noon today. On arrival found Prime Minister Rifai already with King who stated he wished discuss provision Jordan Army which I had recently informed him was under point consideration US/UK. Speaking in emotional tone I rarely seen him use he outlined step by step events leading up to his request US military assistance including mutual defense treaty [garble] establishment MAAG Jordan. He spelled out in precise terms what he considered Jordan’s basic military requirements: (A) Bringing army now at 65 percent troop strength to full strength, increase approximately 6, 000 men.

(B) Recruitment among loyal Bedouin tribes sufficient personnel create two new brigades total approximately 6–7, 000 men properly equipped with necessary armor, artillery, other supporting units, modern weapons.

(C) Complete re-equipment other four army brigades with new weapons/vehicles some of which are over 40 years old. King said “we have 1916 Enfield rifles, 1947 tanks, 1941 transportation equipment, no army can long survive unless it is periodically re-equipped, in Jordan case this long overdue.”

(D) Prompt delivery twelve Hawker–Hunter aircraft, inauguration ground training program Amman.

At this point he spoke in Arabic to Rifai who said King had asked him to explain how in light probable early departure UK troops as result UNSYG recent visit mandatory HKJ knew where it stood re present/potential strength armed forces order determine appropriate internal security policies. He went on to say Jordan refusal accept UN police force and/or observer teams was based on HKJ determination [not?] use international forces deal external/internal security problem. This however depended in large measure on size/character Jordan army.

In reply I said my Government’s response Jordan’s multiple request only transmitted two days ago at which time it was noted question additional units Jordan army under urgent consideration to be matter later communication. My opinion it only reasonable suppose due nature/size problem answers not likely be forthcoming several days probably longer. However I invited Hussein/RIFAI attention certain facts which must be taken into consideration: (A) If fully implemented HKJ request would result more than 30 percent increase its armed forces. This carried serious political implications re Jordan’s neighbors.

(B) Cost additional brigades approximately $25 million with re-equipment army neighborhood $60 million with comparable increase annual recurring costs which in turn would greatly increase army budget now approaching $50 million annually.

(C) Recruitment, equipping, training new brigades would take one to two years far too long be of use in present emergency. I expressed thought would like think USG delay specific reply Jordan’s request might in light foregoing be considered result number very serious problems it entailed.

King responded by saying he willing forego bringing army troop strength to TO level.

However insisted two modern equipped brigades minimum requirement in external/internal security when UK troops withdrawn. Said due fact many exservicemen available at least 50 percent new brigades could be recruited immediately, balance within six months.

RIFAI interrupted to say situation Middle East far from settled, considerable likelihood aims GA resolution might not be achieved, therefore Jordan could not afford be weaker than her enemies, many which getting all arms they wanted USSR, added ironically Yemen army better equipped than Jordan’s.

Hussein said he concerned over antiquated administration/army, asked me request US military “survey and evaluation team” be sent Jordan make recommendations reorganization country’s armed forces. I agreed transmit request.

RIFAI pressing for answer re two brigades, said if USG wished send someone make on-spot survey speed up decision he would be most welcome. I said I would pass on this suggestion Washington.

Throughout discussion Ambassador Johnston said practically nothing and although admittedly US had been recipient original request on basis Department’s recent cables I assume UK had been consulted from outset. Therefore his attitude a little difficult understand unless he embarrassed over position he took at yesterday’s meeting reported Embtel 667.6

Comment: Abrupt nature Palace summons in light USG answer only delivered two days ago together general character British approach additional units Jordan army as noted in reference telegram leads me believe something happened past 24 hours arouse Hussein’s ire. ARMA informed by senior Jordanian army officers British up to yesterday had presented no plan. However, we know British have a plan which they have outlined to ARMA, very possible they showed it some army officer who passed word to Palace with result King decided make crystal clear he not about “buy” any idea two brigades armed only with cast-off national guard weapons. On basis estimates prepared by ARMA what Hussein has in mind (expansion, modernizing Jordanian army) would cost approximately $500 million over six-year period.

Event the so-called “minimum” which Hussein/RIFAI indicated they willing accept, namely two new brigades equipped with armor, artillery, supporting units would run into $30–35 million with sizable increase budgetary support pushing total US aid well above $100 million mark annually.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–3058. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

2 Document 301.

3 Apparent reference to telegram 677 to Amman; see footnote 3, Document 300.

4 In telegram 694 from Amman, August 30, Wright outlined what he understood to be the position of the British Embassy on the question of providing Western support for the proposed expansion of the Jordanian army. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/8–3058)

6 Apparent reference to telegram 694 from Amman, cited in footnote 4 above.

309. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 309. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 4, 1958—5 p.m.

749. Reference: Embtel 686.2 At our meeting today Prime Minister Rifai again raised question two additional brigades Jordan Army, went great length explain must be properly equipped armor/artillery/supporting units if they expected fulfill important role maintenance internal security.

He asked if I had received reply whether USG had indicated to UNSYG its willingness early withdrawal US troops Lebanon which SYG tentatively hopes might take place on/about September 30 (see Embtel 686). I replied negative. He requested I again raise this question my government pointing out essential he know US intention re this problem prior SYG return Amman in order he (RIFAI) avoid being led by SYG put pressure USG withdraw its troops. Rifai emphasized he extremely anxious that HKJ take no action re withdrawal British troops which might create difficulty USG re situation Lebanon. However he had already told SYG as far Jordan concerned September 30 date acceptable providing Nasser agrees abide GA resolution. If this date unacceptable USG he must know in order prepare retreat his earlier position as stated to UNSYG.3

I asked Rifai if he thought Nasser would accept stationing UN “ministers” Cairo/Damascus observe/report violations GA resolution. If answer negative what would HKJ reaction be. Rifai replied in strictest confidence while he would argue point with SYG he willing accept “personal representative" SYG in Amman even though other Arab states refuse. He reasons this would create good impression UN same time point up UAR unwillingness abide spirit letter GA resolution.

He expressed extreme pessimism situation Lebanon, feels Chehab will try be all things all people, pointed out opposition flaunted authority in use partial strike technique, unwillingness/inability Lebanese security forces put stop sniping/bombing/other outward expression opposition’s contempt Chehab authority. He feels Lebanon definitely lost to west, sees no end instability which indirectly affects all ME, Jordan in particular.

Re cabinet action appointment his brother Monem Rifai new post director broadcasting, press, tourism I inquired if decision yet made re HKJ Ambassador Washington. Rifai replied Khulusy Khairy, former Minister Economy was no longer being considered ostensibly because poor health, however Rifai said he wished to tell me in confidence “we have reason believe he (Khulusy Khairy) may have been unduly influenced by Iraqi officials during his detention. We plan to keep an eye on him”. Since elimination Khulusy Khairy makes release Anastas Hamania from Jordan DB impossible Rifai intends send Midhat Juma as Ambassador Washington, hopes discuss appointment with King shortly. Anxious Juma be on hand regular GA meeting since he likely head HKJ UN delegation in addition duties Ambassador.

RIFAI once again inquired re $6 million budgetary support needed meet September army/civil payroll, pointed out recapture POL counterpart funds not expected exceed $1/1.5 million, emphasized he had ordered all government departments reduce expenditures very minimum including army, hopes that way keep budget manageable proportions.4

RIFAI brought up question delivery Hawker–Hunter aircraft, said he had stormy session with British Ambassador Johnston who gave him impression USG had not completed transaction thereby causing delay delivery. I told Prime Minister I understood US had long since concluded necessary arrangements but question delivery in light absence any qualified Jordanian pilots might very well be one consideration, furthermore present isolation Jordan made “fly-in” aircraft practically impossible. He said it psychologically important Hawker–Hunter be delivered Jordan soonest, even if they not flown until pilots finish training UK, added “I want aircraft to be put in show where most people and particularly army can see our friends have not forgotten us.”

Comment: Rifai’s anxiety know USG position re withdrawal our troops Lebanon understandable in light his partial commitment UNSYG permit British troops leave Jordan by September 30. Re $6 million budgetary support country team in agreement this urgently required. If additional funds not available suggest HKJ be authorized draw against dollars million allocated third quarter. Rifai attitude toward Khulusy Khairy significant, reinforces to certain extent an idea currently being talked about to the effect Iraq might assist group within Jordan unseat present regime with understanding when new government took over it would orientate Jordan foreign policies parallel those Iraq, in this way begin set stage confederation Syria/Iraq/Jordan which might act as counterbalance Nasser’s UAR within Arab world.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 315/9–458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, and USUN.

2 See footnote 2, Document 306.

3 In telegram 739 to Amman, September 5, Wright was instructed to inform Rifai that the United States had no definite timetable for withdrawal from Lebanon, since that decision was dependent upon a number of factors, but the intention was to withdraw as soon as the continued presence of U.S. forces was no longer required. (Department of State, Central Files, 315/8–3058; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Telegram 735 to Amman, September 5, addressed the question of U.S. budget support for Jordan. It noted that the Jordanian Government “continues inflated expenditure level for which it has offered no convincing rationale.” The Department concluded that the time had come to “face HKJ with fixed US budget support level with which it will have to live.” Concerning the Jordanian request for $6 million to meet budgetary requirements during September, the Department was prepared to transfer $5 million on the understanding that the use of this amount in one month would seriously reduce the amount of U.S. budgetary support available for the remainder of the fiscal year. (Department of State, Central Files, 885.01/8–2158; included in the microfiche supplement)

310. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Rountree), Department of State, Washington, September 5, 1958 310. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Minister of the British Embassy (Lord Hood) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Rountree), Department of State, Washington, September 5, 19581

Washington, September 5, 1958

SUBJECT

Withdrawal of U.S.–U.K. Troops from Lebanon and Jordan Respectively

Mr. Rountree called in Lord Hood to inform him that the Department had been giving consideration to the question of the withdrawal of certain U.S. troops from Lebanon. He said he knew the British would be interested in being informed of all developments of this nature because of the relationship to the question of British withdrawal from Jordan and Prime Minister Rifai’s attitude thereto (reported in Amman’s telegram 749)2 with the presence of U.S. forces in Lebanon.

Mr. Rountree said the U.S. would withdraw one battalion of Marines about September 15, hoping it would be a salutary development in advance of Chehab’s inauguration. Another battalion, he said, will be withdrawn soon after the inauguration if political circumstances permit. Granted favorable conditions, the withdrawal of the sole remaining battalion and support troops might be completed, Mr. Rountree stated, before the end of October. No firm decisions had been made, however, except for the September 15 withdrawal of one battalion.3

Mr. Rountree informed Lord Hood in confidence of Prime Minister Rifai’s statement to Chargé d’Affaires Wright in Amman that he had informed the Secretary General he would be willing to see the British leave Jordan by September 30 provided Nasser agrees to abide by the General Assembly resolution. Mr. Rountree said that this eventually seemed to hinge in part on the U.S.–U.K. decision re the financing of two additional Jordan army brigades. Lord Hood indicated a preference for an elementary level of equipment rather than the ambitious plans Rifai seemed to have in mind. Mr. Rountree remarked that the expense would be considerable in any case and we did not know how it could be met.

The Hawker–Hunters scheduled for delivery to Jordan by the U.K. were discussed briefly, Lord Hood stating that HMG has no particular views but is prepared to move in any manner the U.S. thinks desirable. In any case, it would be a long time before the planes got off the ground.

Lord Hood expressed pleasure at the suggestion that the Jordanians have a definite date in mind for the departure of British troops, saying he thought this news would be a relief to his government. The British have had the impression, he said, that Jordan wanted them to remain indefinitely. On the other hand, it would be embarassing to depart prematurely only to find it necessary to return. He said he would be interested in knowing on what basis the Secretary General had suggested September 30. He hoped the U.S. and U.K. would remain in close touch on the issue.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5411/9–558. Secret. Drafted on September 9 by William L. Hamilton.

2 Supra.

3 At the Secretary’s Staff Meeting on September 5, Dulles said that the President was interested and hopeful that there would be a further reduction of U.S. forces in Lebanon. Rountree noted the tentative plan calling for the withdrawal of one battalion on September 15, a second on September 30, and the balance of the forces on October 15. Dulles and Rountree agreed that it would be necessary to consult with the British on the overall plan, especially as Jordan represented the main potential stumbling block, but they also agreed that the British should be informed rather than consulted on the first reduction. (Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 63 D 75)

311. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 311. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, September 5, 1958—10 p.m.

1431. During visit which Admiral Holloway and I paid on General Chehab this afternoon certain aspects of which are covered by a separate telegram2 following additional points emerge.

(1) General Chehab confirmed reports which had reached me of concentric plots both in and out of army designed primarily to frustrate his administration and secondarily to prepare way for an eventual federation of Lebanon with UAR. Chehab strongly inferred but did not directly say that there were certain intransigent elements in loyalist circles who were lending themselves to these conspiracies (although how such partisans would wish to federate Lebanon with Syria he did not explain).

(2) Chehab said he had taken necessary preventative measures to forestall coup d’etat and had his eye on “three officers” who were involved in plot. He also said, somewhat to my unease, that his G–2 was in direct contact with Syrian G–2 with apparently a very free exchange of information. I plan to follow up on this item [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

(3) General said he had undertaken conversations with a view to forming a government immediately upon his assumption of power. At first he had favored naming Haj Hussein Oueini a moderate opposition leader as Prime Minister, but later Oueini himself led a delegation suggesting that Rashid Karame should receive this nomination on grounds that Tripoli was a critical area and this post had better be given to a Tripolitanian Moslem leader. It later developed, however, that Christian loyalists and in particular entourage of Chamoun were working violently against a government which would contain members of opposition. According to Chehab plan of more fanatic loyalists is to insist on a so-called “neutral” government which will be incapable of doing its job. Ultimate purpose according to General would be prolongation of crisis in Lebanon with goal of creating such a continuing state of insecurity that US forces could not be withdrawn.

Comment: This hypothesis coincides with statements Chamoun made to me last week and again this morning that he thought US military presence should remain indefinitely in Lebanon.

(4) Chehab said it would be difficult to see clearly with regard to a phased withdrawal of all US forces until he had taken office and nature of his new government was known. However, as reported separately, he feels a very urgent political necessity of having at least one Marine battalion commence its withdrawal toward middle September.

(5) I told Chehab that I had informal indications that Hammarskjold would be here on September 10 and that Galo Plaza was preparing a suggested agenda for talks between General and SYG. We agreed that early next week, especially if Department and DOD concur in our recommendations re withdrawal of a Marine battalion, I might see Chehab before his talks with Hammarskjold.

(6) Re economic situation General was increasingly optimistic. He said his Chief of Staff had met today with syndicate of truckers to work out arrangements for greater security of vital highway commercial route to Damascus; and he had taken steps to remove certain interference from PPS (aided by Lebanese Sûreté) at checkpoint at Zahile. Queried as to chances of reopening standard gauge railroad from Beirut through Tripoli to Horns and Damascus, General said one bridge was blown up north of Tripoli but he was supplying security forces to protect workmen who he hoped would presently reopen line by rebuilding bridge. General said secretly he was tomorrow sending an emissary to Cairo to negotiate for resumption of important apple trade with Egypt. In gradual reopening of Basta and restoration of commercial life in Beirut Chehab thought worst was over so far as Lebanese economy was concerned.

(7) Admiral Holloway and I asked General his views on collection of arms with which Lebanon is saturated. He said he would propose increasing penalties for holding unlicensed weapons and hoped to institute a system of arms purchase at fairly moderate prices. Here, however, money was the rub. He felt it might take up to 3 million pounds for an effective program to be made complete. He likewise intended to demand of rebels immediate handing over from day of his inauguration all heavy weapons such as bazookas and thought they would comply with this request. Collection of arms from both sides loyalist and opposition would be done on a phased basis so that neither faction would have an advantage.

Comment: I believe it would be sound investment in our own security to say nothing of that of Lebanon if Department and ICA would authorize a special grant of $1 million to be given directly to new President for sole purpose of re-purchase of arms and I so recommend.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–558. Secret. Repeated to Amman, Cairo, Damascus, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 In telegram 1434 from Beirut, September 5, McClintock elaborated on the recommendation which grew out of his meeting with Chehab that an additional Marine battalion be withdrawn from Lebanon by September 15. McClintock noted that such a withdrawal would be important to Chehab in his negotiations with the opposition, and would take some of the wind out of the sails of a hard-core loyalist group which was maneuvering to make it difficult for the U.S. forces to leave Lebanon for the foreseeable future. McClintock strongly recommended that such a withdrawal be authorized, and that the announcement of the contemplated withdrawal be timed to coincide with Hammarskjöld’s visit to Beirut on September 10. (Ibid., 783A.5411/9–558) In a separate message to the JCS on September 6, Admiral Holloway also supported the recommendation to withdraw a Marine battalion by September 15. He indicated that he had established to his own satisfaction “the military feasibility and desirability in executing the next phase of the withdrawal in Lebanon by the retraction of BLT 1/8 of 15 Sep and its return to CONUS.” (CINCSPECOMME telegram 0634 to CNO, 060746Z Sep 58; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files) Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement.

312. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 312. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 6, 1958—7 p.m.

777. Department pass Defense. Re Deptels 735,2 6663 and Embtel 708.4 Conveyed substance reftel Prime Minister Rifai who expressed keen disappointment, said proposed budgetary aid will in effect leave HKJ in position unable meet defense costs last two months of JFY 59. He pointed out British troops cannot remain Jordan much longer, not only because HKJ stated position re UN police force but even more so because domestic/political considerations wherein present regime is accused permitting reoccupation Jordan.

When UK forces depart HKJ must be able maintain internal/external security on its own. Rifai said it was this consideration which prompted King Hussein request expansion Jordan armed forces by two brigades. He said at loss understand how USG could be giving further consideration formation two additional brigades when it had already reached decision tantamount cut back existing troop strength. He said I am sure you appreciate present pro-Western government can only remain in power so long it has sufficient force maintain internal security. If we are compelled reduce below minimum required do job Jordan will be irretrievably lost free world, Western influence will soon be driven from entire ME, I explained that while my government appreciated Jordan courage nevertheless it felt HKJ should be able “prune back” certain expenditures which would enable it live within available US–UK support. Rifai assured me he would do everything possible achieve this and, at same time urgently requested I secure necessary authority provide much needed funds over step [Sept?] expenditures. He said he had meeting with King Hussein this afternoon, would advise him latest US decision but felt certain it would be bitter disappointment.

Comment: The relatively calm manner with which Rifai received bad news re US budgetary support can be interpreted two ways: (1) He feels confident when time comes USG will not stand idly by while HKJ faces army payless payday, at last moment will come through with enough money keep regime creaking along.

(2) He has come conclusion hand-to-mouth operation no longer has “future”, may intend use current budget support pave way his own exit before aid runs out which on basis current spending will be some time January.

With USG limiting budget support for last seven months JFY 59 to absolute maximum $20 million (Deptel 735) budget situation for remainder JGY appears as follows to country team: (1) Budget Director will have to cut civil expenditures $5 million; however he says can finance remaining civil budget requirements entirely from domestic revenues plus UK development loan funds and POL counterpart, therefore can last out year (paragraph 9, Embtel 708). (This does not take into account any emergency civil requirements such as expediting desert road construction.) This would leave entire $20 million US budget aid for army.

2) ARMA believes roughly $4 million can be pared from army budget with no particularly damaging results to present establishment (see ARMA cables on Jordan army budget breakdown).5 However, army budget deficit of $5 million will remain, which can only be covered by cut in present military establishment.

3) In view necessity army be cut, does not make sense for USG to consider financing concurrent expansion of army by two brigades. Consideration should rather be given to maintaining and improving present military establishment, which rapidly deteriorating equipment-wise, using money to be allocated for additional brigades.

4) Country team notes by effecting above savings JFY 1959 expenditures will not exceed $77 million, or only $4 million more than last year’s actual budget undertakings. Country team therefore recommends that to satisfy budget requirements, enhance internal security, reaffirm political support for Jordan and effect psychological impact on Hussein and Rifai, USG make counter-proposal to HKJ request for additional brigades by offering $15 million additional budget support for remainder JFY 1959. This $15 million, along with $20 million available per Department telegram 666, would be used entirely for army, to cover maintenance present army establishment, some improvement equipment-wise, small expansion if any money left over. Since UK plan to create two new brigades “barefoot boys with rifles” is estimated to cost $10 million, country team proposal entails only $5 million additional support. Country team believes it would be tragic mistake to give Jordan $56 million, and for lack of another $5 million to court good possibility present government will collapse, allowing Nasser to enter game next spring with $5 million stake and win jackpot.

5) Above proposal does not take care of $7 million debt for military supplies carried over from last fiscal year. Failure to liquidate this debt has already seriously handicapped normal credit relationships in purchase army supplies. Package still needed by HKJ therefore totals $22 million.

Request authority execute agreement with HKJ committing $42 million budget support September through March 1959, including authority and provision to transfer $12 million immediately to cover $5 million needed for September and $7 million for last year’s unpaid army bills.6

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–658. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

2 See footnote 4, Document 309.

3 Document 301.

4 Telegram 708 from Amman, August 31, contained an assessment of the Jordanian budget for fiscal year 1958 prepared by USOM, as well as the Embassy’s comments on the assessment. (Department of State, Central Files, 885.10/8–2158)

5 Not found.

6 The Department responded on September 12 in telegram 808 to Amman, which authorized the Embassy to obligate and transfer $5 million to Jordan for September, in accordance with prior instructions. The Department added, however, that no additional commitment could be made with respect to the Jordanian army budget. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–658) On September 13, Wright reported, in telegram 852 from Amman, that he had conveyed the substance of telegram 808 to Amman to Rifai. Rifai expressed appreciation for the continuing evidence of U.S. support, but noted that without a substantial increase in U.S. budgetary support the government would be without funds to meet army and civilian payrolls in December. (Ibid., 785.5–MSP/9–1358)

313. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 313. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, September 9, 1958—9 p.m.

1478. Department pass Department of Defense and Joint Chiefs of Staff for information. Admiral Holloway and I saw Chamoun and later Chehab today and communicated intent to withdraw additional marine battalion as authorized Deptel 1160.2

Chamoun said he very much hoped US military presence could remain in Lebanon “for the time being” as he still feared intervention from UAR, had utterly no faith in any assurances given by Nasser, and thought Hammarskjold’s activities would be ineffective. Later Chehab revealed he and President had lengthy discussion yesterday on what they should tell Hammarskjold re ultimate withdrawal of US forces. Chamoun at that time had insisted he thought our troops should not leave Lebanon before December. Chehab said he had told President that, according to his own reading of security situation and measures he would adopt to deal with it, there should be a general cleaning up of lawless elements including a nation-wide rendition of illegal arms which he thought he would have sufficient strength to accomplish within first week after his assumption of power. If things went as he expected, General thought it would be possible for US forces to commence withdrawal after end of this month. However, he had no preconceived ideas as to timing and preferred to be guided by facts as they developed. General said he had made it clear to Chamoun that whatever new government comes into office after September 24 would at least in principle insist on withdrawal of US forces.

Chehab was more optimistic on the present security situation than at any time since May 8th. He told us of return to normal conditions in the Basta, of fraternization in the suburbs of Beirut between Moslem and Christian merchants, and of a general improvement country-wide in opening up areas hitherto held by rebels. Road is open north of Tripoli to Syrian frontier; and his patrols are now moving freely throughout Thebekaa to northern border. Yesterday a deputation of tribal leaders from Thebekaa came to see him and swear fidelity. Chehab made special point of saying he hoped our dependents would return here with appropriate favorable publicity as indicating that Lebanon at long last is on the way back to normal.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5411/9–958. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

2 Telegram 1160 to Beirut, September 8, informed the Embassy that the JCS was sending a message to Holloway authorizing the withdrawal of one marine battalion, as recommended by McClintock and Holloway. McClintock was instructed to notify Chamoun and Chehab of the U.S. intent to withdraw the battalion. (Ibid., 783A.5411/9–558) Secretary Dulles approved the instruction authorizing the withdrawal, with the stipulation that Chamoun be informed before an official announcement was made. (Memorandum from Rockwell to Boster, September 8; ibid., 783A.00/9–858) The text of the announcement of the withdrawal, which was made by Holloway in Beirut on September 10, was transmitted by the JCS to CINCSPECOMME in JCS telegram 947794, September 10. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files) All three documents are included in the microfiche supplement.

314. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 314. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 9, 1958—midnight.

812. Reference Embassy telegram 776.2 In accordance previous arrangements Prime Minister Rifai in 3-hour briefing tonight provided detailed account result UNSYG visit.

A. SYG originally believed some form UN police force and/or UNOGIL type organization required establish “UN presence” Jordan. Subsequently changed mind agreed high-ranking personal representative with small staff stationed Amman/Cairo/Damascus/Beirut/Baghdad act as watchdog facilitate implementation GA resolution.3

B. Although Iraq Government was co-sponsor GA resolution it considers participation limited to area general Arab unity. Re Jordan specific complaint GOI takes position noninvolvement therefore sees no justification UN representative Baghdad. SYG agrees, HKJ concurs.

C. SYG told Rifai in view vague nature resolution he had two alternatives (1) point out this weakness GA request more definitive resolution; (2) make his own definitions. SYG decided on latter course but postponed formulating definitions until after discussion governments involved.

D. Two principal aims SYG Cairo were: 1. Impress on Nasser resolution not mere scrap paper.

2. Secure agreement Nasser/UAR willing/able facilitate necessary arrangements its full implementation.

SYG had stormy session Nasser at which he presented evidence vicious anti-Hashemite radio broadcasts calling on people overthrow Hussein regime. Ultimately Nasser in SYG presence directed Ali Sabri (close political advisor) take necessary steps put stop extremists type broadcasts yet reserve rights political coverage. SYG specifically took Nasser to task for statement that Hussein request UK troops act treason said if Nasser belief he had no right make public statements which caused repercussions beyond UAR borders. As result lengthy discussion SYG secured Nasser agreement 6-point program outlined reference telegram which he proposed use as definition implementation Section 1 GA resolution.4

E. SYG considers in light Arab League sponsorship resolution it together other Arab states must shoulder primary responsibility implementation. He sees UN in assist role only therefore decision as to degree/nature any UN participation rests exclusively with SYG.

F. Nasser indicated he would agree facilitate early removal obstacles land/air communications through UAR territory. However, said it cannot be accomplished before September 24 when President Chehab assumes office Lebanon otherwise Nasser would suffer loss of face which might produce unfavorable political repercussions Egypt.

G. Nasser rejected stationing UN representative Cairo. Pointed out any investigation made by UN representatives could only be done with cooperation GOE. He suggested if Jordan felt needed “UN presence" SYG could station someone Amman but nowhere else. SYG argued UN representative Amman would need network outside Jordan assist him tracking down alleged violations otherwise HKJ might just as well make direct appeal UN. Ultimately SYG/Nasser agreed to following formula in order insure uninterrupted communications across UAR territory. 1. Very senior UN official with rank Ambassador to be stationed Amman with small staff responsible implementation GA resolution.

2. Liaison officer with broad terms reference be stationed Damascus on definite understanding he is subordinate to/works under direction UN representative Amman. (Principal task will be observing compliance agreement re transit communications.)

3. UN representative to be assigned Lebanon with broad terms reference reporting directly UNSYG except matters pertaining Jordan when he may contact UN representative Amman direct. Rifai agreed this proposal as did King Hussein.

H. SYG said he has no idea what he can accomplish Lebanon or even who he will talk with there. He emphasized Lebanese very different Jordan because of UNOGIL hopes Chehab will take forthright action restore law and order after assumption Presidency September 24. SYG indicated if any attempt made catch him in “cross fire” internal political conflict he would make no effort “force himself” into situation, however, planned give extensive coverage Lebanon his upcoming report.

I. SYG put forward name Lieutenant General Von Horn Chief UNTSO as candidate UN representative Amman. Rifai refused on grounds General’s connection UNTSO would give impression Jordan had agreed “observer groups.” Labouisse former UNWRA Chief suggested but SYG agreed his recent position involving refugees might create problem both East-West Banks Jordan. It was agreed SYG would select high caliber person as UN representative Amman meantime will designate temporary representative probably before end September.

J. SYG opinion stationing UN representatives Amman/Damascus/Beirut in itself does not constitute basis for withdrawal US/UK troops. He takes position until Nasser demonstrates willing/able fulfill spirit/letter GA resolution demand withdrawal not valid. He told Rifai he not optimistic Nasser will fulfill his promises. Therefore SYG will make no recommendations in his report to GA re troop withdrawal. Intends to act only as reporter no personal views. He added this matter something Mr. Dulles, Mr. Lloyd, Mr. Gromyko can speak about but not him.

In summation Rifai said King Hussein like himself pleased with outcome SYG mission, however, they share his view in doubting Nasser’s intention live up his promises.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/9–958. Top Secret; Niact; Limited Distribution; Noforn. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, and USUN.

2 Telegram 776 from Amman, September 6, reported on information forwarded to Amman from Hammarskjöld concerning the results of his meeting with Nasser. Hammarskjöld indicated that Nasser had agreed to the following six-point program: A) Agreed that provisions of the U.N. resolution shall be implemented; B) a reasonable/gradual approach toward elimination from radio broadcasts of anything tending to humiliate and at the same time avoid infringement of expression of political opinion; C) a personal representative of the U.N. Secretary-General to be stationed in Amman to receive and investigate alleged violations of the General Assembly resolution; D) agreed to work toward elimination of obstacles to air travel between Arab States; E) a liaison officer operating under the direction of the U.N. representative in Amman to be stationed in Damascus to facilitate communications transmitting from Syria; and F) reaffirmed intention to continue to establish policy to avoid interference in the affairs of other states. (Ibid., 785.00/9–658)

3 See Document 287.

4 Section I of the General Assembly resolution of August 21 reads: “1. Welcomes the renewed assurances given by the Arab States to observe the provision of article 8 of the Pact of the League of Arab States that each member State shall respect the systems of government established in the other member States and regard them as exclusive concerns of these States, and that each shall pledge to abstain from any action calculated to change established systems of government;

“2. Calls upon all States Members of the United Nations to act strictly in accordance with the principles of mutual respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, of non-aggression, of strict non-interference in each other’s internal affairs, and of equal and mutual benefit, and to ensure that their conduct by word and deed conforms to these principles.” (Cited in Document 287)

315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 315. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, September 10, 1958—7:56 p.m.

783. Amman’s 700.2 Rountree today informed British Embassy Officer we desired consult UK in light view we were coming around to, i.e., that we should not meet Jordanian request for two additional brigades. He explained we had had requests from HKJ not only for two brigades but also for substantial quantities new equipment for existing forces, as well as increased budgetary support for army expenditures during current Jordan fiscal year, all of which would require additional US financial aid to Jordan in amounts far beyond our intention to provide. Rountree stated that since flat turn-down at this time of request for two brigades might have serious repercussions we did not propose to tell King and Rifai at present of our decision. We proposed instead to take up suggestion made by King and Rifai (Amman’s 700) that US send survey group composed military and economic experts to make on-the-spot study of Jordan military situation with reference King’s requests both for two brigades and additional equipment for existing forces. Outcome survey might be US decision supply additional equipment for existing forces. However, offer to dispatch mission, while couched in terms designed avoid undue Jordanian disappointment, would also seek avoid any implication that task of mission was to work out implementation of already-taken decision furnish assistance.

British Embassy Officer undertook transmit foregoing Foreign Office. He commented that he believed Foreign Office had hoped we could offer at least minimum program for two infantry brigades. He inquired as to what effect implementation our proposal might have on problem British troop withdrawal.

Rountree replied that according our latest information Rifai no longer making direct connection between withdrawal and agreement provide two additional brigades.

Foregoing should not be revealed to Jordanians pending receipt specific instructions from Dept which will not be forthcoming until after further consultation with British.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/8–3058. Secret. Drafted by Lakeland and Rockwell and cleared by Rountree. Also sent to London.

2 Document 308.

316. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 316. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, September 11, 1958—6 p.m.

1509. Ralph Bunche called on me this morning. He made following points: 1) As predicted Embtel 1473,2 reception of Hammarskjold by GOL got off to a very poor start. SYG was met at airfield by a relatively junior Foreign Office official in contrast to his reception at other Arab capitals. A 2-hour session yesterday with Mokhaiber was exceedingly painful and gave impression to Hammarskjold and his advisers that Lebanese Government was going out of its way to be difficult. Mokhaiber revealed his ignorance on almost every point of UN procedure and probably caused a smile when he asked Bunche if this was his first visit to Middle East.

2) Although Mokhaiber made no effort to arrange an interview with Chamoun, at the last minute yesterday afternoon Hammarskjold was informed President would receive him. Although visit started on a note of chill formality, ice was broken when Hammarskjold began to speak in French and at end of a conversation lasting more than an hour SYG and Bunche had impression Chamoun was not only cordial but was sincere in what he was saying. Gist of Chamoun’s views was that US forces should not be withdrawn until danger to Lebanon’s independence had been removed and that in interim after withdrawal there should be some UN presence in Lebanon.

3) Hammarskjold and Bunche were very favorably impressed by their talk with Chehab last night. General explained his desire for UNOGIL to continue after departure of American troops in order to allay fears of Christian population that they might be subject to Moslem reprisal. Chehab gave Hammarskjold same time table re withdrawal as he has previously discussed with Holloway and me. Chehab this morning confirmed to me that he has asked Hammarskjold to build up UNOGIL in numbers before US withdrawals commence; but that if it were difficult to bring in additional observers quickly he would be satisfied with an announcement to effect observer force would be strengthened.

Bunche says Hammarskjold agreed to increase UNOGIL personnel, these officers and men to continue as at present unarmed. Hammarskjold will also find no difficulty in maintaining UNOGIL indefinitely in Lebanon but would for planning purposes like to estimate on a target date for terminating their task. In response to Bunche’s question I expressed personal view that for planning purposes January 1, 1959 might be a possible target date.

4) Hammarskjold has made an agreement with Jordanian Government for a UN “presence” in Amman whose terms of reference would be left deliberately open. Purpose would be to have some representative of SYG who could watch for possible threats to Jordanian integrity but not be regarded at same time as an indicator of internal weakness in Jordanian Government.

5) It had been agreed with Nasser and Hussein for Hammarskjold to maintain a UN line of communications running from Beirut–Damascus–Amman to assist maintenance of UN one-man “presence” in Amman.

When Hammarskjold mentioned this line of communications to Chamoun and Chehab he got no response; but I told Bunche I was certain General Chehab would pose no objection.

6) Bunche said Hammarskjold found Nasser in a particularly villainous mood and found him extremely difficult to deal with. Bunche said Hammarskjold had now come to agree with his (Bunche’s) analysis that Nasser will some day “explode” in some nervous paroxysm because he is an inadequate man who realizes his own inadequacies and is trying desperately to prove he is wrong in that analysis.

7) I asked if Hammarskjold had made any progress with Arab leaders in developing other aspects of GA resolution. He said SYG had not sought to stress them unduly as he was trying to make progress on one or two finite points in order to show some advance in his September 30 report to the GA for this was essential if Assembly were not to be tempted to reopen a violent debate on Middle East. Subsequent negotiations and reports might then be able to show progress on other aspects of GA resolution such as economic development.

8) Bunche leaves tomorrow for Geneva to close atomic conference but has altered his plans for going to Vienna and will in turn proceed directly to New York to work on increased staffing pattern for UNOGIL. Hammarskjold goes directly to New York to prepare his report for September 30 submission.3

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320.5783A/9–1158. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Amman, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, Tel Aviv, and USUN.

2 In telegram 1473 from Beirut, September 9, McClintock indicated that Hammarskjöld’s arrival in Lebanon that evening came at an unpropitious moment as the outgoing government was bitter against Hammarskjöld personally and UNOGIL generally. (Ibid., 320.5783A/9–958)

3 The Embassy reported, in telegram 1546 from Beirut, September 13, that Hammarskjöld’s visit was viewed with disappointment by most observers in Lebanon, in contrast to the hopes held by all political factions when the visit was first announced. (Ibid., 320.5783A/9–1358; included in the microfiche supplement)

317. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at the Department of State–Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, September 12, 1958 317. Memorandum on the Substance of Discussion at the Department of State–Joint Chiefs of Staff Meeting, Pentagon, Washington, September 12, 19581

Washington, September 12, 1958

PRESENT

Defense General Twining, USAF

General Taylor, USA

Admiral Burke, USN

General White, USAF

General Pate, USMC

Major General Johnson, USA

Lt. General Moore, USA

Vice Admiral Dennison, USN

Lt. General Gerhart, USAF

Major General Greene, USMC

Colonel Hillyard, USA

Rear Admiral Triebel, USN

Captain Carde, USN

ISA Mr. Mansfield Sprague

Lt. General Fox

JSSC Major General Terrill, USAF

Major General Caraway, USA

Rear Admiral Dudley, USN

State Mr. Reinhardt, C

Mr. Rockwell, NEA

Mr. Smith, S/P

Mr. Green, FE

Mr. Porter, G

CIA Lt. General Cabell

Mr. Amory

NSC Mr. Gleason

1. Situation in Lebanon and Jordan

General Taylor said that he had housekeeping and administrative problems to bring up concerning the army troops now in Lebanon. Present plans are to bring the remaining marine battalion out in the near future. This will leave the army battle group of approximately 7, 000. This force must be winterized if it is to stay after mid-fall, and it is due for rotation to the United States shortly after the turn of the year which would require the sending in of a new unit if its presence is still required. General Taylor has noted Chamoun’s comments that the United States would be needed at least until the end of the year, whereas he had the impression that Chehab was more optimistic about an earlier withdrawal date.

Mr. Rockwell gave as his entirely personal view the opinion that if political conditions continue to improve in Lebanon all but a token force could be removed by the end of October. General Taylor inquired as to the nature and size of a token force. Mr. Rockwell said that the big problem is the connection between our forces and the British forces in Jordan. We have made clear to the British that we will not leave their forces in Jordan alone in the Middle East. The political problem in Jordan is more difficult and withdrawal might not be possible as early as in Lebanon. For this reason a token force in Lebanon might be required even though the Lebanese situation per se might not require it. Mr. Rockwell added in response to General Taylor’s further questioning that, again in his personal opinion only, the token force would not be one possessing a military capability but would represent more a political presence on the part of the United States.

He said that he did not believe that Chehab would place us in an awkward position by insisting on immediate total withdrawal, although he believed we would acceed to a firm request on Chehab’s part. General Taylor asked about Hammarskjold’s activities in the Middle East. Mr. Rockwell responded that Hammarskjold appears to be taking no position recommending withdrawal of U.S. and British forces. The proposed United Nations presence in the Middle East, in Mr. Hammarskjold’s view, would not in itself contribute sufficient assurance to justify Western military withdrawal. Hammarskjold has been successful in securing agreement on United Nations representation in Amman, Damascus and Beirut to report on violations of the UN agreement and on evidence of attempt at “indirect aggression”. This would not be a UN observer force in the usual sense, however.

General Taylor pointed out that the army forces remaining in Lebanon after October 1 will be reduced from 7, 000 to 6, 500. This would leave a balanced force but one of the minimum size with a military significance. Anything smaller would be a “flying the flag” gesture. Mr. Reinhardt asked whether plans were firm for departure of the Marine Battalion remaining after the current battalion withdrawal. General Twining responded that this was as yet only for planning purposes, and that the planning date was scheduled for shortly after October 1. There was discussion between Messrs. Reinhardt and Rockwell and General Taylor on the fluidity of the situation immediately after Chehab takes office on September 24. Chehab will take time to form his government and convince the opposition nothing is to be gained by further violence or use of armed force. Chehab will have to get physical control of much of the country. Mr. Rockwell feels that Chehab is already doing well to consolidate his position. The army is now going into rebel held areas and assuming control with considerable firmness.

General Taylor summed up this agenda item by saying that he assumed from the discussion that U.S. forces would be out of Lebanon, or virtually so, by the end of October but that it was recognized that Chehab’s desires would have strong bearing on the matter. He said that from his point of view he would like to remove the troops as soon as the military situation no longer requires their presence.2

2. Aid to Jordan

There was a brief discussion on aid to Jordan in which Mr. Sprague participated. He summarized the State–Defense agreed position to turn down Hussein’s request for equipment and support for two additional brigades. He and Mr. Rockwell pointed out that the political situation did not allow a flat turn-down of the request at this time and that we were therefore taking advantage of an offer by the King to send a small U.S. mission to Jordan to study the military situation. It was agreed that an army officer and an ICA officer would compose this team. Mr. Sprague quoted Mr. Rountree as considering this a holding operation which might use up six weeks time to allow the political situation in Jordan further to crystallize, allowing a reconsideration of the U.S. policy in the area at that time. Mr. Rockwell pointed out in response to a question from General Taylor that the U.S. survey mission would also have a constructive role to play in making positive recommendations for the reequipping and strengthening of the presently constituted armed forces of Jordan. The findings of the mission could also provide additional bases for turning down the request for establishment of the two new brigades.

[Here follows discussion of items 3, “Taiwan Straits,” and 4, “Press Disclosures.”]

1 Source: Department of State, State–JCS Meetings: Lot 61 D 417. Top Secret. A typewritten note at the top of the source text reads: “State Draft. Not cleared with Department of Defense.”

2 The JCS informed Admiral Holloway of the substance of this discussion in JCS telegram 948066 to CINCSPECOMME, September 15. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files; included in the microfiche supplement)

318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 318. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, September 15, 1958—6:47 p.m.

820. Embtel 850.2 FYI. We have noted Rifai’s references to need of timing withdrawal of UK forces from Jordan with departure American troops from Lebanon, and his statements to effect that presence UK forces likely soon to become considerably embarrassing to HKJ. While we appreciate Rifai’s thoughtfulness with regard possible implications of UK withdrawal from Jordan upon US position in Lebanon, we would not wish this factor to be reason for HKJ’s holding UK forces in Jordan any longer than HKJ deems it to be in interests Jordan for these troops to remain. As matter of fact we have since beginning believed it likely situation justifying withdrawal US forces would develop much faster in Lebanon than one facilitating removal UK troops from Jordan, and one of our concerns has been that UK not be left exposed in Jordan after US has left Lebanon. End FYI.

You should thank Rifai for his considerate concern re possible implications for US in Lebanon of withdrawal UK forces from Jordan. We would not wish this factor to be reason for UK troops to remain in Jordan any longer than HKJ deems it to be in best interests Jordan for them to be there. As matter fact there has been substantial improvement security situation Lebanon and as result one US Marine battalion has already been withdrawn and another is now leaving both by agreement with Lebanese authorities. If security situation continues improve we hope further withdrawals can be made in reasonably near future.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5441/9–1558. Confidential. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Berry and in IO by Walmsley. Repeated to London, Beirut, and USUN.

2 In telegram 850 from Amman, September 13, Wright reported on a conversation with Rifai concerning the upcoming session of the U.N. General Assembly. Rifai felt that debate at the United Nations would focus on the withdrawal of United States and British forces from the Middle East, and he discussed his concern to coordinate the withdrawal of the politically embarrassing British forces from Jordan with the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Lebanon. (Ibid., 320/9–1358)

319. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 319. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, September 15, 1958—11 a.m.

1560. General Chehab (Embtel 1478)2 has consistently indicated that whatever new government comes into office after September 24 will at least in principle insist on withdrawal of US forces. Chehab himself stated this as a principal aim in his declaration to Lebanese people August 4 (Embtel 944).3 Rashid Karame in today’s papers includes in his policy statement of goals in event he is named Prime Minister evacuation of foreign forces from Lebanese soil. We have also noted similar concern on part of Jordanian Government as indicated last paragraph Amman’s 850.4

Since within a week or 10 days it seems inevitable we shall be asked to leave Department will no doubt wish to consider possibility of some statement on our part which might lessen threat of vicious propaganda attacks upon us by Cairo–Baghdad–Damascus radios and Communist propaganda machine elsewhere. Such attacks might portray US withdrawal from Lebanon as “retreat of imperialists” or evacuation forced by triumphant anti-US public opinion.

As seen from here a statement on our part that the security situation in Lebanon has so improved as to make possible our voluntary withdrawal of US forces would go far to obviate these contingencies. It might be possible in Secretary’s forthcoming speech at opening session of UN General Assembly to work in some declaration of intent promptly to remove our troops from Lebanon in close consultation with Lebanese Government and in spirit of UNGA resolution of August 21.

Admiral Holloway is submitting similar views to JCS.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1558. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Amman, and USUN.

2 Document 313.

3 Telegram 944 from Beirut, August 5, reported on Chehab’s first address to the nation following his election as President. (Department of State, Central Files 783A.11/8–558)

4 See footnote 2, supra.

320. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m. 320. Memorandum of Conversation, New York, September 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m.1

New York, September 16, 1958, 10:30 a.m.

USDel/MC/8

PARTICIPANTS

US The Secretary

Ambassador Lodge

Mr. Rountree

Mr. Wilcox

United Nations Secretary General Hammarskjold

SUBJECT

The General Assembly and the Middle East

The Secretary General commented that he expected this session of the GA to be an important one. Although there were not many important items on the agenda, they would offer a springboard for the Assembly to consider a good many important problems.

[Here follows discussion of the Sino-Soviet bloc]

Mr. Hammarskjold reported in some detail on his trip to the Middle East. His report compares with that contained in USUN 362 which reported on Mr. Barco’s conversation of September 14. The following points may be added: (1) Prime Minister Rifai of Jordan told the SYG in utter confidence that if it were not for the King’s emotional reactions, he thought it would be possible to establish relationships and work with the regime in Iraq. Because of the King’s reactions, however, he did not believe the time was propitious for such a move.

(2) With respect to Lebanon, the Secretary General commented that he had developed a high regard for Chehab whom he believed to be a deeply patriotic man. He got the impression that Chehab, as a military man, was fed up with politicians, and he doubted Chehab’s capacity to deal with complex situations. On the whole, however, his impression of Chehab was very good.

(3) Hammarskjold did not cover the question of withdrawal of US or UK forces in his report. He said he wanted to see what developments take place after Chehab’s inauguration.

(4) With respect to the resumption of Jordanian-UAR relations, he said that both countries seemed favorably disposed in principle. Nasser pointed out that Jordan broke relations and it was up to Jordan to resume them. Hammarskjold said that he had given some thought to the possibility of Husseini’s (Arab League) acting as a middle man in this respect, but he had the impression Husseini did not carry much weight. In any event, the Arabs, thorough their own organization, ought to try to bring about a resumption of relations.

(5) Nasser assured Hammarskjold that air and land traffic with Jordan would be resumed soon. It was merely a question of timing. He probably would wait until Chehab took over in Lebanon in order to tie in the resumption of traffic with the general improvement in Arab relationships.

(6) In general, Hammarskjold’s attitude was one of guarded optimism. His description of the general situation was not unduly pessimistic. He seemed to feel that with good luck and careful handling an explosion in the Middle East might be avoided.

In conclusion Hammarskjold said he thought it would be sufficient if the GA would merely note the SYG’s report on the Middle East and not take any further action.

1 source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 63 D 123, CF 1107. Secret. Drafted by Wilcox. The source text indicates the conversation took place in the U.N. Building. Dulles headed the U.S. Delegation at the Thirteenth Session of the U.N. General Assembly, September 14–20.

321. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 321. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, September 17, 1958—11 a.m.

1585. Admiral Holloway has received a telegram from JCS2 indicating that on September 12 there was a meeting between State and DOD at which it was agreed that because of desirability of there being some US forces in Lebanon pending withdrawal of UK troops from Jordan it might be useful to leave a token US force here for some time after withdrawal of main body American troops.

Admiral Holloway with my concurrence, has informed JCS he would like to leave a very small training mission of some 11 officers and 60 enlisted men and hoped to use this as cover for a larger token force consisting of 2 infantry companies with specialist platoons of artillery, tanks, transport, signals and engineers.

In expressing my concurrence with over-all project, I made it clear to Holloway I have considerable misgiving as to ease with which we might be able to negotiate either a small training mission or a token force to remain after main body has been withdrawn. On training mission I am perhaps more aware than our own military of extreme sensitivity of Lebanese senior officers to any imputation they may not be up to modern standards, as well as of French imbued feeling that predominantly French methods used by Lebanese Army cannot be improved upon. On problem of leaving a token force we have public declarations of Chehab and of such opposition leaders as Karame, Saeb Salaam and others indicating unanimous demand for withdrawal of all US forces. With Chehab’s request to Hammarskjold for a large augmentation UNOGIL being answered affirmatively, it will be all the more difficult to secure Chehab’s and his new Government’s acquiescence to retention of a US “presence”.

In view of these considerations, would appreciate Departmental guidance on these two issues of a training mission and a token force since from Deptel 12593 I might infer Department does not favor either possibility.4

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1758. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Received at 9:11 a.m.

2 Not found.

3 In telegram 1259 to Beirut, September 16, the Department instructed McClintock to respond to any further suggestion by Chamoun concerning the possibility of secret arrangements to station U.S. forces in Lebanon by indicating that Washington had not responded to the suggestion. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/8–2858; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 On September 18, the Department responded, in telegram 1288 to Beirut, with a summary of the meeting with the JCS in which Departmental officials expressed the expectation that, if security conditions continued to improve in Lebanon, U.S. forces could be withdrawn by the end of October. If such a withdrawal had an adverse political impact on the British position in Jordan, however, it was suggested that it might be desirable to maintain a token U.S. military presence in Lebanon pending the British withdrawal from Jordan. Beyond the desire to be helpful to the British, there was neither need nor desire to maintain a token force in Lebanon, and the Department was considering the possibility of withdrawing all U.S. forces from Lebanon by October 15. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1758; included in the microfiche supplement)

322. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 322. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, September 17, 1958—8:18 p.m.

1273. Embtels 1560,2 1570.3 We note one item in Karame’s program is withdrawal of all US forces by October 15, and have considered your recommendation we make statement regarding voluntary withdrawal US forces in light improvement in security situation. We believe psychologically and politically it would be desirable to take initiative with Lebanese authorities re final withdrawal before we are requested by GOL to remove our forces.4 We would like your urgent comment on following possible arrangement which we might suggest to Lebanese.

Providing it were practicable, all US forces would be withdrawn from Lebanon by October 15 (JCS is sending message to CINCSPECOMME5 referring to proposed timetable contained in his message 072216ZA6 and inquiring what would be CINCSPECOMME’s concept of operations necessary to effect total withdrawal by October 15). As soon as possible after inauguration Chehab and installation new Prime Minister a statement would be issued by these two officials stating that in full consultation with US authorities it had been agreed that all US forces would be out of Lebanon by October 15, and revealing withdrawal timetable. Another possible course might be to have such announcement put out before inauguration Chehab, either by Chamoun and Chehab, or by US as result consultation with Chamoun and Chehab, and to have final withdrawal actually begin before Chehab takes office. In any case, we might wish to issue simultaneous separate announcement in order make clear complete harmony of views between US and Lebanese authorities.

You should take no action re above vis-à-vis Lebanese authorities pending further word from Department but we would like you now to stress Chehab that when decision taken to undertake final withdrawal our forces it is extremely important that withdrawal take place in logical, dignified and orderly fashion. You should tell Chehab that we hope timing to achieve this can be worked out through full consultation between US and Lebanese authorities.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1758. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Berry in NEA, Walmsley in IO, Godley in C, Murphy, and Herter. The JCS was informed. Repeated to USUN.

2 Document 319.

3 In telegram 1570 from Beirut, September 15, the Embassy outlined the program Rachid Karame said he would implement if he became Prime Minister in the new government. (Department of State, Central Files, 683A.86B/9–1558)

4 In a telephone conversation with Herter on September 17, Dulles, who was in New York, stated that he had talked to Hammarskjöld about Lebanon, and the conversation reinforced his conviction that it was important for the United States to have a program for withdrawing from Lebanon so as not to appear to have been pushed out by the United Nations or Chehab. Dulles added that he had discussed the situation with Lloyd. (Memorandum of telephone conversation; ibid., 110.11/9–1758; included in the microfiche supplement) Herter telephoned General Twining after his conversation with Dulles and asked for a practical timetable for withdrawal. (Eisenhower Library, Herter Papers, Telephone Conversations)

5 JCS telegram 948177 to CINCSPECOMME, September 17. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files; included in the microfiche supplement)

6 Not found.

323. Editorial Note 323. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on September 18 on significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Acting Director of Central Intelligence General Charles P. Cabell offered the following assessment of developments in Lebanon and Jordan: “Turning to the Middle East, General Cabell stated that while the security situation in Lebanon had shown superficial signs of improvement, there was nevertheless serious unrest among the pro-Chamoun elements of the population. The most critical period, he predicted, would come after the inauguration of General Chehab next Wednesday.

“In Jordan, General Cabell stated, United Nations Secretary General Hammarskjöld’s attempt to implement the recent United Nations Resolution had failed.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 379th meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 324. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, September 18, 1958—6:26 p.m.

846. Embtels 777 and 700.2 You should inform King and Prime Minister that USG feels need of more precise information than now available in order consider intelligently HKJ requests for two additional brigades, assistance in re-equipment existing forces, etc. We therefore propose take advantage suggestions by King and Rifai (Section Two, Embtel 700) that we send small team to make on-the-spot survey designed to help us in forming response to Jordanian military requests. In addition surveying equipment, team would be prepared undertake study of Jordan army administrative and organizational problems with view to offering suggestions looking toward improved efficiency. Survey team would include economist who would consider budgetary aspects.3

FYI. Dept reluctant commit US to financing two brigades. Not only would initial expense be substantial but we are disturbed at implications of military expansion in terms of permanently expanded budgetary requirements. We feel that acceptance HKJ suggestion for on-the-spot survey would on one hand avoid entirely negative response at this time and at same time also offer opportunity to make a more deliberate decision with respect to Jordan’s various requests for additional military assistance. Team will be instructed to make clear that survey implies no commitment of any kind.

British concur in this approach. End FYI.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–658. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Lakeland and cleared by McClelland and Berry in NEA and with U/MSC, ICA, and Defense. Repeated to London.

2 Documents 312 and 308, respectively.

3 In telegram 925 from Amman, September 19, Wright responded that he had conveyed information concerning the survey team as instructed to Hussein and Rifai, both of whom were “delighted” and urged that the survey team arrive as soon as possible. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–658)

325. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 325. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, September 19, 1958—11 a.m.

1627. Repeated London Exclusive for Admiral Holloway. Re Deptel 12732 I believe we should retain initiative in announcing withdrawal of all US forces from Lebanon by October 15 in order to forestall adverse propaganda possibilities outlined Embtel 1560.3 However, I believe we could usefully arrange with Chehab and Prime Minister of new government for a joint US–Lebanon release outlining details of this phased withdrawal.

I do not consider it either feasible or desirable to work out some announcement with Chamoun: (A) Because Chamoun himself is deeply opposed to early withdrawal of US forces; and (B) an announcement involving ex-president would not sit well with new president.

Re final paragraph reference telegram, it is unnecessary to stress to Chehab that withdrawal take place in logical, dignified and orderly fashion since this has been general’s concept from the beginning. Throughout many conversations Admiral Holloway and I have had with Chehab he has shown a soldier’s appreciation of need for phased movement and full comprehension withdrawal must take place in an orderly fashion with maximum of cooperation from Lebanese Government and armed forces.

Recommendation: That I be authorized to negotiate with Chehab tentative text of a joint communiqué indicating, however, that initial release will come from US side either from Washington or USDel UNGA.

General Adams, Admirals Loud and Yeager concur.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1958. Top Secret; Priority. Repeated to London.

2 Document 322.

3 Document 319.

326. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Herter) and the Secretary of Defense (McElroy), Washington, September 19, 1958 326. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Under Secretary of State (Herter) and the Secretary of Defense (McElroy), Washington, September 19, 19581

Washington, September 19, 1958

SUBJECT

Withdrawal of US Forces from Lebanon

Secretary McElroy called to express his concern about the exchange of cables2 he had just seen between State and Embassy Beirut. He was afraid that there might be a rapid pull-out from Lebanon without Defense having any assurance that internal stability is being protected by the UN. He said Defense believed that to pull our troops out and then have things blow up again would be worse than delaying the withdrawal. We would not appear to be very smart if we get out by October 15 and the UN has not completed the necessary moves for internal security and another civil war develops.

Mr. Herter said our latest information was that the UN was planning to put in very rapidly as many as a thousand people. They intend to leave their observers there but build up the size of the group considerably. We would prefer to pull out under our own steam rather than to be kicked out, if the situation seems to have developed satisfactorily.

Mr. McElroy said he understood our Ambassador thinks we should be able to pull out by October 15th. Mr. Herter replied that the whole question must be reviewed by Secretary Dulles and that our inquiry of Defense was intended merely to obtain their assessment of what they felt would be practicable in terms of timing. Mr. McElroy said we could always announce ahead of time that we will pull out as fast as feasible but then drag out the actual withdrawal. He said he could see the desirability of announcing our withdrawal as soon as possible since, as Mr. Herter pointed out, we want to avoid appearing to have been forced out. But he concluded that Defense could not see any reason for speeding up the actual pull-out.

Max V. Krebs

1 source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1958. Confidential. Drafted by Special Assistant to the Under Secretary Krebs.

2 Document 322 and supra.

327. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 327. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, September 20, 1958—2:16 p.m.

1307. Embtel 1627.2 Principally because of need to coordinate US withdrawal from Lebanon with UK withdrawal from Jordan we have come to conclusion date of October 15, which was selected as tentative one for contingency planning purposes, is too early for completion US withdrawal from Lebanon. End of October is more realistic target.

We have informed Defense of above view, and it has been agreed no operations will now be undertaken based on October 15 as target date for completion. However, routine loading of heavy equipment from Lebanon will continue, and shipping will be unobtrusively gathered together for use in withdrawal operation with possible termination toward end of October, should this time be decided upon.

Meanwhile we are discussing with UK here coordination re US and UK withdrawals, and hope soon to have an agreed proposed schedule.

We are also working on a draft US-Lebanese communiqué on US withdrawal from Lebanon which we will send to you for comment.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–1958. Top Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and Godley. Repeated to London and CINCNELM REAR.

2 Document 325.

328. Editorial Note 328. Editorial Note

On the morning of September 23, General Fuad Chehab took the oath of office as President of Lebanon in Parliament and delivered an inaugural address appealing for national unity, a healing of wounds, the redressing of the national economy, and the reestablishment of cordial relations with Arab states in particular and friendly nations in general. (Telegram 1668 from Beirut, September 23; Department of State, Central Files, 783A.11/9–2358) On September 24, President Chehab announced a cabinet that included Prime Minister Rachid Karame, who also held the portfolios of Interior and National Defense, Finance Minister Rafik Naja, Minister of Foreign Affairs Philip Takla, Minister of National Economy and Information Charles Helou, Minister of Justice and Social Affairs Joseph Sauda, Minister of Education and Health Mohammed Safieddine, Minister of Agriculture Fuad Najjar, and Minister of Public Works Farid Trad. (Telegram 1690 from Beirut, September 25; ibid., 783A.13/9–2558)

329. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 329. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 24, 1958—1 p.m.

970. In view distinct possibility King Hussein under pressure political/military/tribal groups hostile Prime Minister Rifai may attempt replace him as sop to opposition in hope buy time avoid coming grips basic problem Nasser brand Arab Nationalism, Embassy opinion some thought should be given possible courses action to be taken. I believe bellwether any such move will be indirect approach from King [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], or by court minister Hazza Majali now engaged power struggle with Rifai using his palace position as lever or from opposition leaders themselves. In any case all will be anxious ascertain probable USG attitude new government particularly with respect continuation/expansion our military/economic aid programs.

Country Team has repeatedly indicated any success of Rifai administration must move “left”. At moment only visible candidate would be collection “retreat politicians” having varying degrees leftist tendencies, none of whom have capacity satisfy inherent public desire broader base representative government or delay natural swing toward Nasser as only true symbol Arab Nationalism.

Real danger lies not in “devil we know but rather devil we don’t know”. Major task confronting mission Amman is to discover who is potential leader able bring fresh approach present routine cabinet reshuffles, equally important is to know his source of power and ideas for Jordan foreign policy. Under present circumstances wherein martial law has been in force a year and half new leader must either come from army or have substantial military support including tribal allegiances. Jordan cannot for long continue “imperialist island in Nasser sea,” must eventually work out accommodation its Arab neighbors all of which at moment are hostile in some degree. This process will require adjustment Jordan foreign policy which for last 18 months has not only been pro-West but more specifically pro-US especially under Rifai.

It would seem advisable USG should have definite policy re our relation any future HKJ Governments which may well run from caretaker type most likely succeed Rifai to extreme pro-Nasser Nationalist.

If USG decision is “business as usual policy” regardless political coloration new Jordanian Government and if such decision should ever become known Nasser and/or domestic opposition this could in itself set off chain reaction which with “UN presence office” Amman might well result in establishment government extreme nationalist type either through coup d’etat or less violent means without any apparent foreign intervention.

In view inevitability some kind change present government Embassy would appreciate indication Department’s thinking re this problem.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/9–2458. Top Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution.

330. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State 330. Telegram From the Embassy in the United Kingdom to the Department of State1

London, September 24, 1958—7 p.m.

1708. Amman’s 961.2 Embassy asked Foreign Office (Hadow) September 24 regarding United Kingdom plans for withdrawal of British troops from Jordan. Hadow explained situation as follows:

United Kingdom has sent text of SYG Hammarskjold’s report3 on his Middle East trip which satisfactory particularly in that it provides methods for bringing pressure on UAR including possibility of further action in UN should UAR fail to abide by August 21 GA resolution.4 Accordingly United Kingdom has prepared statement in consultation with Abdul Monem Rifai in New York and cleared with Hammarskjold to effect that United Kingdom and Jordan are agreed that British troops in Jordan should start withdrawal in October and contemplate that withdrawal will be completed in October provided situation permits. Selwyn Lloyd hopes to issue statement before leaving New York September 26. Prime Minister Macmillan has insisted that statement be worded so as not to bind United Kingdom to fixed dates.

HMG would like to issue second statement before October 10 giving date for start of withdrawal of troops. October 10 date is related to Conservative Party conference in advance of which HMG wishes to have announced date for withdrawal.

Regarding actual withdrawal Chiefs of Staff insist that because of small number of men involved, operation once started must be carried to completion. Present intention is to move Cameronians and heavy equipment out through Aqaba with Cameronians going to Aden. Para-troop units with light equipment would be moved out by air. Entire operations to take 14 to 17 days once necessary shipping assembled.

Lloyd has spoken to Hammarskjold regarding overflights of Syria for withdrawal purposes. Hammarskjold said matter would have to be negotiated out with UAR, but he foresaw no difficulties.

British Ambassador Amman has warned that early withdrawal of British troops involves grave risk of coup in Jordan. Ambassador particularly apprehensive of action by non-Beduin section of Arab army led by Deputy COS Sadiq Ash-Shara. For this reason Ambassador still pressing his recommendation that United States and United Kingdom, before withdrawal of British troops, agree to King Hussein’s request for additional Beduin units in order to give clear preponderance within army to Beduin elements. Ambassador has advised that plans for possible evacuation of British community be placed in readiness. Foreign Office, without endorsing Ambassador views, asked that they be brought to Department’s attention.

Hadow added Foreign Office believes there are four ways in which UAR can demonstrate insofar as Jordan concerned that it will respect call for good neighborliness contained in August 21 resolution: Permit free movement of goods between Jordan and Beirut, permit free movement of Jordan subjects between Jordan and Beirut, cease hostile propaganda broadcasts and cease efforts at subversion. UN should be able to establish easily facts with respect of first two points and UAR should remove restrictions before withdrawal of British troops. Last two points will always be open to controversy and differences of interpretation.

Whitney

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5441/9–2458. Secret. Repeated to Amman, Cairo, Damascus, and Tel Aviv.

2 In telegram 961 from Amman, September 23, Wright reported on a conversation with British Ambassador Johnston concerning the timing of the withdrawal of British forces from Jordan. (Ibid., 785.00/9–2358; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Apparently a preliminary draft of the report submitted by Hammarskjöld to the General Assembly on September 29. For a summary of the report, see Document 337.

4 See Document 287.

331. Editorial Note 331. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on September 25 on significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Acting Director of Central Intelligence General Charles P. Cabell offered the following assessment of developments in Lebanon and Jordan: “Turning to the Middle East, General Cabell stated that the appointment of the leading member of the opposition to President Chamoun as the new Prime Minister of Lebanon represented a major concession by President Chehab to Nasser and to Lebanese opposition elements. There were also several prominent opposition leaders in the new cabinet and the Christian leadership had been almost eclipsed by the Moslem. It was significant that the make-up of the new cabinet had been accurately predicted in Damascus before its composition was actually announced in Lebanon.

“Meanwhile the security situation in Lebanon has gravely deteriorated. If violence continues, as is likely, the ability of the security forces to maintain order will be seriously weakened. Indeed, the security forces themselves may come to be divided along religious lines.

“In Jordan King Hussein is considering the replacement of his unpopular Prime Minister, Rifai, as well as other unpopular ministers in the present cabinet. These moves may portend a more neutralist Jordan in the future. The effectiveness of the so-called UN presence was very doubtful.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 380th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

332. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, September 25, 1958, 6 p.m. 332. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, September 25, 1958, 6 p.m.1

New York, September 25, 1958, 6 p.m.

SUBJECT

Middle East

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Mr. J. N. Greene, Jr.

Mr. William M. Rountree

United Kingdom Mr. Selwyn Lloyd

Sir Pierson Dixon

Sir Harold Caccia

Mr. Harold Beeley

Mr. Anthony Moore

Mr. Denis Laskey

Following is a summary of the Middle East portion of the Secretary’s talk with Mr. Lloyd:

Jordan. Mr. Lloyd urged that the United States not exclude the possibility of providing assistance to Jordan in order to enable the King to create some additional military force based upon the use of the more reliable Bedouin tribes. He feared that unless the military situation were improved, Jordan would collapse shortly after the British withdrawal. While he realized that we could not provide everything the King wanted, he earnestly hoped that we could do something that would strengthen the King’s hand in the military field.

At the Secretary’s request, Mr. Rountree outlined our views regarding the Jordanian request for two additional brigades. He said the expense of this military force was considerably greater than we could meet through additional military and budgetary aid. We had some doubts as to the feasibility, quite apart from the question of funds. We had not, however, told the King that we would not provide for any additional forces. We were sending a mission which would look into the military situation and report back to Washington, after which decisions would be made. Mr. Lloyd urged that the mission not communicate to the Jordanian Government in Amman that additional military forces would not be approved. Mr. Rountree said it was our intention that the mission would be instructed not to communicate any such decisions directly to Jordan.

[Here follows discussion of Israel and Cyprus.]

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5/9–2558. Secret. Drafted by Rountree. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in Lloyd’s suite at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel.

333. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 333. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut September 25, 1958—7 p.m.

1703. Admiral Holloway and I called this afternoon on President Chehab and made an extensive tour d’horizon with following results.

(1) Chehab said recent disturbances in Beirut ostensibly inspired by Phalange following abduction of Haddad2 had served to confirm his suspicions that there was an important political element in Lebanon which sought deliberately to continue state of conflict and in particular to destroy Lebanese army. Although Chehab did not say so straight out, it was clear he suspected Chamoun hoped by maintaining continuing turmoil to find an opportunity once more to step back into power.

Thus, said Chehab, it had become clear in recent days that Phalange itself had been infiltrated with more extremist elements who took their orders from Moghabghab Chamoun’s henchman and hatchetman. President said Gemayel had been much more moderate and had sought in fact to restrain his more fanatic followers. (We have independent confirmation of this fact from other sources.)

(2) Despite these maneuverings President felt confident of his ability promptly to restore order in Beirut. He realized that now Christian fanatics had violated law and disturbed the peace he was in a position impartially to strike at any malefactors whether Moslem or Christian and this he intended to do.

Chehab said that although new government which had its first meeting with him today had proposed final clean-up measures be deferred in deference to Prophet’s birthday tomorrow he, Chehab, had given orders for security forces to proceed forthwith in removing barricades throughout Beirut including the Basta. Chehab predicted that by Saturday or at latest Sunday all of Beirut would be open and order restored. He has been much helped in this by fact Beirut Moslem leadership is cooperating with Karame; by restraining influence now being imposed on Phalange by Gemayel; by salutary deployment of CINCSPECOMME’s forces; and by no nonsense application of military rule any unauthorized person found with arms will be shot. Chehab said once Beirut was open and order restored he would institute a period of grace for rendition of weapons without punishment to be followed later by more rigorous measures for collecting clandestine arms. With dispersion of present irregular forces however President was certain military would be in complete domination of situation everywhere.

(3) Asked re new Karame Cabinet (Embtel 1700)3 President said he had been faced with choice of trying to assemble a coalition of antagonistic leaders who would carry on civil war in Cabinet or trying to find a group of men representing all confessional sects who could work together in harmony. He had even tried to appoint ministers who would be pleasing to Chamoun; but was now convinced Chamoun did not want harmony as he thought his own interests could be best furthered by continuance of discord. It was for a similar reason that Chehab had decided against creating a government made of parliamentarians or those deputies left out would refuse their support until other cabinets were formed permitting their participation. Every politician wanted his piece of cheese; and Chehab’s low opinion of “the fromagistes” had in no way altered.

(4) Chehab said Phalange and other card-carrying Christians were making dire statements of controlling sufficient votes to forestall a vote of confidence for Karame government when Parliament meets (he thought) next week. Although a vote of confidence is not constitutionally mandatory it is customary in Lebanese parliamentary practice. New Karame cabinet was assured of support of former opposition deputies and of middle bloc such as Raymond Edde’s national front. How Chamoun deputies would vote yet remained in doubt. However Chehab was determined to go straight ahead. If Parliament did not like government he had just appointed it could say so and he would dissolve this Parliament and call for new elections. General said if he gave in on this point it would merely mean commencement of an unending parliamentary squabble as factions vied for temporary advantage. He implied that this would be part of Chamoun’s over-all plan. Chehab said he preferred to meet these issues straight on without fear or favor and to let the deputies draw their own conclusions. He seemed confident of popular support for such a line of conduct.

(5) On withdrawal of US forces Chehab was categoric in saying he thought we should adhere to our phased plan of operations. He saw no objection to retraction of Third Marine BLT on or before September 30; and he thought all our forces could safely be removed by end of October. General volunteered suggestion an agreed communiqué of some sort would be useful. We said without any reference to Deptel 13284 our thoughts trended on similar lines and we would pass his suggestion to Washington. Somewhat to our surprise Chehab said he thought it would have a better effect in Moslem sector of population if communiqué could come from the American side but with suitable reference to joint agreement and planning between Lebanon and US Governments. Admiral Holloway will comment directly to JCS on further details of withdrawal. Meanwhile request Department pass this telegram to DOD and JCS.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–2558. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

2 On September 19, Fuad Haddad, an editorial writer with the Phalange newspaper Al Amal was kidnapped and subsequently murdered. (Telegram 1648 from Beirut, September 21; ibid., 783A.00/9–2158) The kidnapping increased tensions between contending factions in Beirut, but the Embassy reported on September 23 that tensions abated following the arrest of men believed guilty of the kidnapping and murder. (Telegram 1670 from Beirut; ibid., 783A.00/9–2358)

3 In telegram 1700 from Beirut, September 25, the Embassy provided an assessment of the Karame Cabinet, which was described as an “opposition-third force-neutral coalition whose ministers are either all anti-Chamoun or have not recently been pro-Chamoun.” (Ibid., 783A.13/9–2558)

4 Telegram 1328 to Beirut, September 22, transmitted the text of a draft U.S.-Lebanese communiqué concerning the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Lebanon for Embassy comment. (Ibid., 783A.00/9–2258)

334. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, September 26, 1958, 10 a.m. 334. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, September 26, 1958, 10 a.m.1

New York, September 26, 1958, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Withdrawal of British Forces from Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary

Mr. J. N. Greene, Jr.

United Kingdom Mr. Selwyn Lloyd

Sir Pierson Dixon

Mr. William M. Rountree

Sir Harold Caccia

Mr. Anthony Moore

Mr. Denis Laskey

Following is a summary of the portion of the Secretary’s meeting with Foreign Minister Lloyd dealing with Jordan:

Mr. Lloyd referred to a message which he had just received from the British Ambassador at Amman stating that King Hussein would like to announce in a speech from the throne October 1 his understanding with the British regarding the withdrawal of forces. Mr. Lloyd said that this would be a good occasion from the Jordanian viewpoint to announce withdrawal, but he thought the date would be too soon after publication of Secretary General Hammarskjold’s report. He had hoped that the Secretary General’s report indicating British intention regarding withdrawal could be published and that there could be provided several days thereafter to observe measures taken in implementation of the United Nations resolution. He was concerned that there should not be set into motion irrevocable steps for British withdrawal without some assurance that the situation in Jordan would be changed for the better.

Mr. Rountree mentioned that we had something of the same problem with respect to Lebanon. We felt it necessary to announce our intention to withdraw by the end of October. However, we were including in our statement that the withdrawal would be completed by October 31, barring unforeseen developments. Perhaps the British problem could be met if King Hussein should make it clear that his arrangements with the British envisaged withdrawal of British forces by the end of October, barring unforeseen developments.

Mr. Lloyd seemed to favor such an approach. It should be made clear that the withdrawal plans were predicated on the assumption that the Secretary General’s plans would be carried out.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5441/9–2658. Secret. Drafted by Rountree. The source text indicates that the conversation took place at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel.

335. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 335. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, September 26, 1958—5:40 p.m.

902. Embtel 970.2 FYI. Department shares Embassy view that Jordan cannot for long maintain present stance toward Arab neighbors and that some form of accommodation will take place. While we not seeking maintain HKJ as western fortress in Middle East, any abrupt or forceful change in Jordan’s status would be likely precipitate hostilities in area. We are therefore concerned that political future HKJ be determined by agreement between parties concerned and that any changes which occur should be brought about in orderly and peaceful manner.

Our attitude toward successor government would depend on its composition, policy toward US and West and manner its coming to power. End FYI.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/9–2458. Top Secret; Limited Distribution. Drafted by Parker and Rockwell and cleared by Berry.

2 Document 329.

336. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 336. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, September 27, 1958—4 p.m.

1720. I called this morning on Foreign Minister Takla and left with him texts of proposed statements set out Deptels 1364 and 1365,2 indicating Chehab had already given his consent to that contained in 1364.3 Takla read English text attentively and said he was in complete agreement that it should be released to Secretary General and that he very much appreciated our courtesy in giving Lebanese Government a chance to comment. Re proposed communiqué suggested Deptel 1365, he said he wished to bring Prime Minister up to date on entire question of troop withdrawal and that he would wish to discuss this matter with me early next week. I indicated Chehab has expressed his preference for a unilateral communiqué coming from US.

Foreign Minister expressed great personal gratification that our relationship had been so cordial and so close that he could venture to count on my help in difficult days ahead. I said I was equally happy to work with Philippe Bey as an old friend and that, as he knew, we had very consistently indicated our desire to help Lebanon retain its integrity and independence.

Foreign Minister asked specifically if I could use my influence, particularly in the Christian community, in bringing people to a more moderate attitude of mind. He said regrettably Chamoun was maneuvering to bring about a state of disorder where he might once more dream of returning to presidential power. Other Christian political factions, particularly the Phalange and PPS, merely looked upon forthcoming parliamentary maneuvering as a means of getting once more “at the Cheese.” Where they were mistaken, said Takla, was in their belief there was still some cheese to nibble at. New government, he said, could at least point to personal probity of its Ministers. He cited by way of example a two-hour conversation he had with Phalange leaders yesterday afternoon which, after much palaver on principles and high-sounding aims, boiled down to fact they wanted one portfolio for their own party.

In a later call with Admiral Holloway on Prime Minister Karame in his capacity as President of Council and also Minister of Defense, Admiral Holloway and I told press we had come to pay our respects as US diplomatic and military representatives in Lebanon and that we wished to assure new Prime Minister of US desire to do everything possible to help Lebanon restore unity and peace as necessary conditions to primary objective of maintaining independence and integrity of the Republic.

Karame said he would like to repeat what he had told Murphy; namely, that he and his followers had never deviated from a firm friendship for the US. He hoped he could look for our assistance in helping him to achieve his policy of pacification, unification and preservation of the independence of Lebanon. Prime Minister was pleased when we indicated degree to which we and President Chehab were already in cordial agreement on proposed phased withdrawal of US Forces.

At request of Prime Minister and Foreign Minister I plan informally to have conversations with various political and religious leaders, indicating our hope that Lebanon will achieve a breathing spell and will be able to get rapidly back on the path toward unity and independence.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–2758. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

2 Telegram 1364 to Beirut, September 25, instructed McClintock to begin conversations with Chehab to obtain agreement to a joint U.S.-Lebanese communiqué regarding the complete withdrawal of U.S. forces from Lebanon. (Ibid., 783A.00/9–2458) Telegram 1365 to Beirut, September 25, transmitted the text of a statement of the U.S. position with regard to the total withdrawal of U.S. forces from Lebanon which the Department proposed to provide to Hammarskjöld as the basis for that section of his September 29 report to the General Assembly which would deal with the question of the withdrawal of U.S. forces. McClintock was instructed to seek Chehab’s concurrence in providing the statement to Hammarskjöld. (Ibid., 783A.00/9–2558) Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement. For text of the statement submitted to the Secretary-General on September 27, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, p. 1049.

3 McClintock reported, in telegram 1709 from Beirut, September 26, that he had discussed telegrams 1364 and 1365 to Beirut with Chehab. The President had given his assent to the proposed communiqué, but reiterated his preference that it be a unilateral U.S. communiqué indicating close and cordial consultation with the Lebanese Government. He suggested that McClintock work out the final wording with Foreign Minister Takla. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–2658; included in the microfiche supplement)

337. Editorial Note 337. Editorial Note

On September 29, U.N. Secretary-General Hammarskjöld submitted his report to the General Assembly on the implementation of the resolution adopted by the Assembly on August 21. The report detailed Hammarskjöld’s efforts to forge agreement among Middle Eastern leaders on conditions necessary to underwrite peace and stability in the area. He reported on agreement reached with the Government of Jordan to station a personal representative of the Secretary-General in Jordan to report on implementation of the August 21 resolution, and noted that Lebanon and the United Arab Republic had offered facilities to guarantee lines of communication to the representative to be established in Amman.

In Lebanon, agreement was reached on the expansion of the U.N. Observation Group to facilitate the withdrawal of the U.S. forces in that country. The continuing role of the Observation Group would depend upon the rate of progress toward the return of stability in Lebanon. The report concluded that, in light of improved conditions in Lebanon and Jordan, the United States and the United Kingdom had indicated that negotiations were underway with the host governments looking toward the complete withdrawal of their forces from Lebanon and Jordan, if conditions continued favorable, by the end of October. (U.N. doc. A/3934/Rev. 1; printed in full in Public Papers of the Secretaries-General of the United Nations, Vol. IV: Dag Hammarskjöld, 1958–1960, pages 203–216, and in part in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, pages 1050–1054)

338. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 338. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, September 30, 1958—4 p.m.

1757. Since political situation has shown little sign of improvement in recent days I have decided to move more energetically in taking up Gemayel’s request for my good offices reported Embassy telegram 1724.2 I have asked Prime Minister Karame, Foreign Minister Takla, Gemayel and two of his Henchmen, Kamal Jumblat, Henri Pharaon, Maurice Zwein, Pierre Edde, Takieddine Solh, Ghassan Tweini, Joseph Skaff and Adel Osseiran to meet at my house at six this evening to see if some formula cannot be found which will end general strike in Beirut and, in effect, terminate this civil war.

Formula I propose to suggest has three main points: 1) Vote of confidence for Karame Cabinet.

2) Widening of Karame cabinet to grant 3 and possibly 4 portfolios to pro-Chamoun Loyalists or Christian elements who now feel without representation in Government.

3) Karame government and parliamentary deputies to agree on enlarging parliamentary representation from 66 to 88 seats.

Foregoing possible solution would satisfy practically everyone and at same time keep within strict constitutional bounds. Chehab has already told me he is willing to broaden cabinet after vote of confidence; and he has indicated his personal preference for enlarging parliament to 88 seats. Moslem opposition, including Jumblat’s Druzes, should be pleased to have a chance to increase their representation in parliament while, at same time, so-called Loyalists should have an equal opportunity to contend for these new seats. Loyalists and Christians should be appeased if they are given what they regard as a fair representation in Karame government.

I tried out this idea this morning when I visited Greek Orthodox Archbishop Saleeby who was on point this afternoon of announcing a call for Moslems and Christians to get together in conference in an effort to work out present impasse. Saleeby was so pleased with formula he said he would prefer to stay his own hand until outcome of tonight’s meeting at Embassy residence is clear. Other Christians with whom I have discussed foregoing outline likewise feel it is just and has a possibility of acceptance.

Main criticism of my formula is that it is too equitable and logical. This of itself is almost a disqualification in present-day Lebanon. However, the Archbishop said he would pray for my success.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/9–3058. Secret. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

2 In telegram 1724 from Beirut, September 28, McClintock reported on a conversation with Phalange Chief Pierre Gemayel in which Gemayel requested McClintock’s good offices in negotiating with the Chehab government to end the general strike which the Phalange had called. Gemayel stated that he was prepared to negotiate on the basis of two principles: that the kidnappers or murderers of Haddad be swiftly sought out and brought to justice, and that a political solution be developed based on “peace without victory.” McClintock agreed to try to help find a solution to the dispute. (Ibid., 783A.00/9–2858; included in the microfiche supplement)

339. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 339. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 1, 1958—11 a.m.

1773. Meeting outlined Embtel 17572 was on the whole a success, although at last minute Prime Minister Karame dropped out because of pressure put on him by unreconstructed rebels Saeb Salaam, Abdullah Yafi and Hussein Ouwini. Fact they exercised this pressure indicates importance they attached to formula for a political solution. All other leaders whose names were cited reference telegram were present at last night’s two-hour meeting with exception of Jumblat who had another engagement.

I invited each member of the group to have his say and found general agreement on proposed formula, although Gemayel did not wish to commit himself definitively at this first meeting. From a variety of sources I am convinced he did not dare commit loyalist side without permission of Chamoun, who is mastermind behind the present Christian strike. However, on departure his cousin Maurice Gemayel, who is a far sounder and more intelligent member of the Phalange, told me he was certain loyalists would agree. On opposition side, Foreign Minister Takla said he thought Karame and Moslems could be brought around by personal intervention of General Chehab. He begged me to see the President as soon as possible which I shall do this afternoon.3 I likewise intend to call on Patriarch Meouchi and plan to visit Chamoun by helicopter tomorrow.

Although these are somewhat unorthodox gyrations, if seen against background of traditional diplomacy, our intervention seems to be universally welcomed as a catalyst which may enable these warring factions to compose their differences.4

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–158. Secret. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

2 Supra.

3 McClintock reported, in telegram 1791 from Beirut, October 1, that he had discussed the meeting at the Embassy with Chehab and Chehab felt that the meeting had served a useful purpose as a catalyst for action among the Lebanese themselves. Chehab said that he was willing to grant two or three portfolios to Christian loyalists and was prepared to increase the number of seats in Parliament, but would only do so after the Karame government received a vote of confidence in Parliament. Chehab admitted that the Christian strike had effectively paralyzed business in Beirut, and was hopeful that negotiations would bring an end to it. To that end, Chehab welcomed the fact that McClintock was scheduled to see Chamoun on the following day. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–158; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 In telegram 1411 to Beirut, October 1, the Department noted that U.S. newspapers had given prominent play to the meeting arranged by McClintock in an effort to find a compromise settlement in Lebanon. The Department did not question the value of the effort but cautioned McClintock against making any further statements to the press concerning U.S. mediation efforts. “Reports of this nature provide Communists and other anti-American elements material for charging US meddling in GOL domestic politics.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–158)

340. Editorial Note 340. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on October 2 on significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Allen Dulles offered the following assessment of developments in Lebanon and Jordan which prompted discussion among Council members: “With respect to the situation in Lebanon, Mr. Dulles stated that Chehab, the new President of Lebanon, was proposing to call a special session of the Lebanese Parliament in order to seek a vote of confidence for the new cabinet headed by Prime Minister Karami. Indeed, Chehab was threatening to dissolve the Lebanese Parliament if the vote of confidence was not forthcoming. While the Lebanese Parliament was strong in its support of former President Chamoun, Mr. Dulles predicted that the vote of confidence in the Karami government would be forthcoming. Incidentally, he added, that all the seven cabinet ministers nominated by Karami had been opposed to former President Chamoun’s pro-Western policy. Accordingly, the situation was very tense from the point of view of the Christian element in Lebanon.

“Secretary Dulles said that it was not his own view or that of the State Department that the new Karami regime was in any sense anti-Western. Former President Chamoun had adopted an extreme pro-Western policy, so extreme, in fact, that he, Secretary Dulles, had suggested at one time modifications in this policy. Secretary Dulles therefore believed that the creation of the new Karami regime constituted a reaction to the extreme pro-Western policy of former President Chamoun. While the new government was not really anti-American, Karami and his colleagues would want to blunt the sharp differences which had hitherto existed between the government of Lebanon and Nasser as well as other Arab Nationalist leaders.

“Mr. Allen Dulles replied that he could not agree wholly with the view expressed by Secretary Dulles. He thought that the new Lebanese government would pursue a foreign policy similar to that being pursued by the new government in Iraq. Secretary Dulles expressed his disagreement and Mr. Allen Dulles replied that he and the Secretary would have to agree to differ on this point. Mr. Allen Dulles said that, in general, the Moslem leaders in Lebanon were further away from the West than was President Chehab himself.

“In Jordan, said Mr. Allen Dulles, rumours were spreading that King Hussein was planning to bring opposition leaders into the Jordanian cabinet. Hussein’s objective here would be to protect himself when the British forces left Jordan about October 20. Meanwhile, there had been no let-up in the vicious propaganda war against Hussein waged by Cairo and Damascus.

“Secretary Dulles expressed the opinion that the continued blockade of Jordan by her Arab neighbors was at least as disturbing as the continued propaganda campaign. Hammarskjold’s whole plan for Jordan as well as the plans for the departure of British forces from the country actually depended on the lifting of this blockade. If it were not lifted, Jordan would be in a helpless condition.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 381st Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason on October 3; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

341. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 341. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, October 2, 1958—1:54 p.m.

928. You should inform King we understand he desires our views as to what actions Jordan might ask UN to take in regard to continuing subversive activity by UAR in Jordan and also wishes to know what support Jordan might expect to receive from US in UN should Jordan raise this matter there.

You should inform Hussein that as we see it indirect aggression against Jordan through subversive activities from outside created a situation which led to appeal by HKJ to US and UK for assistance, to ready response by both governments to this appeal and to discussion in Special UNGA session of indirect aggression against Jordan and Lebanon. Outcome was adoption of resolution sponsored by Arab states designed to bring an end to subversive interference by one NE state in another and request to SYG to set up arrangements whereby UN could buttress this pledge by NE states. SYG in discussions with states concerned and in agreement with them has set in motion steps designed to achieve purpose with which he was charged. Such machinery would appear to be appropriate vehicle for handling instances of continuing subversive activity against Jordan since it is precisely such development which measures SYG requested to carry out were designed to inhibit.

Accordingly it would be our view that if Jordan has sound evidence of continuing subversion directed from outside this evidence should be presented to SYG through new channel he has established (Spinelli)2 in order give SYG opportunity take appropriate action to bring end to these activities. US views as to what further UN action might be appropriate, and manner in which US could be helpful, would depend in important measure upon SYG’s findings and results his efforts.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/10–258. Secret. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Sisco and Rountree.

2 Pier P. Spinelli, U.N. Under-Secretary in charge of the European office of the United Nations in Geneva, was appointed by Hammarskjöld as Ambassador and Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Jordan.

342. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 342. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 2, 1958—4 p.m.

1805. As indicated Embtel 1791,2 I saw Chamoun this morning, taking a helicopter provided by General Adams to avoid numerous road blocks imposed now both by Phalange and Lebanese army. Chamoun is currently at the Villa of a rich industrialist in a village called Bois de Boulogne near Dhour Choueir.

It took half an hour to move half a mile from where helicopter landed to Chamoun’s villa as road was blocked by 15 large buses and perhaps 75 private automobiles filled with cheering adherents of ex-President. A crowd of almost a thousand people filled garden outside villa equipped with two brass bands and a plethora of automatic weapons. When Chamoun appeared to greet me there was a deafening chant of “we will have no other President than Chamoun”; this refrain continued without interruption for the full hour of our interview, punctuated by numerous shots in the air. According to gendarme captain who met me, similar scenes have gone on almost continuously over past ten days. He estimated average daily visit of adherents to Chamoun’s residence at around 5, 000.

Chamoun was obviously excited and pleased at the adulation. How any man could think calmly amid such din or reach objective conclusions is a mystery to me. However, Chamoun did make certain very emphatic points: (1) Chamoun still held to his word that he pledged full support Chehab as President of Lebanon. It was his pressure on Parliament which had resulted in Chehab’s election and he was still ready to do everything within reason to make Chehab’s regime a success.

(2) Christian and to some extent a certain Moslem opinion had been outraged by Chehab’s selection of new Karame government. Karame epitomized rebel from the barricades whom everyone knew had taken Syrian arms and money and who would follow a policy not only of going along with Nasser but of placing Moslems in places of preference in public administration. Other members of Cabinet such as Takla (“spineless”), Helou (“a Jesuit”) and Najjar (“a Druze chosen to please Jumblat”) could not under any stretch of imagination be regarded as representing half of Lebanon’s population. Chamoun made a gesture toward the mob outside and said “this is proof of how they feel”.

(3) Chamoun had counseled Chehab that in first six months at least of his administration he would be wise to appoint a neutral government whose composition could offend no one. He mentioned such names as Daouk, Moslem former Ambassador to Paris, as a possible Prime Minister, and such other neutral but respected figures as Alfred Naccache and Jawad Boulos.

(4) Failing his first preference for a purely neutral transitional government which would serve to appease passions and make possible an eventual revision of electoral law to widen representation in Parliament prior to eventual new elections, Chamoun would reluctantly consent to a Karame Cabinet but one made up of men who would give it a far more representative character. He said several times “I will not impose my veto on Karame, but I would far prefer my first choice of a neutral government”.

(5) If Chehab thought he could ram present Karame Cabinet down throats of Lebanese people [he] was mistaken.

Christians were thoroughly up in arms; the Christian strike was a crippling one; and Parliament would most certainly refuse a vote of confidence for Karame’s Cabinet as now constituted. This might either lead to an attempt at dictatorship by Chehab or to elections which would be tantamount to civil war. In either case Chamoun was prepared to take personal leadership of militant Christians and descend to the plain to fight it out. His forces were less well armed than Moslems but he doubted if Lebanese army would be a surer instrument in Chehab’s hands if it came to fighting Christian mountaineers.

(6) Chamoun said withdrawal of US forces at this time would be a certain means of accomplishing the end of Lebanon and of delivering it to the UAR. He felt departure of our troops at current critical juncture might serve fatally to excite passions on both sides, Moslem and Christian.

I told former President I regarded situation as exceedingly grave. Lebanon now seemed in greater danger of falling apart than even in worst period of previous crisis when the Casbah was Moslem and not Christian as at present. I asked if he wished me to attempt to negotiate with General Chehab. Chamoun said he would be grateful as he believed Chehab trusted me. He said once more to make certain of his three main points: His continued readiness to support Chehab; his preference for a truly neutral government; but his readiness reluctantly to accept Karame.3 As a final point Chamoun said if any one had any illusions he wished to return to power as President that person would be crazy. I agreed.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–258. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Cairo, and USUN.

2 See footnote 3, Document 339.

3 In telegram 1816 from Beirut, October 3, McClintock reported that he had met with Chehab and discussed the substance of his conversation with Chamoun. Chehab expressed appreciation for McClintock’s intervention and stated that he felt that developments were moving smoothly toward a tacitly-agreed solution. He expected the strike to end within a few days, and anticipated a compromise regarding the expansion of the cabinet after the parliamentary vote of confidence. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–358; included in the microfiche supplement)

343. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 343. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 3, 1958—6 p.m.

1827. Prior to receipt Deptel 14202 I had again spoken with Chehab last night, indicating now that the [Secretary-]General had published his report3 setting forth our views on withdrawal it was all the more necessary to move swiftly on issuing communiqué. Again Chehab referred to his concern as outlined Embtel 1790.4

This morning I saw Foreign Minister Takla who had cleared draft text of communiqué with certain modifications both with Chehab and Prime Minister Karami. Our next telegram5 sets out English translation of draft communiqué from French text collated with an Arabic text which Takla also handed me. Department will note there are several significant drafting changes designed no doubt with a view to Karami not placing himself by implication in a position of having approved request of previous Lebanese Government for our landings here.6

Takla said his government thought communiqué should be issued unilaterally by US, but with a simultaneous release in Lebanon by government radio and by communication to Lebanese press. I said I would ask Department’s instructions on this point and on substantive changes in draft text.

As to question of date and hour, I suggested that possibly we could release communiqué as of noon Washington time Monday October 6. Foreign Minister replied he would prefer to check that out first with Chehab and Karami and would let me know. They are still seriously concerned with psychological effect of such an announcement coming at a moment when Christian general strike is still in full swing and government is on eve of releasing its decree calling for surrender of clandestine weapons.

I shall continue to press for a rapid decision on this point, but would appreciate Department’s urgent comment on Lebanese amendments.7

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–358. Secret; Priority.

2 Telegram 1420 to Beirut, October 2, instructed McClintock to make it clear to Chehab that the longer the decision to begin the final withdrawal was delayed, the harder it would be to meet the target date of withdrawal by the end of October. (Ibid., 783A.00/10–158; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 See Document 337.

4 In telegram 1790 from Beirut, October 1, McClintock reported that Chehab and Takla were reluctant to agree to the release of the communiqué outlining the withdrawal until after the publication of an impending decree by Chehab calling for the surrender of unauthorized arms within a stated period of time. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–158)

5 Telegram 1829 from Beirut, October 3. (Ibid., 783A.00/10–358; included in the microfiche supplement)

6 Paragraph 2 of the communiqué as revised in Lebanon reads as follows: “The United States sent its forces to Lebanon in the special circumstances generally known. Furthermore, the United States took steps in the United Nations with a view to having it adopt effective measures to preserve the independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon and thus facilitate the withdrawal of the American forces.” (Telegram 1829 from Beirut)

7 The Department replied, in telegram 1447 to Beirut, October 4, that it could not accept the revisions to the draft communiqué proposed by the Lebanese Government. The revisions, the Department felt, would radically alter the nature of the communiqué and put the circumstances under which U.S. forces entered Lebanon in an unclear light. Since the communiqué was to be released unilaterally by the United States rather than jointly, the Department intended to use the language originally proposed, with some modification to meet Karame’s sensibilities. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–358) McClintock discussed the Department’s position with Chehab that evening. He reported that Chehab was still sorely disturbed over the probable effect on the Christian population, but conceded that the announcement proposed by the United States could be made on October 8, as there would then be a responsible government with, he hoped, a vote of confidence. (Telegram 1843 from Beirut, October 4; ibid., 783A.00/10–458) Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement.

344. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 344. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, October 4, 1958—5 p.m.

1048. Pass Defense. Re Deptels 9282 and 929,3 Embtel 1045.4 Conveyed King Hussein in presence Prime Minister Rifai substance reference telegrams.

Re Deptel 929 King reiterated HKJ position as given me earlier by Prime Minister Rifai reported Embtel 1045. He left no doubt HKJ counting on UN Ambassador Spinelli implement fullest letter spirit GA resolution. At same time both King/RIFAI made clear they have little faith Nasser will live up to his commitments as evidenced by continued refusal restore land/air transit communications UAR territory.

As stated Embtel 1045 Colonel Delaney, Embassy Military Attaché, accompanied me Hussein/RIFAI meeting. King very pleased US military survey mission to arrive next week, assured me it would have maximum cooperation. I suggested Colonel Delaney be furnished all available data re present/prospective needs Jordan armed forces in order conserve team’s time, gain maximum benefit their technical competence. King most enthusiastic, said he would personally chair meeting next Tuesday attended by Rifai as Defense Minister, senior military officer plus Colonel Delaney in order lay groundwork preparation required reports. He expressed intention attend as many survey briefing sessions as his schedule would allow.

Comment: Hussein decision actively assist US military survey team means maximum cooperation at lower echelons, automatically unlocks doors which otherwise might remain closed under pressure commercial/political vested interests some of which now enjoy preferential treatment purchase supplies/equipment Jordan defense establishment particularly from British sources.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/10–458. Secret; Priority.

2 Document 341.

3 Not found.

4 In telegram 1045 from Amman, October 3, Wright reported that, as instructed, he had discussed the pending arrival of the military survey team with Rifai, and had also pointed up the opportunity to make use of Ambassador Spinelli to bring to the attention of the Secretary-General any violations of the spirit or the letter of the General Assembly resolution. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/10–358)

345. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 345. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 4, 1958—9 p.m.

1844. This evening Chehab confided to me his hope political crisis in Lebanon will find a solution in next two days.

President said idea of holding fast to Karami Cabinet until after vote of confidence was now “chambardee”. In other words, that too rigid objective had been upset by event. He had had a very long conversation yesterday with Gemayel who in turn had reported back to Chamoun; and today Gemayel had returned with proposals for a new slate. On Moslem side Chehab had likewise been busy; Karami was coming in a few minutes to discuss possible shifts in his government. Although Karami might have to accept some names submitted by Chamoun, there would be others which Chamoun on his part must accept. I told President that Chamoun had sent a message to me this morning indicating he hoped to see me further to discuss political crisis. We agreed it would give Chamoun publicity if I should return to his mountain grandstand but Chehab asked that I send an emissary to counsel former President that in interest of Lebanon he must not be too intransigeant in squabble over names in next Ministry. I plan to undertake such a démarche with Chamoun tomorrow.

Chehab said situation had looked very ugly indeed last night but that there were “still a few common sense people left in Lebanon” and leaders on both sides, realizing country was speeding toward the brink, had imposed on more fanatic elements, both Christian and Moslem, and had dragged them back to their senses. Given this development and effective comportment of armed forces Chehab now believed an agreed solution would be found within next 48 hours. He said explicitly there would be a refashioning of Karami Cabinet and that vote of confidence must come after new Ministry had been announced and not before as he and Karami had at first hoped. As indicated in my preceding telegram,2 Chehab thought a government would be formed and a vote of confidence given by Wednesday October 8. I told President there were two observations I was pleased to pass on from another General Officer. This morning General Adams had told me that Lebanese Army had done an absolutely topnotch professional job in restoring order in Beirut. I said that Adams, who is one of the most competent soldiers I know, was not a man given to gratuitous compliments. This touched Chehab very deeply as I knew it would. I then said General Adams had offered a suggestion which I thought had great merit; i.e., that at this critical juncture Lebanese people would probably react affirmatively to a nationwide broadcast by Chehab himself calling on all factions to transcend their differences for the good of the republic. I pointed out newspapers in Beirut are so violently partisan that no one can get an unbiased picture of what is going on whereas government radio is listened to by everyone. Chehab thought this a good idea and said he thought he might make such a broadcast once new government was formed and before parliamentary vote of confidence.

As a last item of business Tasked General if report were correct that Syrian Druzes who have been supporting Jumblatt were on point of mobilizing to return to Syria. Chehab said this was in fact true and they had turned their weapons in to Jumblatt. He thought it better however that no publicity attend the event but added significantly “Chamoun knows about it.”

My over-all impression from this conversation and other reports during day is that political abcess will shortly break and that the fever will commence to subside next week.3

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–458. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Cairo, London, and USUN.

2 Reference is to telegram 1843 from Beirut; see footnote 7, Document 343.

3 McClintock revised his prediction on October 6. In telegram 1862 from Beirut, McClintock noted that it appeared that progress toward a solution in Lebanon was moving more slowly than anticipated. The Phalange-inspired general strike continued into its thirteenth day, there were further incidents of kidnapping and murder, and barricades were beginning to appear on the main routes into and out of Beirut. McClintock stated that he had sent an intermediary to meet with Chamoun, and Chamoun had indicated his willingness to meet with Chehab to iron out a political settlement to the crisis. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–658; included in the microfiche supplement)

346. Editorial Note 346. Editorial Note

On October 8, the Department of State released an announcement concerning the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Lebanon which reads as follows: “The Government of the United States announces that by agreement with the Government of the Republic of Lebanon it has now been decided to complete withdrawal of United States forces from Lebanon. It is expected that, barring unforeseen developments, the forces will all be withdrawn by the end of October.

“The United States sent forces to Lebanon in response to the urgent appeal of the then government of that country for assistance in maintaining Lebanese independence and integrity. At the same time the United States took steps in the United Nations with a view to having it take measures to preserve the independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon and thus facilitate the withdrawal of the United States forces. Subsequently the United Nations General Assembly unanimously adopted a resolution developed by the Arab states and designed to ensure respect by states for the freedom, independence and integrity of other states, and to establish practical arrangements to uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter in relation to Lebanon.

“The steps which have been taken with respect to the situation in Lebanon have led to a substantial improvement in the international aspects of the Lebanese security situation. The current unrest appears to have essentially domestic origins. In view of the progress made toward more stable international conditions in the area, it has been concluded that United States forces can now be totally withdrawn from Lebanon. It is the confident hope of the United States Government that the Republic of Lebanon, its sovereignty and independence strengthened, will move forward in unity, peace, and prosperity.” (American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1958, page 1058)

The announcement was also transmitted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations on October 8 by Ambassador Lodge. (U.N. doc. A/3942)

347. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 347. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 9, 1958—10 a.m.

1895. As indicated Embtel 1891,2 I saw Chehab last night at Junieh. He went over political crisis in great detail and seemed obviously happy to have a friend to confide in who had no personal interest in current intrigues.

Chehab said that after consultation with leaders of the Basta Karami had been “très chic” and had offered his resignation. Sticking point, as we have previously reported, was whether vote of confidence in Karami Cabinet should be taken before or after broadening of that government. Neither side would back down and, in consequence, general had now decided it was necessary to form another type of government.

Chehab has in mind a “neutral” cabinet made up largely of military officers with a leavening of experienced civilians. He said, for example, that the most important posts of Foreign and Economic Affairs and Finance would be intrusted to Takla. Prime Minister would be either Nazim Akkari Sunni Moslem Chef de Cabinet at Prime Minister’s office, an old wheelhorse in the Civil Service who once held Prime Ministership for three days in 1952, or Achmed Daouk, longtime Ambassador in Paris, also a Sunni Moslem who has a good reputation and is regarded as completely non-partisan.

Chehab said Gemayel had been extremely conciliatory and sincerely anxious to put an end to strike. Had he to deal only between Karami and Gemayel, crisis would have ended some days ago. However, President put his finger on Chamoun as being the dominant influence on so-called loyalist side and said he was more concerned with Chamoun’s attitude than he was with that of Moslem leaders. Chehab asked me if I could see Chamoun urgently this morning to endeavor to secure former President’s assurances he would not sabotage this last minute attempt to form a care-taker government which could at least reestablish order and permit Lebanon to start long road back toward reconstruction. I said I would do what I could.3

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–958. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Amman, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, Tel Aviv, London, Paris, Rome, and USUN.

2 In telegram 1891 from Beirut, October 8, the Embassy reported on the continuing impasse in the political crisis. As the Embassy saw it, the stumbling block to settlement was the inability to agree whether the reconstitution of the cabinet should take place before or after the vote of confidence in the Parliament. (Ibid., 783A.00/10–858; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 McClintock reported in telegram 1900 from Beirut, October 9, that he had visited Chamoun and had outlined Chehab’s formula for a new government. Chamoun objected to the inclusion of military officers in such a government, and observed that Takla could hardly be regarded as a neutral. Chamoun reiterated his willingness to support a “really neutral” government. McClintock reported his conversation with Chamoun to Chehab, who was in the latter stages of formulating his military-civilian cabinet. McClintock discussed the makeup of the cabinet with Chehab and concluded that it was probable that a new cabinet would be announced shortly and parliament convened thereafter, unless Chamoun sabotaged the effort. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–958; included in the microfiche supplement)

348. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 348. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 9, 1958—2 p.m.

1901. Publication of our communiqué2 on withdrawal of forces has raised new furor in Moslem population of Lebanon who have construed phrase in first paragraph, “barring unforeseen developments”, as deliberately intended to foreshadow indefinite stay of US troops in this country.

This morning President Chehab and Foreign Minister Takla separately spoke to me of their great concern over this palpable distortion of our intent and agreed with me that, taken in context of entire communiqué, this clause bore on international security situation rather than on internal affairs of Lebanon. However, they said reasonably enough that one could not expect reason from the Moslem faction. In particular, Karami was extremely exercised and wanted a note sent to us formally demanding withdrawal of US forces at once.

I pointed out to President and later to Takla, whom I have just seen, that such a note could make Lebanon Government seem ridiculous coming on top of our published communiqué, and that anything Karami might say should be uttered with extreme care lest he should find himself mouth piece for radio Cairo, Damascus, Moscow and Peking.

At Takla suggestion we then went up to see Prime Minister Karami, who made some extremely cordial statements about his personal regard for me and his appreciation for all the US had done for Lebanon. He did say, however, that clause “barring unforeseen developments” had “torpedoed” agreement on withdrawal in eyes of Moslem population.

I suggested that one way to ease Karami’s problem might be for Admiral Holloway and me to pay a call on him this afternoon in his capacity as Minister of National Defense in order to present Admiral Ekstrom, new Commander of Sixth Fleet. It could be announced after visit that CINCSPECOMME and COMMANDERSIXTHFLEET had discussed with Prime Minister details of American withdrawal. To this suggestion all agreed. Takla likewise indicated he would like to send me a letter couched in very friendly terms expressing gratification for US aid and understanding of Lebanese Government that in fact our troops will leave by end of October. I said I should be glad informally to go over proposed text of such a letter this afternoon.3

I believe these measures will forestall angry blast from Karami which might have had adverse propaganda repercussions in Middle East and been exploited by Communist media.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–958. Secret; Priority.

2 See Document 346.

3 In telegram 1908 from Beirut, October 9, McClintock reported that Takla had conveyed to him the letter outlined in this telegram. He also reported that the meeting of Admirals Holloway and Ekstrom with Karame “went off very smoothly.” Holloway gave Karame an off-the-record indication of his evacuation plans and the Prime Minister was visibly relieved. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–958; included in the microfiche supplement)

349. Letter From the Chargé in Jordan (Wright) to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell) 349. Letter From the Chargé in Jordan (Wright) to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell)1

Amman, October 10, 1958.

My Dear Mr. Rockwell: Thank you very much for your most interesting and informative letter of October 2 and the enclosed copy of the “Talking Paper"2 prepared for the Secretary’s use in possible discussion with Dr. Fawzi.

Unfortunately, since your letter was not remarked “Personal”, it was opened as another piece of official correspondence. I have warned all those who handled the document of its very sensitive nature and will carefully refrain from any reference to it even among members of the country team.

May I take this opportunity to heartily endorse the Department’s latest approach to the knotty problem of our future relations with the Arab states. I have already made known my feelings on this subject in commenting on the draft Middle East policy paper now in preparation as requested by the Department a few days ago.

It is quite apparent that Jordan as a non-viable state cannot long endure unless it reaches some accommodation with its Arab neighbors, all of whom are in some degree hostile to the present Hussein/RIFAI regime, although admittedly for different reasons. In my own opinion, despite all the current talk here in Amman about lifting martial law, the actual facts are that any such undertaking is impossible without endangering the security of the country and setting the stage for some kind of coup d’etat. This will apply equally to any successor government to the Rifai administration which does not have a decidedly pro-Nasser coloration. Furthermore, Jordan is no Iraq. It would be quite impossible for a single brigade to walk into Amman in the early hours of the morning and seize control of the vital installations without having to fight those Jordan army units already on duty in the city, unless, of course, a deal had been made among the senior army officers to effect such a coup. However, in such a case, it would most likely result in a military junta taking over, since the only civilians are retread politicians of doubtful integrity seeking only to gain personal political advantage for themselves and their followers.

At the moment Prime Minister Rifai, despite his admitted unpopularity not only among the general public but also the members of Parliament and even his own cabinet, appears to enjoy King Hussein’s favor. Furthermore, it must be recognized that the King is the only person who can remove him. It is my belief Rifai will in all probability enjoy the King’s favor so long as he can “keep the lid on” internally and, what is even more important, continue to demonstrate to Hussein’s satisfaction his ability to get American aid without which the armed forces cannot be paid. If and when Rifai fails on either one of the foregoing counts, then he will have outlived his usefulness to Hussein and probably will be dumped. This in turn will necessitate Jordan finding another “angel” or drastically reducing the size of its armed forces, either of which will invite opposition forces both from within and from without the country to make a bid for power.

It is possible that a series of caretaker-type governments may succeed Rifai, each in turn having to give up as its inability to satisfy the demands of the extreme nationalists becomes apparent. This process could only take place, of course, providing the Jordan army was either neutralized through internal dissension or chose to take a neutral position so long as nothing was done to unseat the King, providing they elect to remain loyal to him. This will to a large degree depend on how far the Nasser influence has penetrated the army or whether the Bani Sakhir, largest of the Bedouin tribes, decides to replace the monarchy with a paramount sheikh of their own, a process which would be quite readily understood by the predominantly Bedouin population of the East Bank. Incidentally, this is not too far fetched because of the traditional tribal jealousy among the northern and southern tribes, some of which believe that the Hashemites should never have been set up as the supreme ruler in the first place. No matter what means are used to bring about a change in the present Jordan government it is most unlikely that the process can run its natural course toward Arab nationalism of the Nasser variety without some bloodshed and disorders. If and when that time comes, there is a distinct possibility that any symbols of “western imperialism” may become the natural target against which the Jordanian public, long held down by martial law, may vent their spleen.

Under these circumstances it is not improbable that unless or until U.S. policy toward the Middle East in general and Nasser in particular is modified the position of our mission in Amman, including Point IV and USIS, may well become similar to that in the U.A.R. and Iraq.

I didn’t really intend to make this letter so long but once having begun it, I felt that you might like to have on a personal and unofficial basis the benefit of my thinking on what I consider to be a potentially explosive situation.

Sincerely yours,

Thomas K. Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 611.86/10–1058. Top Secret; Personal; Official–Informal.

2 Neither found.

350. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 350. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 11, 1958—11 a.m.

1931. I made my rounds last night as indicated final paragraph Embtel 1921.2 Chehab was prudently optimistic after his attempt at forming a military government presided over by a neutral Moslem had failed yesterday. He confirmed reports we had earlier reported that Basta mob got somewhat out of control, threatening Karami with death if he turned in his resignation. (I suspect, however, mob was incited to this demonstration and that Karami and company did not need much urging to hang on to their cherished portfolios.) At all events, formula which had been accepted by Phalange and Moslem opposition fell through. Chehab thought there was a good chance of returning to former course of action, namely to widen membership in Karami Cabinet to include pro-Chamoun loyalist and perhaps representation from the Phalange. He said Gemayel was meeting with Karami that evening to discuss these possibilities.

I next called on Saeb Salaam who was smooth as oiled-silk. After proudly showing me his arsenal of home-made submachine guns (“the Basta has the best”), he said that morning a committee of 25 Moslem leaders had met to discuss what to do next. Abdullah Yafi tabled a motion calling for no modification whatsoever in Karami Cabinet; but other leaders of a more moderate stripe had later privately agreed they would go along with a compromise for a widened Karami Cabinet along lines suggested by Chehab.

Perhaps most significant thing Saeb Salaam told me was that mobs on both sides, Christian and Moslem, were getting very tired and increasingly impatient that their leaders find a solution. He added it was significant that during day Beirut had been quiet and there had been no retaliatory kidnappings.

When I called on Gemayel after leaving the Basta, I found him on verge of desperation. He said a three-hour meeting with Karami had produced no result. He was convinced Karami and his backers were not sincere in their professed readiness to have a truly representative cabinet. They were only willing to take in a few face-saving personalities but would not honestly seek for an arrangement of “no victor, no vanquished.” Under these circumstances, said Gemayel, neither the Phalange nor their followers could agree to a Karami Cabinet.

I inquired what would happen if Chehab could resuscitate idea which had so nearly proved successful previous day of a military government of officers presided over by a civilian. Gemayel, who was accompanied by Secretary of the party and by former Minister of Finance Joseph Chader, said with their concurrence that Phalange would support such a cabinet. Gemayel said that after his conversation with Chamoun previous evening he had Chamoun’s agreement to an immediate lifting of strike if a military government were formed, Chamoun to restrict his opposition to a purely parliamentary one. Phalange leader told me if such a government were appointed, it would receive a vote of confidence, as Chamoun could not corner more than 20 votes against such a grouping. Gemayel implored me to seek Chehab again that night to announce that he create such a government forthwith. He thought this would have such a magical effect on country it would eliminate strike and restore order provided Chehab stood firm.

I thereupon resumed my weary journeying to Junieh and called on Chehab at 10 p.m. He was interested in negative result of Gemayel–Karami interview and in possibility of resuscitating idea of a military cabinet; but said his concern now was not to upset Moslem apple cart in Tripoli and Saida. He speculated as to possibility of a military cabinet presided over by Karami but agreed when I pointed out Christians would be up in arms at such an arrangement unless there were a balance of strongly pro-loyalist Christian ministers.

President concluded a long day by saying he thought both sides were now so groggy with fatigue they would eventually stumble to some sort of live and let live solution. He noted (and our individual observation corroborates it) that, despite continuance of Christian strike, town is slowly opening and main thoroughfares are free of barricades. Chehab said he thought there would be a long weekend of continued negotiations ending Monday or Tuesday with formation of a compromise government, with parliament to meet immediately thereafter.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–1158. Secret; Priority. Also sent to USUN and repeated to Cairo and London.

2 In telegram 1921 from Beirut, October 10, the Embassy summarized developments in the unfolding political crisis, and noted that McClintock had appointments that evening with Chehab, Saeb Salaam, Gemayel, and former President Beshara El-Khoury. (Ibid., 783A.00/10–1058; included in the microfiche supplement)

351. Telegram From the Consulate General at Geneva to the Department of State 351. Telegram From the Consulate General at Geneva to the Department of State1

Geneva, October 14, 1958—6 p.m.

380. From Dillon.2 Had good visit with McClintock in Istanbul. On premise that Lebanon successful in forming coalition government country team recommends total of $25 million budget support for period ending September 31, 1959. (This is $20 million in addition to $5 million already allotted.) McClintock feels that this should be one time operation and that thereafter Lebanon should be able take care of herself except for such concrete development projects as might meet standards of DLF. Funds presently programmed for Lebanon should be adequate until first of year when additional funds could be obtained through supplemental appropriation.

McClintock also recommends sharp reduction leading to early termination of technical assistance program in Lebanon. Lebanese neither want nor require assistance and do not appreciate such technical assistance as they have received. I recommend acceptance this recommendation but no action to withdraw personnel until Lebanese Government formed and we are in position talk to them about budgetary support.

McClintock emphasized importance of aid for AUB which he feels is our greatest asset in Middle East. I informed him that moderate sums were programmed for AUB in FY 59.

On military assistance McClintock informs me that Chehab and government primarily interested in equipment for ground forces. Here their appetite is large. I told McClintock that this might be more difficult than economic assistance as case for larger armed forces did not seem good and we are attempting cutback on military assistance wherever possible. McClintock then said he felt it might be desirable cancel scheduled deliveries Hawker Hunters since they would be of no use to Lebanon and since Lebanese did not seem particularly interested in them and preferred equipment for ground forces. He will look into matter further and send definite recommendation to Washington. I told him that reprogramming these funds might be only source for military assistance to Lebanon.

Villard

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5-MSP/10-1458. Confidential. Repeated to Beirut.

2 Dillon began an 11-nation trip on September 19 to examine mutual security programs and economic problems. He met with McClintock in Istanbul on October 13.

352. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 352. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, October 15, 1958—5 p.m.

1126. Department pass Defense. General Risden, Chief Military Survey Team,2 and I accompanied by Colonel Tennison of mission and Colonel Delaney ARMA called on Prime Minister Rifai/King Hussein today.

Both King/RIFAI expressed appreciation tangible evidence USG interest Jordan defense establishment, offered cooperate every possible way facilitate mission’s work.

Prime Minister Rifai once again raised question delivery Hawker-Hunter aircraft. He said in view withdrawal British aircraft by end October essential new planes be flown in rather than shipped by sea, not only because time factor but even more important Jordan lacked facility reassemble them. I informed Rifai we had encouraging signs UAR might permit overflight Syria once British have withdrawn. He urged USG work out with British firm delivery date Cyprus from where aircraft could be flown Amman in less one hour. He said unable understand why delivery taken so long in view planes supposedly already available, not tied production schedule.

RIFAI expressed misgivings Lebanese situation, called four-man Cabinet announced today a stop-gap arrangement which would not last very long, likely be replaced by military junta. In answer my query as to likelihood early resumption air/overland transit UAR territory Rifai said expected favorable action next few days, however not unlikely Nasser might insist on waiting until British troops have left Jordan. He took occasion to make clear regardless whether or not transit rights restored HKJ will never again permit itself be dependent on Beirut, will continue build up Aqaba as major Jordan port.

Comment: In view high priority both Hussein/RIFAI attach delivery Hawker–Hunter aircraft it is hoped matter can be straightened out in such way as permit planes be flown Amman as near target date November 1 as possible. Rifai said he felt Jordan had been victim “buck passing” exercise between Washington/London to point where some positive action had to be taken. He offered opinion in absence trained Jordanian pilots would probably be necessary HKJ hire mercenaries on contract basis fly aircraft until officers now undergoing training UK have completed course. General Risden mission seems be off good start with word being passed down line that both King/RIFAI personally interested mission’s operations. I plan give small dinner next week to which King/RIFAI together top Jordanian military officers have agreed come. This will provide additional opportunity General Risden get acquainted those Jordanians responsible maintenance internal security/formulation military policy.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/10–1558. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, London, Paris, Rome, and Tel Aviv.

2 The military survey team, headed by Brigadier General Richard A. Risden, USA, arrived in Amman on October 14. (Telegram 1116 from Amman, October 14; ibid., 785.00/10–1458)

353. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 15, 1958 353. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 15, 19581

Washington, October 15, 1958

SUBJECT

Situation in Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Ambassador Rifai, Chief Jordanian Delegate to UN General Assembly

NE—Stuart W. Rockwell

NE—William C. Lakeland

Ambassador Rifai expressed his Government’s gratitude for the decisive stand which the United States, under the leadership of President Eisenhower and the Secretary, had taken in the recent Middle East crisis. He said people in the Near East tend to believe in what they see and to “follow the prevailing wind.” When United States policy was translated into action by our support of Lebanon and Jordan, people realized in a tangible way the value of cooperation and friendship with the United States and felt confidence that they could rely on the United States in the future. The Ambassador felt that Jordan had come out of the recent crisis very successfully; the Arab resolution had been a good development and there had been no criticism of Jordan by the other Arab states during the present session of the UN General Assembly.

The Secretary, in replying to the Ambassador, said that he wished to express his thanks for the words of appreciation for our efforts which the Ambassador had spoken. He said that our response to the appeals of Lebanon and Jordan for help against indirect aggression was evidence of the sincerity of our concern for the independence and integrity of small nations and of our great respect for the efforts of the King and the Government to preserve Jordan’s independence. We were gratified that the situation appeared somewhat more stable for the future than it was at one time in the past.

The Secretary, turning to the subject of Jordan’s more long-range prospects, observed that it would not be sound or practical for the United States to continue financial support to Jordan at the present level indefinitely. The long-range problem for Jordan was one of developing the country’s own resources so as to permit it to exist independent of outside help. This would require austerity—which admittedly was not easy when there was some prospect of a need for even greater military expenditures.

When asked later if he had specific advice which the Ambassador might carry back to Jordan, the Secretary replied that he didn’t feel qualified to offer advice but asked the Ambassador to express the great admiration which the President, he himself, and the American people generally felt for the courage and vigor which the King and the Jordan Government had shown. He observed that in the dangerous world in which we live people can’t be safe unless they are prepared to be bold and courageous, as witnessed by the recent example of the crisis over Quemoy and Matsu. He added that people who are disposed to stand up for themselves, even though they are small, attract support, while people who give in only isolate themselves.

In Jordan’s case, the Secretary said there was still the long-range problem arising out of the fact that Jordan was essentially an artificial state carved out of the old Palestine Mandate by the British to serve as a strategic base in the area. This concept was now outmoded and the British were no longer in a position to support Jordan. The long-range solution of this problem would appear to require that Jordan at some time reach an honorable understanding with its neighbors which would permit it to enjoy a greater measure of economic well-being. This was not easy. The Arab Union would have been a sound step had it been possible to carry it through, but it was doubtful whether union with Iraq would be a sound step today since the situation in Iraq was not yet stabilized. However, something might prove possible in the future.

Ambassador Rifai agreed that Jordan must seek an understanding with its neighbors. He observed that Jordan does not believe that the union of Syria and Egypt will necessarily prove permanent. He believed that there might be as much chance for Jordan in combination with Syria and with Iraq, particularly in view of King Hussein’s special qualifications. Events in the Middle East often take place suddenly, and anything is possible.

The Ambassador thanked the Secretary for receiving him and said that he expected to be stopping briefly in London on his way back to Jordan. He would be leaving New York in a few days and was happy to be able to carry back to his Government the Secretary’s comments.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/10–1558. Confidential. Drafted by Lakeland. The conversation took place at the request of Ambassador Rifai, who came from New York to meet with Dulles. The conversation was recorded in three memoranda. In addition to the memorandum of conversation printed infra, a third memorandum of conversation was prepared covering the question of a proposed visit to the United States by King Hussein. (Ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199; included in the microfiche supplement)

354. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 15, 1958 354. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 15, 19581

Washington, October 15, 1958

SUBJECT

UAR Blockade of Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Ambassador Rifai, Chief Jordanian Delegate to UN General Assembly

NE—Stuart W. Rockwell

NE—William C. Lakeland

During a general discussion of the situation in Jordan, the Secretary inquired whether the UAR economic blockade of Jordan had been lifted. Ambassador Rifai replied that although he had received repeated assurances that the ban on transit of goods through UAR territory and overflights by Jordanian aircraft would be lifted, the physical blockade was still in effect. He cited a recent letter from Secretary General Hammarskjold containing assurances that the UAR had promised to lift the blockade. The Ambassador felt that Nasser’s failure to carry out these promises to date indicated bad faith on his part. He said that Dr. Fawzi had implied that some Lebanese Ministers were objecting to the lifting of the blockade at the instigation of Syrian elements who were against the improvement of relations with Jordan.

This led Ambassador Rifai to comment that it would appear at present that only Syria was the source of trouble for Jordan. The situation in Lebanon seemed to be much improved; Iraq was not causing difficulties; Jordan was on good terms with Saudi Arabia, where the King seemed to be improving his position, and even Cairo gave evidence of a desire for better relations. He was hopeful that in the future Jordan could be a stabilizing influence in the area. In this, Jordan relied upon US aid and would continue to do so.

The Ambassador wondered whether the Secretary would care to put some additional pressure on the UAR with respect to lifting the blockade of Jordan. The UK troops were withdrawing, the Secretary General had given assurances that the UAR was going to remove its restrictions, and Jordan did not wish to disrupt the present trend by renewing the propaganda war.

When the Secretary expressed some doubt as to what he might be able to do, especially since our own relations with the UAR were not of the best, the Ambassador urged that the United States put in a word with the Secretary General urging him to renew his efforts at securing full UAR compliance with the Arab resolution. The Secretary replied that he saw no reason why we couldn’t speak to Mr. Hammarskjold along these lines and indicated that appropriate steps would be taken through Ambassador Lodge.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/10–1558. Confidential. Drafted by Lakeland. See footnote 1, supra.

355. Editorial Note 355. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on October 16 on significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Allen Dulles offered the following assessment of developments in Lebanon and Jordan: “In Lebanon, said Mr. Dulles, the new stop-gap Cabinet has ended for the moment the strikes and violence of recent months. The new Cabinet was about evenly divided between the Moslems and the Christians, although the choicest portfolios had gone to the Moslems. Even so, Mr. Dulles thought this was an encouraging development in the Lebanese picture.

“Mr. Dulles stated that the evacuation of British forces from Jordan was beginning. The future of that country would, of course, be discussed in connection with the agenda item covering a new U.S. policy toward the Near East. King Hussein was planning to take a vacation out of the country, although it was singularly difficult to find an appropriate time for him to take a vacation.

“The President inquired whether the British forces would be flown out of Jordan over a corner of Syria. General Twining replied that these troops would be flown out, the bulk of them through Syria.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 383d Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason on October 17; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

The Council also discussed “U.S. Policy Toward the Near East” at the meeting. The record of this discussion is scheduled for publication in volume XII.

356. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 356. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 16, 1958—5 p.m.

1983. Since formation of new government reported Embassy telegram 19662 I have made separate calls on President Chehab and on each of the new ministers.

Recalling prediction he had made as outlined last paragraph Embassy telegram 1931,3 Chehab said on Saturday night he had given Moslem opposition an ultimatum that if they did not consent to some reasonable solution of crisis he would resign as President of Lebanon. Chehab intimated he had been equally firm with Christian Loyalists. He expressed great vexation at attitude of Jumblat and spoke with some irony of Druze chieftain’s pretension to be a spiritual leader, whereas in reality all he wanted was a ministerial portfolio for himself. Chehab said final compromise reached at one a.m. yesterday excluded many confessional factions but did give justice to main division of Lebanon between Islam and Christianity. He was optimistic that new government would be able to get on with its job.

Foreign Minister Hussein Oueini (who was visibly pleased that US Ambassador was first of diplomatic corps to call on him) was exceedingly cordial and made pleasant sounds of his willingness to settle any problems which might come up between Lebanon and US on a basis of trust and friendship. He did, however, put in a plug for Nasser, expressing hope US–Nasser relations would improve; and likewise stated that if US could contribute to rapid and just solution of Palestine refugee problem this would do more than anything to improve US relations with “50 million Arabs”.

Rashid Karami told me this morning country is rapidly returning to a peace-time basis. His reports from Tripoli, Saida, Tyre and Bekaa all confirmed that security situation is calm. Like his colleagues, he expressed optimism and pleased surprise at almost magical change in atmosphere of Beirut.

Conversation with Raymond Edde is reported Embassy telegram 1980.4 In addition, he is arranging for various elements of our official family to deal on a working level with opposite numbers in various ministries in order to prevent clogging at top of such over-burdened ministers as Rashid Karami who has important portfolios of Defense, Finance and Economic Affairs in addition to Information.

Pierre Gemayel tells me he thinks tomorrow’s vote of confidence in Parliament will be almost unanimous,5 with possible abstention or negative vote of solitary PPS deputy. Gemayel said practically every leader of Moslem opposition had personally telephoned him to express congratulations and good wishes for success of new government. Somewhat to his surprise, Gemayel said he seemed popular hero in the Basta.

Uniformly I found among new ministers a repeated request for US moral support. They seemed more interested in this type of backing than in more concrete manifestations of aid; but I do not doubt that requests for financial and economic assistance will be forthcoming.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–1658. Secret. Repeated to Amman, Ankara, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, Paris, Rome, Tel Aviv, and USUN.

2 In telegram 1966 from Beirut, October 15, the Embassy reported that Chehab had formed a new cabinet consisting of Rashid Karame as Prime Minister, and Minister of Defense, Finance, Economy, and Information; Hussein Oueini as Minister of Foreign Affairs, Justice, and Planning; Raymond Edde as Minister of Interior and Social Affairs; and Pierre Gemayel as Minister of Public Works, Education, Agriculture, and Health. Karame and Oueini were Sunni Moslems and Gemayel and Edde were Maronite Christians. Following the announcement of the establishment of the cabinet, the Phalange issued a statement calling off their strike, and an impending trade union strike was also cancelled. The Embassy reported that the cabinet was being popularly referred to in Lebanon as the “cabinet of salvation.” (Ibid., 783A.00/10–1558)

3 Document 350.

4 Telegram 1980 from Beirut, October 16, reported on a conversation among McClintock, Chehab, and Edde concerning the security situation in Lebanon. McClintock noted that both men gave evidence of “renewed vim and determination" to restore Lebanon to normal within a matter of days. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/10–1658; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 In telegram 1992 from Beirut, October 17, the Embassy reported that the new Karame cabinet received a unanimous vote of confidence in Parliament that morning. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.13/10–1758)

357. Editorial Note 357. Editorial Note

On October 25, Admiral Holloway reported to the Chief of Naval Operations that all United States military forces had been withdrawn from Lebanon, and that the operation was “completed”. (CINCSPECOMME telegram 251221Z; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files) The Army Attaché in Lebanon reported that the departure of the last of the U.S. troops passed quietly and without incident. He noted that the “country continues calm with Beirut again a thriving commercial center.” (USARMA telegram CX 357, October 28; ibid.) The withdrawal of British troops from Jordan began on October 20, and the airlift of the main body of paratroopers from Amman began on October 25. (Telegram 1183 from Amman, October 24; Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/10–2458) The CINCSPECOMME telegram is included in the microfiche supplement.

358. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 358. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 28, 1958—5 p.m.

2129. Pursuant Embtel 20632 and Deptel 1600,3 I saw Prime Minister Karami this morning.

I said United States might be able to help Lebanon in recovering from effects of almost half a year of civil war but we could not even estimate our ability to aid without a firm statistical basis as to financial situation in which Lebanese Government found itself. Upshot of a long interview was agreement that when each ministry had submitted its budget estimates for next calendar year, which are due to be presented Karami November 5, and a consolidated draft budget has been rounded out, which he thinks will be between November 10 and 15, USOM and Embassy economic experts will be called in to go over the books. Karami agreed to make a complete and honest revelation of income accounts, proposed disbursements and calculations under headings of reconstruction and development (first paragraph Deptel 1600). At that time we would jointly determine what deficit, if any, GOL found in its forward planning but there would be no commitment on part of US to meet this deficit. I could only promise sympathetic study and subsequent recommendation by Embassy and USOM to Washington.

Karami asked if I could let him know what global figure for aid US had in mind for Lebanon. I said I did not know it myself. US had many clients around the world and many demands upon foreign aid funds. All we could hope for was that if Lebanon could establish a clear basis of actual need US would regard its requirements sympathetically and do its best to help. I made it clear there would be no question of any lump sum annual grant to GOL.

I mentioned in passing 8 million pounds of counterpart and found, as I expected, that Prime Minister had never heard of this fund. I left further elaboration on this point to await joint study of Embassy–USOM experts with Lebanese budget technicians.

Prime Minister asked if there would be any strings attached to US aid, and mentioned in this connection Eisenhower Doctrine. I pointed out Eisenhower Doctrine was a unilateral statement of policy by the United States and offered personal suggestion it would be wise if neither side brought this issue up. What we were concerned with was a solid study in public finance and not in polemics on foreign policy. I likewise recalled that (Deptel 4107)4 Secretary had some months ago pointed out to Malik in a personal communication unilateral character of Eisenhower Doctrine.

I later went over main points of my conversation with Karami with my closest friend in government, Raymond Edde, to make sure this influential minister is conversant with my oral arrangements with Prime Minister. In particular, I cautioned Edde that I thought it would be unfortunate if Karami made any public statement about Lebanon and Eisenhower Doctrine. I thought this was a sleeping dog which could well be let lie.5

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 883A.10/10–2858. Confidential.

2 In telegram 2063 from Beirut, October 23, McClintock reported that he had been approached by Karamé with a request to discuss the question of U.S. budgetary support for Lebanon. McClintock indicated that he agreed to conversations beginning October 27. He and the Embassy economic officers felt that such conversations should begin with a request for a detailed indication of Lebanon’s budgetary needs. Assuming a genuine indication of need, McClintock asked for authorization to release $2.5 million for October budgetary support, to match the amount which had been provided for September. (Ibid., 883A.10/10–2358; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 The reference is in error. The correct reference is to telegram 1640 to Beirut, October 24, which responded to telegram 2063 from Beirut. In telegram 1640, the Department concurred in McClintock’s proposed approach to Karamé. In addition to a detailed indication of budgetary needs, the Department asked that Lebanese requirements be identified in the categories of current expenditures, reconstruction, and development. The Department added that it was reluctant to authorize the release of the second $2.5 million until after the country team and State/ICA had an opportunity to assess Lebanon’s overall requirements. (Department of State, Central Files, 883A.10/10–2358; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Telegram 4107 transmitted Dulles’ April 29 letter to Malik, Document 16.

5 In telegram 2139 from Beirut, October 29, McClintock reported that he had covered the same ground with Chehab that he had gone over with Karame and Edde, and the President said that he was in complete accord with the proposed vetting of the Lebanese budget and development program. McClintock concluded from these conversations that Chehab and the Karame cabinet were making “a common sense and intelligent effort to try to improve Lebanon’s economy and social structure.” (Department of State, Central Files, 883A.10/10–2958; included in the microfiche supplement)

359. Special National Intelligence Estimate 359. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, October 28, 1958.

SNIE 30–6–58

DEVELOPMENTS IN THE AFTERMATH OF US AND UK TROOP WITHDRAWALS FROM LEBANON AND JORDAN

The Estimate

1. The presence of US and UK troops in Lebanon and Jordan slowed down the trend in both countries toward seizure of control by local forces sympathetic to the UAR. The landing of these forces has not, however, changed basic trends in the area and developments in both countries will continue in the direction of neutralism and accommodations with Pan-Arab nationalism.

2. The most significant immediate consequence of the withdrawal of US and UK troops will be to remove one of the most important props which hold up the shaky regime of King Hussein, thus increasing the danger of its overthrow and the likelihood of Israeli and UAR intervention.2 The danger of a move to overthrow the regime will be particularly great during Hussein’s anticipated absence abroad in November.

3. We believe that the withdrawal of Western troops will not of itself automatically and precipitately lead to widespread hostilities: the withdrawal has been widely anticipated; the governments of the area are aware of the possibility that the collapse of the Jordanian regime could lead to an Arab-Israeli war; and these governments probably do not desire such a war at the present time. Nevertheless, the situation, especially in Jordan, will be delicate. Nasser may miscalculate the risks in the situation and Arab extremists both in and out of Jordan might take independent action to overthrow the regime.

Lebanon

4. The withdrawal of US forces from Lebanon is not likely to produce any marked or sudden change in the situation in that country. The struggle between the Christian and Moslem elements is likely to continue for some time and to involve occasional resort to force, but we believe that large-scale outbreaks in the near future are not likely.

5. The future of Lebanon’s present compromise government and, indeed, of President Chehab is not clear. The preferential position of the Christians in political life has been seriously weakened, and the Moslems may seek to push their gains to the point where the Christians will feel compelled to strike back in force.

Jordan

6. In the face of threats by the UAR and by Jordanian Pan-Arab nationalists, Hussein has been sustained by the Jordanian Army and by the aid and support of the US and UK. Another force counteracting Arab nationalist pressures has been Israel, which has threatened to intervene in Jordan in the event of the overthrow of Hussein’s regime.

7. Maneuverings designed to reduce pressures upon Hussein and to allow him to remain on the throne after the withdrawal of the British troops have been underway in Jordan. If these are to be successful they must involve such concessions to the Pan-Arab nationalists as release of political prisoners and the removal of the openly pro-Western Samir Rifai as Prime Minister. Furthermore Rifai’s successor will have to be a politician acceptable to the extreme nationalist forces. Although there are a number of pro-Hussein politicians in Jordan who would be willing to make a try at rapprochement with Nasser, we believe it unlikely that Hussein himself has much taste for such an arrangement. He probably also believes that any such arrangement would be short-lived. It is possible, though unlikely, that Hussein will not return to Jordan from his November trip.

8. If Hussein continues his present government and policies after the withdrawal of UK troops, we believe chances are better than even that he will be overthrown within a few months. The scheduled absence of Hussein from the country in the course of the coming two months will provide a particularly tempting opportunity for the opposition to move against the monarchy.

9. There are indications that the Jordanian regime may seek a rapprochement with Iraq as a means of appeasing Pan-Arab sentiment without capitulating to the UAR. At least under its present leadership, however, the Iraqi Government is not likely to prove receptive to overtures from the current Jordanian regime.

UAR

10. Nasser probably believes that important progress has been made for his cause in Lebanon since the outbreak of the insurrection last spring, and he will continue to encourage the pro-UAR Moslem group to establish its dominance and bring Lebanon into close alignment with the UAR. Nasser may choose to move slowly in Lebanon. However, relations with the Moslem leaders in Lebanon are principally in the hands of Syrian Minister of Interior Serraj, who is much less restrained than Nasser and likely to continue strong covert efforts on behalf of the pro-UAR group in Lebanon.

11. With respect to Jordan, Nasser would almost certainly prefer the evolution of a cooperative Jordanian regime which would not provide Israel with the occasion to intervene forcibly and which would, at least in the early stages, avoid loss of Western economic assistance to Jordan. However, here too his hand may be forced by the activities of Serraj or local Pan-Arab extremists.

Israel

12. Israel is unlikely to make any move in direct response to the withdrawal of US and UK troops, but it will hold its forces in readiness in case the troop withdrawal leads to events in Jordan which it feels require intervention. Even if the movement of Jordan toward the UAR is gradual and peaceful, the danger will remain that Israel will at some point move to forestall the establishment of UAR forces west of the Jordan.

The USSR

13. The USSR is unlikely to respond to US and UK troop withdrawals except by beating the usual propaganda drums against Western “imperialism.” It is unlikely to intervene more directly in the situation unless an Arab-Israeli war appears imminent, in which case it is likely to respond with threats to the West and Israel. The USSR is unlikely to take further steps without Nasser’s concurrence. As we have estimated elsewhere,3 however, the Soviets are unlikely to take actions which they believe would involve serious risk of war with the West.

1 Source: Department of State, INR Files. A covering note indicated that this special estimate, submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, was prepared by CIA, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff. All members of the United States Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate on October 28, with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and the FBI who abstained on the grounds that the topic was outside their jurisdiction.

2 Footnote in the source text [8½ lines of source text] not declassified.

3 See SNIE 30–2–58, “The Middle East Crisis,” 22 July 1958, paragraphs 18–22. [Footnote in the source text. SNIE 30–2–58 is scheduled for publication in volume XII.]

360. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 360. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, October 29, 1958—12:03 p.m.

1696. Embtels 2019 and 1993.2 We share Embassy view that investment USG has made in Lebanon, as well as political significance US-Lebanese relationship, requires substantial continuing US interest in that country. From political viewpoint, however, Dept coming to conclusion that while we should maintain attitude helpful friendliness to Lebanon, it is not to either Government’s interest seek to make more intimate our already close association. From financial viewpoint funds available to USG heavily committed.

Thus, while recognizing military and security aspects of problem as thoughtfully outlined in Embtel 2019, Dept and Defense do not favor our involvement in program for reorganization and re-equipping Lebanese armed forces. We would be taking on responsibility which would not only involve conclusion military mission agreement and assignment US military personnel to Lebanon but would also entail heavy cost.

On other hand Dept sees much merit in recommendation for arranging visits and training programs for Lebanese officers. Although process slower and indirect, such projects could have some influence on Lebanese military thinking while at same time strengthening ties with US on part of individuals involved. Preliminary reaction this proposal is favorable and while specific approval being sought would appreciate Embassy’s estimate number of personnel involved, and suggestion re types and duration of training. Defense concurs.

With reference MAP assistance, Department would welcome Embassy’s specific recommendations on: 1) Maintenance and ammunition requirements (final para Section 1 Embtel 1993); 2) Consolidated list Lebanese requirements and country team recommendations mentioned USARMA’s CX 332;3 3) “Shopping lists desired equipment” (para 2, Embtel 2019).

Defense planning to date has been limited to earlier Lebanese lists screened by JCS, which show priority deficiencies of perhaps $3 or $4 million in artillery, prime movers, general purpose vehicles, communications, electronics equipment, and ammunition. As indicated Deptel 1556,4 MAP funding problems might be limiting factor here as well.

Re equipment program for Lebanese Internal Security Forces (last para First Section Embtel 1993) ICA Washington thinks FY 1959 program should not exceed reasonable amount of demonstration and training equipment in addition to technicians and some US training for participants. This project currently under study here.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/10–2058. Secret. Drafted in NEA/NE by Hamilton, Meyer, and Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and, in draft, with NR, W/MSC, Defense, and ICA.

2 In telegram 1993 from Beirut, October 17, McClintock stated that he had not intended to convey the impression to Under Secretary Dillon that the Lebanese Government preferred equipment for ground forces to delivery of the anticipated Hawker–Hunter aircraft. Rather, they wanted the aircraft and hoped for substantial military assistance for ground forces as well. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/10–1758) On October 20, McClintock continued his assessment of Lebanon’s military requirements in telegram 2019 from Beirut. He noted that the Lebanese forces were imbued with a Maginot line mentality, and added that he, Admiral Holloway, and General Adams felt that the United States should respond to future requests for military assistance by recommending a reorganization of Lebanese forces along more flexible lines. If Chehab responded to that suggestion, the United States could offer to provide a military training mission to facilitate the change. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/10–2058) Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Not found.

4 Dated October 16. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/10–1458; included in the microfiche supplement)

361. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions and Consular Offices in Europe and the Middle East 361. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions and Consular Offices in Europe and the Middle East1

Washington, October 29, 1958—7:51 p.m.

523. Reports from field indicate number military measures being taken which might be linked imminent departure British troops from Jordan.2 Dept had expressed to Fonmin Fawzi (October 24) and Israeli Embassy (October 27) fact we have no reason believe aggression being planned in area but that attitude USG with respect aggression from any quarter in Middle East is well-known and has not changed since Suez. Limited info available not such as clearly to reflect aggressive intentions by either UAR or Israel; reports re UAR moves indicate they probably precautionary. Addressees are requested continue report urgently all developments their areas which might substantiate reports military measures now being taken or give indication of UAR or Israeli intentions.

Dulles

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/10–2958. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Brewer and cleared by Hamilton, Rountree, and with DRN. Sent to Amman, Aleppo, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Jerusalem, Damascus, London, Paris, and Tel Aviv.

2 In telegram 1303 from Cairo, October 29, the Embassy reported that UAR forces were on a full alert status, thought to be linked to the departure of British troops from Jordan. (Ibid., 785.5411/10–2958)

362. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 31, 1958 362. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 31, 19581

Washington, October 31, 1958

SUBJECT

Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Sir Harold Caccia, British Ambassador

Lord Hood, Minister, British Embassy

Mr. C. Burke Elbrick, EUR

Mr. William M. Rountree, NEA

Mr. Robert H. McBride, WE

The Secretary stated that apparently the UAR really believes that something will happen in the area of the Middle East and possibly that Israel will take over the West bank of the Jordan now that British troops have departed.2 Israel was probably being used as a pretext by the UAR. He noted that we had no information from Israel indicating that they were planning any move. He expressed gratification that the opening of the Syrian-Jordan border had been announced.

Ambassador Caccia expressed the view that the absence of the King of Jordan at the present time was unfortunate. The Secretary said that the planned vacation of King Hussein also gave us cause for concern. Ambassador Caccia said that this was causing anxiety in the UK but that no action had been contemplated to the best of his knowledge. He thought that the Foreign Office was considering some move to try to make sure that at least some member of the Royal Family returned to Jordan. The Secretary noted that the King of course might conceivably never return to Jordan.

Mr. Rountree stated that there was no evidence of an Israeli military build up but that Israeli forces in being were sufficient to take over the West bank should they so desire. Moreover, the Israelis could mobilize very quickly. Therefore the UAR was particularly sensitive in this respect. The UAR was making a great deal of US–UK–French alleged arms programs for Israel. They had also noted with concern Ben Gurion’s statement on the West bank.

Ambassador Caccia asked if our anxiety was confined to Jordan. Mr. Rountree said that at the present time the UAR is stating that it wishes peace in Jordan and that we think there will probably not be any UAR move at the present time. The Secretary noted that the departure of US troops and the King’s leaving on vacation created a situation where a coup might occur.

The Secretary said that the compelling considerations in this situation are basic and that it was probably desirable to have a discussion of the problem with the King.

The Secretary added that the situation would be extremely worrying should the King not return. Mr. Rountree noted that a peaceful evolution was possible in this case but that it seemed that serious problems would be raised if King Hussein did not return. Mr. Rountree thought that if the evolution in Jordan were peaceful, Israel might not take over the West bank of the Jordan but that Israel certainly would act to occupy the West bank should there be an uprising in Jordan. He thought it was fairly unlikely that the King would not return, particularly in the light of his recent conduct.

The Secretary said that we would send a message to our Embassy in Amman proposing that we should discuss the situation there with the British Embassy and that we should consider a talk with King Hussein asking for his evaluation of the situation. Apparently, if he believed it was prudent for him to depart on vacation now his estimate of the situation might differ somewhat from ours, because we had certain doubts over the situation and were interested to know on what basis his estimate might differ from ours. The Secretary stressed that he believed it would be more desirable for us to probe the King’s views rather than to issue some form of warning against his departure.3 He also stressed that we should proceed in concert with the UK.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/10–3158. Confidential. Drafted by McBride.

2 The last of the British paratroopers left Jordan on October 29. The remaining Cameroonian regiment was scheduled to depart by sea from Aqaba on November 2. (Telegram 1202 from Amman, October 28; ibid., 785.00/10–2858)

3 In telegram 1234 from Amman, October 31, the Embassy expressed the opinion that King Hussein definitely planned to return to Jordan after approximately a month of vacation in Europe. (Ibid., 785.11/10–3158) Wright confirmed this opinion in a conversation with Prime Minister Rifai on October 31. Rifai dismissed the rumor that the King might not return as “vicious gossip.” (Telegram 1236 from Amman; ibid., 985.7286B/10–3158)

VI. U.S. Relations with Lebanon and Jordan, November 1958–December 1960: The Question of the Level of U.S. Aid to Lebanon; U.S. Relations with the Karame and Salaam Governments in Lebanon; U.S. Military Survey Mission in Jordan; Negotiations Concerning U.S. Military and Economic Aid to Jordan; King Hussein’s Visit to the United States; U.S. Relations with the Rifai, Majali, and Talhouni Governments in JordanVI. U.S. Relations with Lebanon and Jordan, November 1958–December 1960: The Question of the Level of U.S. Aid to Lebanon; U.S. Relations with the Karame and Salaam Governments in Lebanon; U.S. Military Survey Mission in Jordan; Negotiations Concerning U.S. Military and Economic Aid to Jordan; King Hussein’s Visit to the United States; U.S. Relations with the Rifai, Majali, and Talhouni Governments in Jordan

363. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, November 3, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 883A.10/11–358. Secret.

364. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, November 4, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5411/11–458. Confidential. Repeated to Amman, Ankara, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, Paris, and USUN.

365. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, November 6, 1958—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/11–658. Confidential.

366. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, November 25, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/11–2558. Confidential; Priority.

367. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, December 2, 1958—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/12–258. Confidential; Priority.

368. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, December 9, 1958—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.15–RO/12–958. Secret. Repeated to Amman, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, and USUN.

369. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, December 24, 1958—10:32 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/12–258. Confidential. Drafted by J.F. Shaw in NEA/NE/E and cleared in NE by Hamilton and Meyer and in DLF by H. Perry.

370. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut March 24, 1959—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 661.87/3–2459. Secret. Repeated to Ankara, Cairo, Damascus, London, Paris, Amman, Baghdad, Jidda, and Tel Aviv.

371. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon

Washington, July 20, 1959—10:32 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/7–2059. Official Use Only. Drafted by E.B. Goldmann in NEA/P. Cleared in NE/P by Harold Sims and in P by Kretzmann.

372. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, September 18, 1959, 2 p.m.

New York, September 18, 1959, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 64 D 560, CF 1476. Confidential. Drafted by N. Armour. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.

373. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, September 21, 1959

Washington, September 21, 1959

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Hart.

374. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1959

Washington, September 22, 1959

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.83A41/9–2259. Confidential. Drafted on September 25 by Bennsky and approved as accurate on October 1 by Murphy.

375. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, November 3, 1959—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 883A.00–TA/11–359. Confidential.

376. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, March 18, 1960—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/3–1860. Confidential; Priority.

377. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, May 10, 1960.

Source: Department of State, INR Files. Secret. A covering note indicated that this special estimate, submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, was prepared by CIA, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. All members of the United States Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate on May 10, with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and the FBI who abstained on the grounds that the topic was outside their jurisdiction.

378. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, June 20, 1960—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/6–2060. Secret.

379. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, New York, September 22, 1960, 4:15 p.m.

New York, September 22, 1960, 4:15 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Secret. Drafted by John S.D. Eisenhower. The source text indicates that the conference took place in the President’s suite at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel while Eisenhower was in New York to address the General Assembly.

380. Memorandum of Conversations Between Prime Minister Saeb Salaam and the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Meyer), Washington, October 8–9, 1960

Washington, October 8–9, 1960.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.83A11/10–960. Confidential. Drafted by Meyer.

381. Airgram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State

Beirut, October 20, 1960.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/10–2060. Confidential.

382. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, November 10, 1958—7:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.11/11–1058. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and in IO by Cargo. Repeated to Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, and USUN.

383. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, November 19, 1958

Washington, November 19, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/11–1958. Secret. Drafted by Parker.

384. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, November 30, 1958—10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/11–3058. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Cairo, Damascus, and USUN.

385. Memorandum of a Conversation, Amman, December 10, 1958

Amman, December 10, 1958

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.15–RO/12–1058. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Symmes. The conversation took place during Rountree’s visit to Jordan December 10–11. Rountree visited several Middle Eastern posts during the trip.

386. Editorial Note

387. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, December 11, 1958—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–1158. Secret; Priority.

388. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, December 20, 1958—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–2058. Secret; Priority.

389. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, December 21, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–2158. Top Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

390. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, December 29, 1958—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–2958. Secret; Priority.

391. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, February 4, 1959—1:14 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.11/2–259. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and in U.

392. National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, March 10, 1959.

Source: Department of State, INR Files. Secret. A covering note indicated that this estimate, submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, was prepared by CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate on March 10, with the exception of the representatives of the AEC, the NSA, the FBI, and the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Special Operations who abstained on the grounds that the topic was outside their jurisdiction.

393. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Rountree) to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, March 14, 1959.

Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 64 D 560, CF 1223. Secret. Drafted in NEA/NE by Lakeland and Rockwell and cleared with E, W/MSC, H, Defense, and ICA. Sent to Herter through Dillon and Murphy.

394. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 24, 1959

Washington, March 24, 1959

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/3–2459. Secret. Drafted on March 31 by Lakeland and approved as accurate by Herter on April 15.

395. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 24, 1959

Washington, March 24, 1959

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/3–2459. Secret. Drafted by Lakeland and approved as accurate by Herter on April 15.

396. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 24, 1959, 2:45 p.m.

Washington, March 24, 1959, 2:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/3–2459. Secret. Drafted by Bennsky.

397. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, March 25, 1959

Washington, March 25, 1959

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series. Secret. Drafted by Rountree.

398. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 26, 1959

Washington, March 26, 1959

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/3–2659. Drafted by Lakeland on March 30 and approved as accurate by Herter on April 15.

399. Letter From the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell) to the Chargé in Jordan (Wright)

Washington, April 2, 1959.

400. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, May 7, 1959—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.13/5–759. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, London, Tel Aviv, and Beirut.

401. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, May 7, 1959—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.13/5–759. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, London, Tehran, Tel Aviv, and Beirut.

402. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, May 14, 1959—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/5–1459. Confidential. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, and Tel Aviv.

403. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, May 22, 1959—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/5–2259. Confidential. Drafted in NEA/E by E. G. Berns and cleared by Lakeland and Rockwell and with ICA. Repeated to London.

404. Despatch From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 5, 1959.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–559. Confidential.

405. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 20, 1959

Washington, October 20, 1959

Source: Department of State, NEA Files: Lot 62 D 25, Memos of Conversations, 1959. Secret. Drafted by Lakeland on October 21. Musa Nasser, who was appointed Jordanian Minister of Foreign Affairs on September 20, was head of the Jordanian Delegation to the General Assembly. Nasser took advantage of his trip to New York to request a meeting in Washington with Secretary Herter.

406. Airgram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, February 8, 1960.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/2–860. Confidential.

407. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, July 23, 1960—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 841.0085/7–2360. Confidential. Repeated to Amman and London.

408. Editorial Note

409. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, September 9, 1960—3:51 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project “Clean Up”, Jordan. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Mills and Meyer, cleared in BNA by James D. Moffett, in UN by Stephen Palmer, in NEA by Jones, and by Herter. Repeated to London, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Beirut, Damascus, Jerusalem, and USUN.

410. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 9, 1960—6 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project “Clean Up”, Jordan. Secret; Niact; [distribution indicator not declassified]. Received at 4:56 p.m.

411. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 10, 1960—8 p.m.

Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project “Clean Up”, Jordan. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Beirut, Damascus, Jerusalem, and USUN.

412. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State

Amman, September 18, 1960—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320/9—1860. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Beirut, Damascus, Jerusalem, and USUN.

413. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan

Washington, September 30, 1960—11:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–2660. Confidential. Drafted in NEA by E. S. Duncan and cleared by Meyer and with BNA. Also sent to London and repeated to Bonn.

414. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, October 7, 1960

October 7, 1960

Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Secret. Drafted by Hart on October 10. Hussein, who was head of the Jordanian Delegation to the General Assembly, exchanged courtesy visits with Herter in New York on October 3 and October 6 before coming to Washington to meet with Eisenhower. (Memoranda of conversation, October 3 and 6; Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199; both included in the microfiche supplement)

415. Letter From the Ambassador in Jordan (Mills) to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Meyer)

Amman, December 6, 1960.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, 885.2391/12–660. Secret; Official–Informal.

363. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 363. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, November 3, 1958—6 p.m.

2222. Raymond Edde called on me this afternoon. He said Karami somehow had impression (cf. Embtel 2129)2 US possibility of aid for Lebanon could not become actual before calendar 1959. Prime Minister said Edde was being pressed by Soviet Ambassador to accept credits from USSR. Karami was tempted in this direction because he felt there would be a budget deficit for calendar 58 which could not be met by US assistance.

I told Edde undoubtedly their technicians had gotten confused as between US FY59 and calendar 59. However, in my discussions with Prime Minister I had not mentioned any dates or any figure of aid. We were still waiting to be invited to examine Lebanese budget and to ascertain if in fact there was a requirement for US assistance.

Edde said so far as he knew Lebanese budget for calendar 58 would show a deficit of between 25 and 30 million Lebanese pounds ($7.8 and 9.2 million). He said he intended to see President Chehab this evening as well as Karami and would recommend that our scrutiny of Lebanese budget requirements commence forthwith and not toward mid-November as suggested by Prime Minister (Embtel 2129).

I said we would be willing to examine the books at any time. However I did not want anyone in government to have impression we would be impelled to action by prospect of Soviet entry into aid field. If by chance USSR did give credits to Lebanon it might ease over-all burden and we could contemplate a diminished requirement for US assistance. Edde quickly rejoined “Oh, no”.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 883A.10/11–358. Secret.

2 Document 358.

364. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 364. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, November 4, 1958—6 p.m.

2236. Over week has passed since quiet withdrawal last American troops from Lebanon and predictions of certain Christian Cassandras remain happily unfulfilled. While majority Christians, many Shiites, and even some Sunni, would have preferred to see troops remain, we do not believe we have lost many friends in process. Uneasiness certainly remains in Mount Lebanon, and many Christians are quietly hiding guns where they can be easily found, but in absence of trouble criticism of American “do nothingness” has largely vanished.

Former opposition after initial trumpetings of joy over departure “imperialist aggressors” has had little further to say. However, this refrain will undoubtedly return from time-to-time in future, particularly in connection with continuing flow of propaganda from Baghdad trials.

There can be little question but that presence American forces kept Lebanese crisis from erupting more violently. At this juncture it seems to us our landings had indirect effect of forcing insurgents into cooling-off period. Left to own devices they might well have let emotions run away with common sense. As it was after insurgent leaders had second look at UAR, particularly Syria, sovereign Lebanon looked better again. Many observers also feel presence our forces contributed to Moslem acceptance present compromise Cabinet despite inclination reap fruits of what they considered their victory.

Despite fact basic issues which provoked Lebanese crisis remain unresolved, we believe effects of our action will continue to be felt for long time to come, both in Lebanon and elsewhere in Arab world. As present government cautiously feels its way through difficult problems of internal security and external relations, memory of landings will encourage some, act as brake on others, and in general continue to induce spirit of compromise so necessary to existence of Lebanon.

In a broader strategic sense US landing was an eminently successful exercise in limited war. We believe it served to check both Soviet and Nasserite aspirations, while at same time heartening our friends in free world. It is significant that none of standard indicators of so-called “imperialist aggression” was associated with American landing. I am discussing propaganda aspects of this fact in a letter sent today to Director Allen of USIA,2 with copy for Assistant Secretary Rountree.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5411/11–458. Confidential. Repeated to Amman, Ankara, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, Paris, and USUN.

2 Not found.

365. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 365. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, November 6, 1958—1 p.m.

2257. During past twenty-four hours I have had conversations with speaker of Parliament Osseiran, former President Chamoun, President Chehab and Minister Raymond Edde. Upshot of impressions gained from these leaders is that Karami cabinet’s request for full powers to rule by decree for six months (Embtel 2247)2 will probably be debated in Parliament on Tuesday November 11, and that after much haggling and perhaps some minor amendments, bill authorizing full powers will go through. It is then intention of Chehab and Karami Cabinet to undertake a thorough overhaul of Lebanese administration. Chehab told me last night there was an incredible plethora of useless people in Lebanese Government, although in certain departments there were too few employees. He likewise complained of existence of autonomous authorities such as that for Litani river hydro-electric project and others in which some officials received salaries grossly in excess of standard pay scale for other bureaucrats. Chehab indicated a general overhaul of Lebanese Civil Service would be unpopular with deputies in Parliament because of nepotism and fact each deputy had his long list of proteges in the bureaucracy.

Although Chamoun said his party had yet to adopt its line of policy toward bill on full powers, I got definite impression that after securing some amendments to show his party must be reckoned with and his leadership acknowledged Chamoun would go along in supporting government’s request. My most outstanding impression of a day of visits was marked change which has come over Chamoun. He proved exceedingly moderate in his comments and the old flush of egotism enhanced by adulation which had marked his attitude during my interviews when he was on the mountain had completely disappeared.

He now spoke soberly of situation in which Lebanon found itself and of need to support Chehab and Karami Government in meeting urgent and difficult problems. It was also interesting to see that Chamoun was voicing theories on economic development which had originated with Raymond Edde and been implanted in Chehab before they emerged from mouth of Chamoun.

I found Chehab absorbed in fairly constructive ideas on what to do about Lebanon in realm of social policy and of reconstruction. As in case of Chamoun, I have discerned a marked change in the general. He is beginning to like being President of Lebanon and with each week in office he gains new assurance. Although there are admittedly many deficiencies in the governance of this strife-torn republic, I have very clear impression that under present management, and particularly with the courageous and energetic Raymond Edde personally tackling problem of internal security, the present team will be able to surmount its difficulties.

On question of foreign aid, Edde tells me Karami is still tempted by prospect of accepting both US and Soviet assistance. Apparently he was buoyed up by a friendly telegram of congratulations from Khrushchev. However I found Chehab exceedingly cautious toward every aspect of relations with USSR. Far from evincing any desire to accept Russian assistance, he went so far as to say he wanted to go very slowly even before contemplating trade arrangements with Russia.

As for our own contemplated economic and technical assistance to Lebanon, General now fully understands question of eight million pounds of counterpart which still remains to be used and my final arrangement with Karami for a joint study by Lebanese and US experts of budgetary and economic facts upon which any consideration of request for aid must rest. Chehab also very clearly comprehends that if we do furnish assistance it will be in modest proportions.

Chehab said last night he had come to conclusion Lebanon must have advice of foreign experts if it were to improve its government and services which people had a right to expect. He said he hoped he could count on Point Four technical assistance in this regard. I said my overall review of our efforts in this field had led me to a personal disappointment so far as effect on US-Lebanese relations had been concerned; however, if there were real needs and Lebanese Government felt US experts could help to meet these needs, I was sure my government would give sympathetic consideration to requests for help.

As result of my opening gambit with Karami, whenever I said I thought our aid program might very well be phased down and out we now find (as we had expected) a growing concern lest technical assistance be completely withdrawn.

I believe stage has now been set for a friendly and frank consideration across the board of the entire aid program, with initiative in American hands.

Karami telephoned this morning to request that expert scrutiny of budget commence tomorrow at 9 a.m.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.00/11–658. Confidential.

2 Telegram 2247 from Beirut, November 5, reported that this debate would take place on November 11. (Ibid., 783A.00/11–558)

366. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 366. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, November 25, 1958—4 p.m.

2465. Following my return from leave I have carefully studied results of painstaking joint examination made by US and Lebanese financial experts of Lebanese budget position. Embtels Toica 220,2 Toica 2243 and Embtel 24044 are pertinent in this regard. Country Team likewise most gratified to receive Department’s thoughtful Icato 2325 which furnished opportune policy guidance.

I have discussed Lebanese aid and budget problem with a number of responsible people including most recently President Chehab, with whom I had a long and frank conversation last night. I find in Chehab and his more alert ministers, as well as in a variety of disparate elements (e.g., such widely differing characters as Emile Bustany and Kamal Jumblat), a persistent belief that if Lebanese Govt can promptly initiate a program of planned expenditure, particularly in public works sector, pump will be primed for a rapid return of Lebanese economy to normal. From aspect of internal security and interest economics, Chehab and his ministers are keenly anxious to commence a program which would relieve destitution and provide work at such neuralgic points as Tripoli, certain regions in the mountains and the depressed area of Tyre and Sidon. We concur that there is need for such an exercise of leadership, and if it is made possible by our aid we should share in political dividends which will accrue.

Before making our specific recommendations I should like to recall certain basic facts which condition our judgment of situation: (1) Lebanon for first time in its brief history has a president who is incorruptible. Likewise, for first time in Lebanese history all ministers of govt are men of personal integrity. This is thus a unique situation in which content [intent?] of top management in this country is to run an honest administration. We should be naive, however, to believe that throughout ranks of bureaucracy there will be an equal standard of public conduct. Nevertheless, from aspect of how US taxpayers funds are used, we do have at present time in Lebanon an honest chief of state and an honest Cabinet.

(2) One political observer has remarked to me that US area-wise has an unusual, although perhaps fleeting, opportunity to use an imaginative and bold aid program for Lebanon with a view to furthering US policy interests elsewhere. This observer points out that [to] many Moslem Arabs Karami is identified as a follower of Nasser. Although it would seem strange outside Arab world, there is validity to argument that if Karami asks for and receives a grant of US aid it will be interpreted in other Arab countries as indication that US is a friend of free Arab nations and that USSR is not sole purveyor to Arab nationalism.

(3) So far as political impact is concerned, a cash grant of US aid made now (and which Karami and company would play up as being without strings attached) will have great effect in Lebanese leadership circles, including particularly Moslems who have been inclined to regard past US gestures in offering aid as designed with politically ulterior motives. As indicated in preceding paragraph, an offer of such US aid made now we think will also have impact politically outside Lebanon.

(4) In my conversations with Chehab and his ministers I have indicated belief that if Lebanon with our immediate assistance can get its economy back on the road there should be no further requirement for aid of an extraordinary nature. Such future assistance as US might subsequently be called upon to offer would then be in the way of technical assistance along lines foreshadowed Icato 232, plus judicious resort to DLF.

Given this analysis of situation, I recommend that we at once make available to Lebanon sum of ten million dollars of grant aid as a one-shot, non-recurring operation. This would not fully meet their own estimate of complete deficit for Lebanese fiscal 1958, which, as indicated Embtel 2404, comes close to 37 million pounds, but it would be generally accepted not only by the experts but by ministers and public opinion as being a grant-in-aid which in effect closes books on recent civil war, places government in a solvent position and moves Lebanon up to the point of a new year starting in January 1959 from which it can move forward under its own momentum. The figure of ten million dollars is in our considered judgment the minimum amount which can achieve these objectives with major credit accruing to the US.

I believe this offer of a grant-in-aid would be generally interpreted throughout Arab world as a corollary of US policy in intervening by military means to assist Lebanon to maintain its integrity and independence. This likewise should have considerable political impact beyond borders of Lebanon. Fact Moslem Karami asked for and accepted such aid would silence usual output of Cairo and Moscow radios.

What we are in effect asking for is a one-shot non-repeating aid operation made for political considerations but with sound long-term economic justification. This will cost ten million dollars and will not recur. After that ICA operation Lebanon will be principally confined to winding up past pipeline business, reallocating and reducing past project commitments and to responding to anticipated requests by GOL for intelligent technical assistance or DLF aid. What we are trying to do in effect is to turn a completely new page in history of our aid for Lebanon and to start a new year in 1959 which is definitely a new year. I trust Department and ICA–W will concur in this recommendation (which has approval of Country Team) and that affirmative instructions will be issued forthwith.6

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/11–2558. Confidential; Priority.

2 Toica 220 from Beirut, November 10, a joint message to State and ICA, indicated that technical discussions with Lebanese officials on the calendar year 1959 budget had begun. (Ibid., 883A.10/11–1058)

3 Toica 224 from Beirut, November 17, also a joint message for State and ICA, reported that Embassy officials had suggested to Finance Ministry representatives that a submission be prepared listing Lebanon’s cash requirements for the 4-month period of November through February as a starting point in considering U.S. aid. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/11–1758)

4 In telegram 2404 from Beirut, November 19, the Embassy reported that Lebanese officials had submitted an estimated Treasury balance sheet which “dashed” prior optimistic hopes on the part of the Embassy that an early agreement could be reached on the question of U.S. budget support. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/11–1958)

5 Icato 232 to Beirut, November 13, a joint ICA–State message, instructed the Embassy to sound out the Lebanese Government on the question of a technical assistance program to determine whether a basis existed for continuing a program within the budget constraints which were necessary. (Ibid.,883A.00–TA/11–1358; included in the microfiche supplement)

6 In telegram 1990 to Beirut, November 28, the Department and ICA concurred in the Embassy’s recommendations, and authorized the offer of $10 million as a “one time grant operation.” (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/11–2558; included in the microfiche supplement)

367. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 367. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, December 2, 1958—6 p.m.

2535. I discussed Deptel 19902 in great detail last night with President Chehab and this morning with Karami. I likewise outlined main points US offer to Foreign Minister Oueini today. During interview with Karami which lasted hour and a half he was accompanied (at my private suggestion) by Raymond Edde, while I had with me acting USOM Director Lippincott. To make certain Karami understood everything that was said, conversation was translated from English into Arabic by Embassy employee Haddad.

Chehab evinced utmost gratification at readiness of US to offer $10, 000,000 as one-time grant operation and concurred that with other elements of US aid program there should be no requirement for any repetition of such a cash grant. He agreed that Lebanon must find sufficient civic and administrative discipline to live within its own resources and to go its own way. I found a similar but more attenuated concurrence in Karami and Edde who said that, although they agreed in principle that Lebanon should meet its own fiscal requirements, they could not say with certainty that GOL would not in future years require some form of external assistance. However, their eyes were clearly on finding means to finance larger budgets and to this I rejoined that until Lebanese imposed same sacrifice on their citizens as did US in respect of income tax I, for one, could not go along with notion that ever increasing budgets would somehow be underwritten by a complacent Uncle Sam.

We found great confusion in mind of Karami as to nature of $12, 000,000 DLF financing authorized Deptel 4057.3 In fact, no one in present Government ever heard of oral presentation made to Malik last April (Embtel 3574).4 When I queried Karami as to his press statement November 19 (Embtel 2406),5 he explained that during Parliamentary debate on grant of emergency powers to Government, he had been pressed to give assurances that these powers would not include authorization to cabinet to contract debts on behalf of Lebanon. It was to this parliamentary restriction that his press conference statement had been addressed. However, he would welcome in principle utilization of DLF financing in private sector provided applications for loans could be processed expeditiously and if rate of interest was not too high. (We have feeling, however, that in a hard currency country like Lebanon there will be less enthusiasm than in soft currency countries for loans to private sector at interest rates of between four and one half to five and one half percent.) It was clear that Prime Minister was apprehensive lest announcement of availability of $12, 000,000 of DLF funds might unleash a clamor from undisciplined applicants which might have unfavorable repercussions for his Government in event many claimants for easy loans would of necessity be turned down. Karami asked if in screening out applications for loans we would object to an informal working group made up of representatives of Lebanese interested Ministries and of USOM. I replied I had no objection as, in fact, I had told Chehab last night I did not wish US to be in a position of being deluged with requests for soft loans which it was not purpose of DLF to finance and would in consequence welcome an indigenous shock absorber between USOM and voracious applicants for easy loan financing.

Karami and Edde fully understood need for cleaning up arrears of pipeline and will appoint experts to consult with USOM on details.

Re final paragraph Deptel 1990, Karami was in full agreement with suggested treatment. He volunteered that he would like to make a statement at his weekly press conference tomorrow. I had anticipated this and had drafted as a talking paper a suggested communiqué which he might wish to issue. Karami thought it would prove a good vehicle for his press conference statement. Text is submitted to Department in Embtel 2534.6 If Department wishes to make changes, please instruct Niact in order that I may pass on our views to Karami before his press conference at 1100 hours tomorrow. Following Karami’s statement to press, we suggest in next few days I hand him check for $10, 000,000 with suitable publicity and that Department or USIA confirm payment, taking into account whatever ad lib statements Karami might make at press conference. I do not anticipate, however, he will stray far from text of suggested communiqué, although he may prefer to delete reference to DLF loans.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/12–258. Confidential; Priority.

2 See footnote 6, supra.

3 Dated April 21. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/4–1158)

4 In telegram 3574 from Beirut, April 26, McClintock reported that he had discussed with Malik the DLF financing authorized in telegram 4057. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/4–2658)

5 Dated November 19. (Ibid., 683A.86B/11–1958)

6 The text of the announcement transmitted in telegram 2534, December 2, indicated that the United States had expressed its readiness to provide substantial aid to Lebanon in the form of a cash grant. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/12–258)

368. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 368. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, December 9, 1958—7 p.m.

2611. From Rountree.2 During my conversations over past two days with Lebanese leaders, including President Chehab and all four Ministers of Karami Cabinet as well as a number of former Foreign Ministers, three main themes have emerged: (1) Relationship of US-Israel-Arab world is still basic stumbling block to improvement of relations between US and Arabs.

(2) Most immediate corollary of foregoing is refugee problem and prevalent misconception in Arab community that US was seeking by some Machiavellian stroke to pressure Arab states into acceptance of Israel on terms favorable to latter by threatening to dump refugees on Arab governments (cf. Embassy telegram 26043 not repeated addressees except USUN).

(3) Nasser is unchallenged popular hero of Arab world and US in recognizing this fact should take active steps to re-establish friendly relations with him.

Although foregoing were dominant themes, it was reassuring to find many responsible Lebanese leaders were fully conscious of overriding threat of USSR and aggressive Communism to safety of the free countries of ME. This was most clearly manifest by President Chehab; significantly alluded to by Prime Minister Karami and was subject of a personal peroration by Foreign Minister Oueini in a private audience he insisted on according Ambassador McClintock and me today. Foreign Minister, with every appearance of complete sincerity, said Russia was ultimate enemy in ME and thus far USSR had succeeded in capitalizing on mistakes made by “US”—in which he referred not only to US and Western world but to Arab states also. Oueini said unless some stop was put to onward march of Communism future of ME would be synonymous with disaster for people who live there. He thought way out included better relations between ourselves and Nasser and, above all, prompt action spurred by US on some settlement of refugee problem, his own somewhat oversimplified solution would be for US to issue a unilateral declaration to effect best remedy for refugee issue would be for refugees to return to their former homes within one year’s time. He said this would be a great psychological shock in this part of the world (as indeed it would be) but that as a matter of fact, by his own estimate, 99 percent of refugees would not opt to return to Palestine. It would then be incumbent on US, in consultation with Israel, to work out financial means for permanent resettlement and rehabilitation of refugees. I replied that this remedy had advantage of simplicity, but that there were many facets of refugee problem, to say nothing of need to choose optimum moment, both with Israel and Arab governments, to push for a truly final settlement of this matter.

It was noteworthy that in all our conversations no Lebanese official made any request for additional US financial aid.

While papers today carried a statement by Karami that, although he had not discussed Eisenhower Doctrine with us, it was to all intents and purposes a dead letter, here again no Minister raised issue of Eisenhower Doctrine. However, following press accounts attributed to Karami, I did take pains to explain to certain Ministers on my own volition unilateral character of Congressional resolution on ME and its implications in respect of foreign policy in this area.

My over-all impression of Lebanese visit is that in a remarkably short space of time Lebanese, under an energetic and streamlined government, are rapidly returning toward a more normal life handicapped only by fact that under directed economies of such important neighboring states as Syria and Iraq their usual lucrative transit trade has not been re-established. In general, in Karami Cabinet and elsewhere, there seems to be a warm regard and respect for US, as well as an appreciation of the fact (an appreciation ranging from grudging acknowledgment to enthusiastic acclaim) that our military intervention here constructively changed course of events in ME last summer and prevented a chain reaction which would have become a debacle.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.15–RO/12–958. Secret. Repeated to Amman, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, and USUN.

2 Rountree was in Lebanon December 8–9 during a trip to Middle Eastern posts. Memoranda of Rountree’s conversations on December 9 with Chehab, Karame, Oueini, Edde, and Gemayel are ibid.

3 Dated December 9. (Ibid., 320.511/12–958)

369. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 369. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, December 24, 1958—10:32 a.m.

2245. Embtel 2535.2 Evident lack GOL interest together with Karami recent parliamentary assurance suggest US need not continue earmarking any specific amount DLF funds for use by GOL. World wide requirements greatly in excess current Fund availabilities, thus Fund as matter great urgency must free up money for which no immediate needs exist. All funds will be exhausted January 31 and unless part of GOL earmark released several urgent projects will go by board. Expect situation may ease when new appropriations obtained early next year.

Unless Embassy objects suggest that $4 million of present earmarked funds be held for possible financing the two current applications totaling $2.137 million from private Lebanese business users now on hand being studied or for applications which might be sent in soon and the remaining $8 million released for use elsewhere. Future applications beyond the $4 million would be processed on “funds available” basis in accordance with general practice in handling applications received from other countries.

If you agree with foregoing suggest Karami be informed.3

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/12–258. Confidential. Drafted by J.F. Shaw in NEA/NE/E and cleared in NE by Hamilton and Meyer and in DLF by H. Perry.

2 Document 367.

3 The Embassy responded, in telegram 2805 from Beirut, December 31, that it had not meant to convey the impression that the Lebanese Government was not interested in DLF support. On the contrary, the Embassy stated that there was a “bona fide requirement” in Lebanon for DLF financing which could absorb even more than the $12 million which had been allocated for Lebanon. (Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/12–3158) On January 7, however, the Department indicated, in telegram 2346 to Beirut, that the DLF staff planned to recommend to the Board of Directors a reduction of $8 million in the DLF funds which had been allocated for Lebanon. (Ibid.) Both telegrams are included in the microfiche supplement.

370. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 370. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut March 24, 1959—2 p.m.

3880. During lengthy interview with President Chehab this morning he enlarged on thesis set out Embtel 38122 regarding present position of Nasser and his relationships with Western world and USSR.

President said he thought psychological moment would presently appear when West could do a great deal in its own interest in improving relationships with Arab world by some gesture of support for Nasser. Chehab thought that if, when as he seemed to expect UAR–Iraq relationships quieted down, some sign of support for Nasser and Arab world in general could be coming from West, this would serve to consolidate anti-Communist position which Nasser has taken. Whether we like it or not Nasser was acknowledged leader of Arab world but as a dictator he could do irresponsible things if pushed too far. In consequence a policy of “seeing him on his knees,” which seemed to motivate Turks, Israelis and possibly British, could only provoke him to further excess. At same time, said Chehab, Russian bear was an animal “in the face of which one can spit and he will wipe it off and forget the episode provided it is to his interest.” He cautioned that it was by no means impossible for USSR to reach rapid accommodation with Nasser if that suited Soviet policy.

Chehab did not specify what sort of gesture from West would be most suitable at a psychological moment yet to be realized but he did say it should be something which would have impact throughout Arab world at same time “not be too much.” At this juncture he hastily added, “we should not put Nasser on a pedestal; after all I am a Lebanese”.

Asked as to rumors of possible mediation between Iraq and UAR by Lebanon, President said three of more nearly neutral countries of Arab League had been mentioned in this connection. In addition to Lebanon there was the Sudan, which had originally broached idea, and Morocco—however, President said, there could be no successful mediation unless both parties were amenable thereto; and thus far there had been no indication that Iraq would welcome outside intervention even from most impartial of Arab League members.

Comment: I do not know what sort of gesture from West and particularly from U.S., which Chehab indicated should be power to lead free world in new approach toward Nasser, would be most effective but would leave this problem to judgment of my colleagues in Cairo, Damascus and Baghdad. I do feel however that Chehab speaks with eminent common sense and that his analysis of present situation in Arab world is sound one.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 661.87/3–2459. Secret. Repeated to Ankara, Cairo, Damascus, London, Paris, Amman, Baghdad, Jidda, and Tel Aviv.

2 Telegram 3812 from Beirut, March 19, commented on President Chehab’s attitude concerning Nasser and Nasser’s difficulties with Khrushchev and Kassem. Chehab felt that the West would make a mistake to think that Nasser’s difficulties would make him more amenable to Western influence. (Ibid., 661.86B/3–1959)

371. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon 371. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Lebanon1

Washington, July 20, 1959—10:32 a.m.

175. Verbatim text. Department plans issue following press release 10:00 a.m. Friday, July 24: “The United States Development Loan Fund today announced basic approval and commitment of funds for a $5, 000,000 loan to the Banque de Credit Agricole, Industriel et Foncier (BCAIF), a private Lebanese development bank with 40 percent government participation located at Beirut, Lebanon. Details of the loan agreement are to be negotiated.

The funds made available by the DLF will be re-lent by BCAIF to help develop new industrial establishments in Lebanon as well as to participation of private capital in industrial development activities.

Established in 1954, the BCAIF so far has assisted only in the modernization and expansion of existing agricultural, real-estate, and industrial enterprises. Commercial credit is about the only form available in Beirut, and the establishment of new industries has been hampered for want of long-term credit. Proceeds of the DLF loan will be used only for longer-term loans for the industrial department of BCAIF’s operations.

Industrialization is basically important to Lebanon, an area half the size of New Jersey, with only 25 percent of its land arable and a rapidly increasingly population which now totals 1, 500,000. At present there are 1, 800 industrial establishments employing 5 or more persons. These establishments hire a total of 40, 000 employees.”

Dillon

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/7–2059. Official Use Only. Drafted by E.B. Goldmann in NEA/P. Cleared in NE/P by Harold Sims and in P by Kretzmann.

372. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, September 18, 1959, 2 p.m. 372. Memorandum of a Conversation, New York, September 18, 1959, 2 p.m.1

New York, September 18, 1959, 2 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

US The Secretary

Mr. Wilcox

Mr. Armour

Lebanon Prime Minister Rachid Karami

Ambassador Joseph Abou Khater

SUBJECT

U.S. Aid Programs for Lebanon

Prime Minister Karami and Ambassador Abou Khater called on the Secretary at their request for a preliminary exchange of views prior to their visit to Washington.2

Karami was primarily concerned with the drop in U.S. economic aid following the change in government in Lebanon.3 He said the people of the Middle East believe in the same principles as the Western world. They could never espouse Communism because this is totally contrary to their religious beliefs. However he claimed the U.S. economic policy in this area was geared to maintaining friendly governments in power and once this was achieved the U.S. stopped economic aid.

Because of this fact and because the U.S. was still linked to the U.K. in the minds of the people in the Middle East, most of the national revolts which had taken place in the Middle East had necessarily been forced to join with Communist elements to achieve success, although they would have preferred to achieve their goals without their help and with the tacit support of the U.S. The Baghdad Pact and the Eisenhower Doctrine had been premature and a further element in forcing nationalists in such countries as Iraq and the UAR from adopting tactics they would not necessarily have preferred to adopt.

Karami agreed with the Secretary’s answer that very often the Communists take advantage of proper nationalist aspirations for their own ends and we ourselves had been deluded by what had originally appeared as an agrarian revolt in China but which had proved to be a ruthless Communist coup. However Karami said that public opinion in the area was still convinced that U.S. military and economic aid was geared to U.S. political interests in the Middle East. He did admit that since Suez there had been a slight change in their attitude and we were not quite as linked with the U.K. as we had been in the past.

The Secretary concluded by saying that the U.S. only attached certain conditions to military aid but never to economic aid and that economic aid had consistently been used for the benefit of improving economic conditions in these countries and not for political purposes. While it was true that economic aid to Lebanon had diminished, this was due to certain conditions beyond our control and based on limitations imposed by existing aid legislation. We had confidence in the present Lebanese Government and we have never used, nor do we intend to use, economic aid for political purposes.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 64 D 560, CF 1476. Confidential. Drafted by N. Armour. The source text indicates that the conversation took place in the Secretary’s suite at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.

2 Karame came to New York as head of the Lebanese Delegation and served as President Pro Tern of the General Assembly in place of Charles Malik at the opening session on September 16. He visited Washington at his request September 21–22 to meet with President Eisenhower.

3 Karame became Prime Minister and head of a four-man cabinet serving under President Chehab on October 15, 1958.

373. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, September 21, 1959 373. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, September 21, 19591

Washington, September 21, 1959

SUBJECT

Courtesy Call by Lebanese Prime Minister Karame on The President

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Mr. Robert Murphy

Mr. Parker T. Hart, NEA

Lt. Col. Walters, Interpreter

Prime Minister Rashid Karame

Ambassador N. Dimechkié

What had been expected to be a brief courtesy call by Prime Minister Karame on the President developed into a lively but very friendly exchange of views lasting one hour and five minutes covering matters of primary concern to both the Arab world and the United States.

After expressing his appreciation for Prime Minister Karame’s call and his happiness in having this opportunity to meet him, the President inquired as to the length of time the Prime Minister would remain in the United States. Mr. Karame replied that he had expected to be here until the end of September, indicating his intention to visit Detroit and to spend some time at the United Nations General Assembly. The President inquired whether Lebanon had particular problems to raise at the present General Assembly, commenting that the United States for its part would be glad to see progress on the problem of the Arab refugees and that he personally had very much in mind the question of Algeria, on which General DeGaulle had just taken a most important step. (The President later stated that he had not meant to imply that General DeGaulle’s proposals should be discussed in the UNGA.) Prime Minister Karame asked to respond in Arabic, using Ambassador Dimechkié as interpreter. He began by extensive comments on the values held in common by the Arabs and the West and the great confidence which the Arab peoples felt for President Eisenhower.

The subsequent conversation is recorded by subject headings rather than by strict chronology.

Arab Nationalism and Communism. Emphasizing the values held in common between America and the Arab world, the Prime Minister urged that America avoid mistaking true Arab Nationalism from the false Nationalism voiced by Communists. For example, Nasser, while fighting Imperialism, was mistakenly charged by the West as a Communist, or a follower of Communism. We now see that when his main battle against Imperialism had finished, Nasser did not hesitate to turn against the Communists, and to combat them as fiercely as he had the Imperialists, Prime Minister Karame regretted that Western antagonism toward Nasser befogged Western appreciation of Nasser’s position today. He cited the Iraqi situation as prime evidence. He could not understand why the United Kingdom continued to consider Nasser a greater threat than the Communists in Iraq.

Palestine Arab Refugees. The President referred to his concern that the situation of the Arab refugees, which he characterized as an “international disgrace”, be tackled more effectively, and noted that the United States had been paying 70 per cent of the bills of UNRWA. He felt that continuation of this situation was not satisfactory and did nothing to advance a solution. Prime Minister Karame responded that the 1947 Resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly defined the rights of the refugees but had not been carried out. The avenue to a solution lay in pressuring the Israelis to accept these Resolutions, not in forfeiting the rights of the refugees. The Palestine Conciliation Commission had been set up to care for the property rights of the refugees and should be permitted to operate within Israel, collect the money due the refugees thus relieving them from the indignity of taking charity.

On the Palestine situation in general, the President commented that he had suspected in 1956 that the Arabs believed the United States approached the Palestine problem only from the standpoint of national elections in the United States, and the influence which proponents of Israel might exert in those elections. He had therefore made special efforts by a series of actions to disabuse everyone thoroughly of this concept. Logically, as a result of such efforts, he, President Eisenhower, should have been defeated in the 1956 elections. From a purely material point of view the United States had much more to gain by close association with the Arabs than with Israelis. Arab territory was vast while Israel’s was small; the Arabs had tremendous oil reserves which the West badly needed, while Israel had none. Nevertheless, he felt that the Arabs would agree that we should deal with this question on the basis of principle. He would be happy if some steps could be taken to relieve the tension. Several measures had been proposed in the past, among others he had sent Eric Johnston to the area to obtain an Arab-Israel solution to the distribution of Jordan Waters. Technical agreement had been reached but political obstacles vitiated the solution. Both sides are intransigent as a result of deep emotional feelings which he felt he well understood. However, Israel was now a historic fact, created well before President Eisenhower had assumed office. It should be accepted as such. He certainly did not favor Israel over other countries, neither did he wish to destroy it. Perhaps the creation of any state on the basis of religion alone was a mistake. We all live under one God. Yet religious antagonisms make us overlook the main threat today which is the anti-religious, atheistic force of Communism. As between Zionism and Communism, the greater threat to the Arab world was surely Communism. Ambassador Dimechkié laughingly responded that he wished the President would not force the Arabs to choose between these two antagonists, as they would more likely pick the Zionists as the deadlier enemy. The President disagreed and in one of his last comments to Prime Minister Karame at the end of the interview, he urged him again not to lose sight of the fact that the main enemy to Arabs, as to the rest of the Western world, was International Communism.

Prime Minister Karame responded that ultimately the Palestine problem would somehow have to be solved. While he agreed with the President’s remark that no ready solution was in sight, some day a solution would be found as it had been found for Cyprus. In the end, the best thing for the United States would be to remain neutral in this question. Some day the Arabs and the Israelis would have to sit down together and work it out between them.

Algeria. Responding to the President’s statement that he was very well impressed by DeGaulle’s proposals, Prime Minister Karame said he wished to speak to President Eisenhower as a soldier. As such he could understand that the Algerians who had fought for five years against great odds for their independence and were willing to continue fighting for it must examine with great care any proposals from the other side, even those which for the first time spoke of independence. The question was how the Algerian people were to express themselves on the question of independence. He urged that the United States not take a formal stand on the DeGaulle proposals until they had been fully examined by the Arabs. Such examination was now under way and it would facilitate matters and would most likely lead toward a settlement if public positions were not frozen in advance. The President indicated that he had no intention of making a public statement.

Arab Self Help. At one point, the President indicated that in 1958 he had expressed a readiness to assist the Arabs in any joint effort they might devise to improve their economic lot and their stability. That was the American way: To give help to those who vigorously help themselves. He would never be interested in a country which did not bend its whole heart and soul toward improving its own lot. He would like to inquire what the Arab reaction was today to these 1958 proposals that they pool their efforts toward a common goal. Prime Minister Karame replied that steps were being taken, such as the Arab Bank and the Joint Fund and there had been some talk of inter-Arab roadways; but progress on joint projects had been very slow. The most logical projects to Arabs were those within the borders of the independent Arab states and which redounded to the immediate benefit of the individual Arab communities, for example, the Aswan Dam and the Litani projects. However, joint undertakings would come with time.

American Landings in Lebanon in 1958. The President referred to our landings in Lebanon at the request of its elected government as an example of United States willingness to assist small nations preserve their integrity in the face of outside intervention. The Prime Minister responded: “It would have been better for you just to have sent us Mr. Murphy”. (laughter)

In closing the interview, President Eisenhower indicated that the press was anxious to take pictures of Prime Minister Karame and himself. If the Prime Minister had no objection he would invite the photographers in. Prime Minister Karame indicated that he would be honored, and some 20 photographers were admitted.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Hart.

374. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1959 374. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, September 22, 19591

Washington, September 22, 1959

SUBJECT

United States Assistance to Lebanon

PARTICIPANTS

Lebanese His Excellency Rashid Karame, Prime Minister of Lebanon

His Excellency Nadim Dimechkie, Lebanese Ambassador

Mr. Simon Boulos, Alternate Member Lebanese Delegation to UNGA

United States M—Robert Murphy

NEA—G. Lewis Jones

NE/E—George Bennsky

After the usual courtesies and some minutes of general conversation, Prime Minister Karame set forth his case for further United States assistance to Lebanon. He said he wanted to bring to Mr. Murphy’s attention the fact that the people of Lebanon were very sensitive to the attitude of America toward them and their problems. Although it was true that Lebanon’s economy had recovered considerably from last year’s civil disturbances, all was not well in the country. Many villages did not have adequate water supplies, health centers, electricity, access roads, etc. His Government was doing what it could to develop Lebanon, but its resources were limited. He had thought that PL 480 might be the route by which the United States could assist. However, there were other ways in which the United States might help. He mentioned the United States grant aid made available to his Government just after its formation and suggested that we might continue such assistance. During his presentation, the Prime Minister also noted (1) the recent transit payments agreement with the IPC and the upcoming negotiations with TAPLINE in terms of new resources for his Government’s development program; and (2) President Eisenhower’s statements regarding the world-wide need for economic development.

Ambassador Dimechkie pointed up the President’s contingency fund as a possible source for grant assistance to Lebanon. He also took the position that Title II PL 480 aid could be justified on the grounds that Lebanon was faced with a balance of payments crisis. To justify this he cited the large trade gap. (This subject was not pursued to the point where it would have become clear that income for invisibles and capital account were more than balancing the trade deficit, thus resulting in a relatively sound foreign exchange position.)

Mr. Murphy said that, given the Congressional cuts in the foreign aid program and world-wide demands on these funds, there was no chance of any grant economic aid being available for Lebanon this fiscal year. As for PL 480 assistance, Lebanon’s economic and financial situation made it very difficult to justify a program under the legislation and regulations governing either Title I or II.

Note: After the conversation was completed, Mr. Boulos approached Mr. Jones pointing out that this was the Prime Minister’s first visit to the Untied States, and it was important politically that he not go home empty-handed. The amount of United States assistance was less important than the fact that he obtained something. Any gesture by the United States would be considered by the Prime Minister as symbolic of our good will towards him and his Government. Mr. Jones replied that we might be able to consider something along these lines if Mr. Boulos and the Prime Minister could come up with a specific case which met United States legal requirements. Mr. Murphy, after being apprised of this talk by Mr. Jones, agreed that if a specific case could be developed it might be well to consider such a gesture.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 411.83A41/9–2259. Confidential. Drafted on September 25 by Bennsky and approved as accurate on October 1 by Murphy.

375. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 375. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, November 3, 1959—6 p.m.

1531. Department pass ICA/Washington. Embtels 14702 and 1494.3 I have now completed my calls on members of new Karame cabinet4 and am able to make an interim report on manner in which GOL will probably approach issue of further US aid.

Most vociferous of the Ministers and at same time most generalized in his thinking was Foreign Minister Oueini, who made a strong plea for continued technical assistance, for PL 480 wheat, and for certain unspecified items of grant aid which would indirectly bear on GOL projects for increasing productivity and raising standard of living. However, Haj Hussein has, through illness, been largely out of touch with other members of cabinet, and among his colleagues I found a much more realistic and restrained evaluation of future possibilities in field of US assistance. No one, including President, Prime Minister, Minister of Public Works, Minister of National Economy and Minister of Agriculture seemed to expect very much, although they had an almost pathetic and certainly to me alarming assumption that I could somehow manage to produce a few more white rabbits out of the shrinking Washington hat. In general, however, I found a philosophical acceptance of fact there will be no grant aid from US except possibly in realm of military hardware; and a cautious hope that through PL 480 Lebanon’s actual and very serious deficit in wheat could partially be met while at same time funds from sale of PL 480 wheat could be put to work in depressed sectors of population and economy. Ministers with technical departments, e.g., Public Works, Agriculture and Economic Affairs, likewise expressed interest in technical assistance as for example in engineers from Bureau of Public Roads, experts in agriculture, and aid in developing a sensible program for tourism.

In consequence, I think we are off to a fairly good start, and that there will be no major disappointment either in public opinion or in more informed government circles if US aid in future to Lebanon is modest in proportion and eclectic in application. However, I have strong recommendations to offer on four main points: (1) Once painstaking and objective study of wheat problem has been made by Minister of Agriculture, USOM/L and Embassy economic section, every effort be made to provide some form of PL 480 wheat assistance. Our concrete specifications under this head should be forthcoming next week, if necessary studies can be completed in time.

(2) Military hardware program, specifics of which were submitted under cover my letter5 October 26 to Deputy Assistant Secretary Hart be speedily implemented by DOD.

(3) If as I hope Lebanese Government initiates a campaign for reducing trade barriers in Arab World (and I should not be surprised after my conversation this morning with Minister of Economic Affairs Takla that President Chehab himself may make a statement along these lines November 22), that from a very high quarter in U.S. Government there be sympathetic support for such a Lebanese initiative. I have recalled to various Ministers that President Eisenhower in his talk with Karame September 216 adverted to his speech of August 13, 1958,7 and had inquired what was Arab reaction to these proposals that they pool their efforts toward a common goal. On November 1 in a local TV broadcast, but without referring to Eisenhower–Karame conversation, in response to a question as to what I thought as to steps trending toward Arab unity, I cited President Eisenhower’s 6-point program of 19587 and expressed surprise that apparently no Arab government had responded to this generous initiative. If now, as I hope, Chehab does say something about need of greater economic cooperation among Arab governments, it would seem appropriate for perhaps White House or Secretary of State to say that we, too, feel as a matter of policy (e.g., Dillon’s recent speech at GATT) that measures toward reducing trade and transit barriers by Arab governments are in accord, not only with U.S. views, but are a reflection of a major world trend toward reduction of trade barriers.

(4) Coming now literally to “Point Four,” as indicated in my talks with ministers they are anxious that our Point Four operation for providing technical services and expertise be continued. I would say that with present government, especially with such technically qualified Ministers as those now in Agriculture, Education and Economic Affairs, we are in fortunate position of being able to control such requests as may be made with a view to optimum use of such skills and advice as USOM/L with ICA/Washington support can offer. Accordingly, I should like to have authorization to respond sympathetically to such requests for technical aid as may be forthcoming.

Of course we have made no commitments locally with respect to any of four foregoing recommendations, but I feel that such a program, if met affirmatively from Washington, would go far to put our aid relationships with Lebanon on a modest but sound basis. Certainly we have come a long way from Malik’s aerial promises of “unlimited, unconditional U.S. aid.”

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 883A.00–TA/11–359. Confidential.

2 In telegram 1470 from Beirut, October 28, McClintock reported that he had forestalled an attempt to bring up the question of U.S. aid levels by raising, instead, the issue of the need to work to liberate trade. (Ibid., 483A.86/10–2859)

3 In telegram 1494 from Beirut, October 30, McClintock reported on a meeting with Prime Minister Karame in which Karame expressed gratitude for the sympathetic hearing which had been given to the case he made with officials in Washington on the need for continuing U.S. aid for Lebanon. He was particularly concerned about the situation created by the wheat crop failure in Lebanon and asked McClintock to consult with the Minister of Agriculture. (Ibid., 883A.49/10–3059)

4 A new Lebanese cabinet was appointed on October 8. Karame remained Prime Minister and the cabinet was expanded from four to eight members.

5 Not found.

6 See Document 373.

7 See Document 269.

376. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 376. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, March 18, 1960—4 p.m.

2947. Department pass Defense. This morning President Chehab made a direct personal appeal for affirmative action on Lebanon’s long-standing request for a modest amount of military aid.

Country team telegrams are too numerous to cite but briefly a seven-man survey team from US Army European Command arrived here May 8 last year and completed its survey June 17, estimating what Lebanese Army actually needed for spare parts, ammunition and vehicles which ARMA valued at $2, 300,000. Subsequently country team refined this figure to a recommendation that hardware and an item of training for Lebanese officers in European Theater of US be furnished in a total amount of $1, 440,000. This figure was later reduced by country team to an ultimate bedrock request for $900, 000 including training.

Thus, for not quite a year Lebanese Army and President Chehab have been hoping that as result of ordnance team survey and country team recommendations some modest military assistance for Lebanon would win approval in a Presidential determination. Of course we have not divulged any figures to Lebanese.

This morning President Chehab, in discussing political situation which country confronts when nation-wide parliamentary elections are held in May, said “In such a country as this with so many different factions and basic problem of Moslem-Christian differences, Army is real ultimate guarantor of independence of this republic.”

While President did not wish speeding of munitions, spare parts and vehicles to assist Lebanese Army in maintaining internal security for elections, he did make valid point that morale of armed forces would be very much improved if they knew there were some aid forthcoming from US.

President said that last week he had once more requested Chief of Staff to inquire as to possibility of securing US radar (cf. Embtels 2661 and 2721). He said he would welcome a training mission to assist Lebanese in learning to operate this equipment as well as training of younger officers in US.

President emphasized defensive character not only of radar installations but of whole philosophy of his army. As reported in a separate telegram, he once more repeated what he had told me two weeks ago that, in event of an Arab-Israeli war, Lebanon would not participate.

Service attachés and country team concur in this message. With all respect, but with measured insistence, we request a favorable Presidential determination.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/3–1860. Confidential; Priority.

377. Special National Intelligence Estimate 377. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, May 10, 1960.

SNIE 36.4–60

THE OUTLOOK FOR LEBANON

The Problem

To estimate the political outlook in Lebanon, particularly the implications of the prospective elections.

The Estimate

1. It will soon be two years since virtual civil war, threatening the integrity of Lebanon, led to the Lebanese request for US military intervention. The period since the end of Chamoun’s administration has been relatively tranquil. Under President Chehab and Prime Minister Karami, Lebanese foreign policy has taken a middle direction, avoiding both the outspokenly pro-West course followed by Chamoun, and the strong pro-UAR tendencies exhibited by Chamoun’s more ardent opponents at the time of the 1958 troubles. In general, we consider that the present regime’s orientation reflects the preference of most Lebanese. There is little desire for a recurrence of the violent outbreaks of 1958, and most factions, since the restoration of order, have accepted a kind of political truce under a cabinet of moderates who have largely avoided provocative issues.

2. This tone has been set by President Chehab, former commander of the armed forces. Chehab has so far employed a combination of compromise and firmness in his determination to avoid a repetition of the 1958 strife. He has shown himself willing to use force against occasional threats to public security, and has successfully employed pressure against both Christian and Moslem political factions when he considered it necessary. As a Christian, he favors the system of confessional balance2 in the Lebanese Government. However, he is unsympathetic to Chamoun, whom he regards as a dangerous extremist. He clearly hopes to prevent a resurgence of Chamoun’s political power, in part by bringing about a larger and more balanced representation in parliament of the various Lebanese factions than that resulting from the 1957 elections, which Chamoun rigged. Prime Minister Karami, a leader of the pro-UAR Moslem faction in 1958, has gone along with Chehab’s policies, and substantial cooperation between them is likely to continue. Karami has removed many Chamoun sympathizers from the government—including the gendarmérie and police—but he has avoided replacing them with Moslem extremists. He, like Chehab, has sought to avoid identification with any one Arab regional faction.

3. The basic internal rivalries between Lebanese political forces remain, of course, essentially unchanged. The central issue of Moslem-Druze-Christian tensions is inevitably coming to the fore with the approach of elections, planned for this June. Chamoun, in particular, feels that he and his followers are threatened, and that a combination of outside pressures from the UAR, together with Chehab’s maneuverings, will destroy his political power. There is considerable apprehension, not only among Christians, that the next parliament will be dominated by Moslem extremists bent on destroying the delicate balance of the confessional system. Many Christian politicians fear that UAR influence and money, chiefly originating in Syria, will be used to bring this about, with the aim of controlling Lebanon if not actually absorbing it. They insist that strong Western support is needed to enable their forces to rally and to counter the trend. Many Moslem and Druze elements, on the other hand, take Western support of the Christians for granted and seek UAR assistance to counter it.

4. While there is already evidence of UAR interference in pre-election maneuvering, we doubt that the UAR Government is intent on a massive campaign of intervention or that Nasser presently entertains serious ambitions of absorbing Lebanon or establishing UAR hegemony there. Nasser clearly wants a Lebanese government sympathetic to the UAR and the broad aims of Pan-Arab nationalism, and is prepared to contribute money and influence to this end. He almost certainly believes that the Western Powers will provide support for pro-West Lebanese factions. If he came to believe that outside forces were attempting to foster a Lebanese government which would follow the strongly anti-Nasser policies Chamoun pursued, UAR counterefforts would be stepped up strongly. On the whole, however, we think it likely that Nasser’s actions will stop well short of the kind of blatant interference which characterized UAR activities against Chamoun two years ago. Syrian Region Interior Minister Sarraj may try to interfere on a scale and by means not sanctioned by Nasser, but we believe that Nasser can probably control Sarraj’s activity.

5. We base this estimate on the belief that Nasser himself is fully alive to the unique conditions governing Lebanese affairs. Lebanese policies under Chehab and Karami have been essentially satisfactory to Nasser. Nasser is aware of Western interest in Lebanon’s continued independence and is not desirous of adding to his troubles with the Western Powers—at least with the US—at a time when he is heavily engaged with his own problems. He probably believes that the Western Powers under certain circumstances would again intervene in Lebanon. Moreover, he has been impressed with the difficulties of governing Syria, and is aware that Lebanon’s peculiar domestic institutions and international position would present even thornier problems if he tried to take them on.

6. Nor do we believe that any substantial Lebanese faction seriously wants the state to be joined with or subservient to the UAR. Certainly President Chehab and Prime Minister Karami have shown little of the extreme pro-UAR sentiments which some of Karami’s fellow-dissidents displayed when they were in arms against Chamoun two years ago. The moderate Moslem factions, which were prompted to turn to the UAR as the only available support against Chamoun in 1957 and 1958, now feel reasonably secure under Chehab and Karami. Having seriously weakened Chamoun and strengthened the Moslem position, Karami and his sympathizers give every indication of wanting to consolidate these gains, but to do so far short of following the Syrian politicians into dependence on Nasser.

7. They will find support in this course from Arab leaders other than Nasser. King Saud, once a heavy financial contributor to various Lebanese political factions, no longer has the funds for such purposes. However, such influence as he and his family retain will be exerted against the spread of Nasser’s influence. The Iraqis, Jordanians, Iranians, and Turks will also back candidates opposed to Nasser. On the whole, these attempts are not likely materially to affect the outcome of the elections.

8. Neither the UK nor France is likely to be as active as in the past. Both will probably attempt to hold pro-UAR influences to a minimum, through covert support of certain Christian and moderate Moslem elements, but they will probably avoid, as unfeasible, attempts to bring about the kind of clear pro-Western orientation which British and French influence fostered in previous Lebanese governments.

9. As the elections approach and tensions mount, interested outside powers are likely to become more deeply involved than they may now plan. Nasser will be under pressure from pro-UAR elements for greater support, and he will find it difficult to reject these demands even if he were so inclined. The Western Powers will encounter growing importunities from pro-West elements to take more vigorous action.

10. In any case, the elections will be hard fought, with considerable risks of serious clashes. On the whole, we believe that Chehab’s control of the security forces is strong enough to enable him to cope with the kind of localized armed clashes which are a normal feature of Lebanese elections. This is particularly true since the elections will be held on four successive Sundays in different parts of the country, thus enabling the security forces to be moved around. A more serious danger is that disorders might become widespread. Further incidents such as the May bombings in Beirut, for example, unless decisively dealt with by Chehab, might cause both Christians and Moslems to drop their present internal differences and close ranks against each other.3 Such a development would divide government and country alike and place critical strains on the unity and discipline of the security forces. As a last resort the government might feel compelled to postpone the elections, but this now appears unlikely.

11. The elections are likely to result in a parliament more accommodating to Nasser and his policies than the recent one. In an effort to bring all political factions into the new parliament and discourage extra-parliamentary maneuvering by disgruntled “outs,” 33 new seats are to be added to the parliament, now composed of 66 members. In accordance with custom, confessional representation is to remain in about the same proportion. However, most of the new seats will probably be won by politicians unsympathetic to Chamoun. Finally, many present pro-Chamoun deputies will probably encounter much stiffer opposition in their own districts.

12. We do not, however, believe that extremist Moslems are likely to gain sufficient strength in parliament to attempt drastic changes in Lebanon’s present middle of the road foreign policy or to upset the present confessional balance. Any such effort would be opposed not only by the Christians, but also by many moderate Sunnis, most Shias, and the Druzes. An additional measure of protection is afforded the Christians by virtue of the fact that President Chehab’s term of office has four more years to run. Chehab will probably attempt to prevent any Moslem extremism in parliament.

13. Long-term trends in Lebanon clearly favor some increase in Moslem influence and greater identification with Arab nationalism in general. Outspoken pro-Westernism of the Chamoun brand is highly unlikely to be adopted again, and no foreseeable Lebanese government would have much chance of surviving if it tried to restore that orientation. Nonetheless, it remains unlikely that Moslem influence will lead, even in the longer run, to unification of Lebanon with the UAR or the effective suppression of pro-West or Christian elements. For the foreseeable future most Lebanese, Christian and non-Christians alike, would have too much to lose by such a development.

1 Source: Department of State, INR Files. Secret. A covering note indicated that this special estimate, submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, was prepared by CIA, and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. All members of the United States Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate on May 10, with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and the FBI who abstained on the grounds that the topic was outside their jurisdiction.

2 The complex system by which the various Lebanese religious groups are apportioned representation in the government. [Footnote in the source text.]

3 The Christian-Moslem rivalry in Lebanon is complicated by the sectarian and factional differences within each community. The Sunni-Shia split tends to inhibit effective Moslem unity, while the Christian camp is divided into various sects, with Maronites in the majority, followed by Greek Orthodox and various others. The Druzes constitute a distinct but influential third element. Normally, these internal differences equal or even overshadow the simple distinction between Christians and Moslems. [Footnote in the source text.]

378. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 378. Telegram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, June 20, 1960—4 p.m.

3682. Department pass Defense. Paris pass CINCEUR, MAD. Deptel 4145.2 As suggested reference telegram I called on President Chehab this morning (accompanied by US Army Colonel Stines) to inform him of signature presidential determination for grant military assistance to Lebanon. In course of following discussion I made to him various individual points outlined reference telegram.

President Chehab expressed his great gratification at this development. His first inquiry was whether grant would include the radar equipment needed to forestall Syrian pressure on Lebanese armed forces to close gap in present Lebanese surveillance radar set-up against high flying Israeli reconnaissance planes. (I received impression from him Syrian pressure on this matter is continuing.) I assured him grant included the radar equipment recommended by our country team following his conversations on subject with Ambassador McClintock several months ago. (Embtel 2721, March 1)3 President also inquired as to total amount involved in grant. I said we had not received word as to precise figure but had impression it came to something just over a million dollars. Acting as pleased as child with new toy he asked number of other questions about technical specifications of equipment and breakdown by categories, on which Colonel Stines was able provide detailed information.

President was philosophical over my point that this was one-time grant considered sufficient by US to bring Lebanese armed forces up to satisfactory level logistically for internal security purposes and that henceforth GOL should look to 1953 Reimbursable Aid Agreement for any further military assistance. President said he was particularly gratified over present grant because it would enable GOL to free funds which might otherwise be budgeted for military requirements for much-needed social development projects.

Creel

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/6–2060. Secret.

2 In telegram 4145 to Beirut, June 10, the Department indicated that a Presidential Determination had been signed that day for grant military assistance to Lebanon covering spare parts, training, ammunition, and radar. (Ibid., 783A.5–MSP/6–1560; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 In telegram 2721 from Beirut, McClintock reported on a conversation with Chehab concerning military assistance, and recommended the provision of the radar equipment which Chehab felt was essential. (Department of State, Central Files, 684A.86B/3–160)

379. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, New York, September 22, 1960, 4:15 p.m. 379. Memorandum of a Conference With the President, New York, September 22, 1960, 4:15 p.m.1

New York, September 22, 1960, 4:15 p.m.

OTHERS PRESENT

Prime Minister Salaam2

UN Ambassador Hakim

Ambassador Dimechkie

Foreign Secretary General Amoun

Secretary Herter

Assistant Secretary Jones

Colonel Eisenhower

During the course of amenities, the Prime Minister praised the President’s UN speech.3 The President said one of his main objectives had been to give assurance of the peaceful intentions of the U.S. He referred to the dispatch of U.S. troops to Lebanon in 1958 as a dramatic example of our desires for peace and hoped that things had gone well in Lebanon since then.

The Prime Minister said things had indeed developed well in Lebanon. General elections had been held and foreign elements of the Lebanese political body have been fused satisfactorily into the government. Lebanon still has many refugees from Palestine who are desirous of returning to their homeland. That, plus the struggle of the Arabs in Algeria, constitutes the main sore point for the Arabs.

The President expressed regret over the condition of Arab refugees. He said our people had been reluctant to press the refugee problem because it is difficult to see prospects for real rapid improvement. The Prime Minister said they favor dealing with this problem through the UN. He pointed out that some UN resolutions have not yet been implemented. He said the refugee elements become more explosive every day as they grow in numbers of people and in strength of arms.

The President said he is encouraging all nations with refugees to build their industries proportionately. He referred to the situation in Japan, which, with 95 million people, possesses so little arable ground (less than California) that she must be industrialized. The Prime Minister said that Lebanon was industrializing as fast as possible. In answer to the President’s question, he said the refugees remain in their camps because they refuse to give up hope of returning to Palestine. The Lebanese Ambassador said that many refugees still retain the keys to their old homes.

The Prime Minister then referred to Algeria. He referred to the President’s September 22nd speech advocating self-determination of peoples. He said the Arabs interpret this reference as advocating freedom for Algeria. The President said the U.S. has always stood for self-determination for peoples, back to the days of President Wilson. The difficulty in Algeria is the fact of the French-European settlers. He said he thinks De Gaulle has tried hard to bring about a peaceful solution to that problem, and that we could support De Gaulle’s position as outlined in the speech of September 1959. The Prime Minister said that De Gaulle is supplying words and not actions. Furthermore, in his use of the word “pacification,” the connotation is anything but pacific.

The President admitted that De Gaulle is not a simple man. The President had presumed that De Gaulle wanted elections in Algeria soon, but De Gaulle had pointed out the difficulty of holding elections while fighting is going on. When the Prime Minister referred to the UN, the President admitted De Gaulle’s dislike of that body. The Prime Minister said that the main hope of the UN is the President’s support.

The President said that when he was in Paris last year De Gaulle had offered freedom to the French Community. De Gaulle had told him, however, that the difficulty in Algeria is the fact that they possess no recognized spokesman. An Arab woman in the Cabinet had told the President that the mass of Arabs in Algeria trust De Gaulle. De Gaulle had reemphasized that no spokesman for the Arabs in Algeria exists.

The Prime Minister said the trouble is that the U.S. is not experienced as are the Lebanese in dealing with the French. One technique of the French is to obtain sympathizers to their own views and then call them representatives. The President said he had had experience with the Arabs in North Africa from his days in the war and had learned at that time how little he knew of Arab politics. For example, he had been disturbed over oppressive local laws against the Jews. He had given an order for repeal of these laws and had received a disturbed letter from a rabbi warning him that such action would bring retaliation in the form of violence against all Jews in Algeria. The Prime Minister added this was the same case of the woman who talked to the President.

The President said that he gives De Gaulle credit for believing what he says. De Gaulle is honest, although he may have some blank spots in his vision. The Lebanese Ambassador asked why it required a half million French soldiers to combat a few non-influential rebels. The President said he had mentioned this to De Gaulle, who had pointed out the fact that the bands were concentrated and were operating in difficult terrain. Perhaps if De Gaulle had been generous in the beginning, he could have settled with profitable economic ties between the two nations. The Prime Minister brought up the UN again and the President repeated that De Gaulle is adamant on this subject. The Prime Minister repeated there is no other course for solution. The spirit of the world is like that of the Algerian rebels; freedom at all costs.

The President said he should think the situation of the Algerian people would be better than average for Africa.

The Prime Minister quoted a speech by the President in his 1952 election campaign, in which he had allegedly said that all subject peoples must be emancipated before the world can know real peace. The President corrected the Prime Minister’s quotation and reminded him that he had insisted that peoples must be prepared to take over. This contrasts with the attitude of Sekou Toure who says no preparation is necessary. The President advocates going to the people and laying before them the opportunity for independence in the Philippines in which the Philippines were prepared for independence at U.S. expense. For 35 years the Philippines underwent constant expansion of their training in self-government. In 1935 we promised to free the Philippines in 10 years. During that period of transition, the Philippines had a commonwealth government. Also during that time we gradually instituted tariffs but plowed under the proceeds to the further building up of the Philippines. Even at that, when the time came, the Philippines were woefully unprepared. Compared to their situation, however, other peoples are far worse off.

The Prime Minister said the fault of this unpreparedness elsewhere is the fact that colonial powers have not foreseen the situation wisely. The President quoted some figures he had seen recently regarding the Congo. Apparently in this entire nation there are only 16 college graduates, one doctor, and one lawyer. This was why the President had emphasized the matter of education in his speech that morning.

The Prime Minister said he appreciated the educational problem. Lebanon itself is reputed to be a forward country in the Arab world but this forwardness is a facade only. Lebanon is 20% developed and 80% underdeveloped, and a part of the country is highly underdeveloped. Lebanon has a population of 1.5 million people. It is in need of roads, doctors, water and schools.

The President admitted the building of a nation takes time. A nation must help itself with the aid of others. Things like clinics, accountants, and the like, are needed. The Prime Minister agreed that the initiative must come from the country itself. He quoted that God helps those who help themselves.

The President repeated that responsibility is on the nations themselves and that improvement takes time. The Communists, in an effort to create discontent, tell everybody that growth should be overnight. Our doctrine is that evident improvement, even though gradual, is conducive to high morale. The Prime Minister said it is difficult to differentiate between the Communist line and the legitimate aspirations of all subject peoples to throw out the colons.

The President said he could not see how any people with any religious feelings could be Communists. To those with any religion at all, death is better than slavery. He realizes that to the man in the Congo the issue is not placed in such stark terms. In our case, if the choice is put to the people, we will fight to the last man.

The Prime Minister said that you cannot “sleep on” religion as proof against Communism. This is proved by the number of Moslems who have turned Communist. The President agreed that to the peasant whose goats are starving the issues are not clearcut.

John S. D. Eisenhower

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Secret. Drafted by John S.D. Eisenhower. The source text indicates that the conference took place in the President’s suite at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel while Eisenhower was in New York to address the General Assembly.

2 Saeb Salaam became Prime Minister on July 28 after elections in Lebanon and formed an 18-member cabinet at President Chehab’s request.

3 For text of President Eisenhower’s address before the General Assembly on September 22, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1960–61, pp. 707–720.

380. Memorandum of Conversations Between Prime Minister Saeb Salaam and the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Meyer), Washington, October 8–9, 1960 380. Memorandum of Conversations Between Prime Minister Saeb Salaam and the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Meyer), Washington, October 8–9, 19601

Washington, October 8–9, 1960.

SUBJECT

Matters of Lebanese and American Interest

During a number of brief encounters with Prime Minister Salaam at social functions during his weekend visit to Washington, the following items of interest emerged in informal discussion: 1. Nasser. Saeb Bey said that during an automobile ride in New York, UAR President Nasser had confided to him that he, Nasser, could not be unfriendly to the United States. In this connection, Nasser had noted appreciatively that his country has received over $400 million in American aid in recent years. (Nasser obviously was impressed by statistics brought to his attention by Deputy Under Secretary Hare.) Mr. Meyer suggested to Saeb Bey that he might wish to use his considerable influence on Nasser to persuade him to reflect a more friendly attitude toward the United States in his public speeches. Mr. Meyer noted that it is difficult for the United States Government to maintain “normalized relations” without some cooperation on Nasser’s part. The Prime Minister replied that the US should keep in mind that Nasser has in the past openly attacked the Communists and that Nasser can be relied on as the chief obstacle to the Communist offensive in the Middle East. Mr. Meyer expressed the view that from a long-range standpoint, Nasser’s value in this regard would be more effective if he could see his way clear to display less partiality for Soviet causes in international affairs. The Prime Minister suggested that the US should do its best to try to win Nasser’s confidence, at which point Mr. Meyer in a friendly vein referred to an old Arab proverb “You can’t clap with one hand”.

2. Syria. Most of the present dissatisfaction in Syria, according to Prime Minister Salaam, stems from the three years of drought. He did not anticipate an early break-up of the Syria-Egyptian union, although he observed that strong man Sarraj is clearly not under Nasser’s full control. He said Nasser remains the hero of most Syrians.

3. Jordan. Saeb Bey said that he could state with “100% plus” certainty that Nasser had nothing to do with the assassination of Jordanian Prime Minister Majali. He would not be able to make the same statement, he said, with respect to Damascus and Sarraj. He reported that at New York the Lebanese have endeavored with some success to ameliorate UAR–HKJ tensions. He gave the impression that King Hussein was much more responsive than Nasser.

4. Alleged British Perfidy. Despite the Macmillan–Nasser conversations, the contents of which he was not aware, Saeb Bey emphatically denounced British activities in the Middle East, including in Lebanon. Mr. Meyer stated just as emphatically his view that the British were making a sincere effort to demonstrate that they are not interfering in Arab world affairs and that they desire to maintain normal friendly relations with all the Arab countries. Saeb Bey was clearly unconvinced.

5. Lebanese Politics. Prime Minister Salaam said he suspected that President Chehab would again attempt to resign in the near future. However, all Lebanese would unanimously insist that he continue to serve until the expiration of his term in 1964. Saeb Bey said there is no other alternative to Chehab as Lebanon’s President in the foreseeable future. The Prime Minister voiced his high regard for Nassim Majdalani, who is presently Acting Prime Minister. He also described his erstwhile rival for the Prime Ministership, Abdulla Yafi, as “finished”. He saw no chance that fanatical Moslem Adnan Hakim could ever attain the Prime Ministership and in this connection noted how he, Saeb Bey, had categorically rejected Hakim’s proposal for a census, long demanded by Lebanon’s Moslems.

6. Aid. Saeb Bey expressed the hope that Lebanon could receive US assistance. Americans, he said, quite erroneously consider Lebanon to be prosperous. Their views are based merely on a quick look at the building boom in Beirut, he said, adding that just before coming to New York he had read a report by a certain Pere LeBret who had concluded that Lebanon is 80% underdeveloped. In this connection, the Prime Minister noted that much of southern Lebanon doesn’t even have electricity. When Mr. Meyer suggested that perhaps this would be remedied when the Litani project is completed, the Prime Minister said he is fast reaching the conclusion that the funds invested in the Litani project would have been better placed in other projects. He was pleased by Secretary Herter’s interest in Lebanon’s road program. He noted that he had invited some Germans to undertake surveys of the road situation. Mr. Meyer applauded this move and encouraged the Prime Minister to see whether he might not induce much greater German interest in Lebanon’s development program. As for US aid, Mr. Meyer suggested that the only possibilities are probably PL–480 and DLF. Both of these have been under continuing discussion between US and Lebanese authorities.

7. Ambassadors. Saeb Bey said he is considering moving Ambassador Dimechkie from Washington to Cairo to maintain close Lebanese contact with Nasser which he, Saeb Bey, cannot himself do for domestic political reasons. He noted Dimechkie’s intimate friendship with Nasser, and suggested this transfer might also be of some benefit to the US. Asked as to Dimechkie’s successor in Washington, Saeb Bey said he had no one in particular in mind as yet and that one of his problems is finding qualified personnel for such assignments. The Prime Minister spoke most complimentarily of Ambassador McClintock. Noting that he had not as yet met Ambassador Reinhardt, he stressed that Cairo was the most important Ambassadorial post for the US in the Near East. As far as UAR Ambassadors are concerned, Saeb Bey expressed the view, probably echoing Nasser’s sentiments, that UAR Ambassadors are not as well qualified as they should be. The implication was that the days of the UAR Ambassador in Washington may be numbered.

8. Semper Fidelis. Saeb Bey reported that on the day before coming to Washington he had received in New York a group of Marine Corps officers who had participated in the landings in Lebanon in 1958. As a rebel leader barricaded in his Basta headquarters, Saeb Bey had not been able to meet these American officers when they were in Lebanon. Now, on their own initiative, they had called on him in New York to pay their respects. Saeb Bay indicated the hour spent with these warm-hearted Marine officers will remain one of the most pleasant memories of his current sojourn in the United States.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 033.83A11/10–960. Confidential. Drafted by Meyer.

381. Airgram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State 381. Airgram From the Embassy in Lebanon to the Department of State1

Beirut, October 20, 1960.

G–96

In recent weeks indications have reached members of the Country Team that the Government presided over by Saeb Salaam, made up in some part of Ministers who have never previously held portfolios, will ultimately make formal requests for U.S. economic assistance far exceeding any expectation cherished by interested agencies in Washington.

The Country Team will in due course summarize the informal soundings already made by various Ministers and will make recommendations as to the attitude it feels the United States Government should take. In general it can be said that new Ministers, anxious to make a political name for themselves, are over-prone to look to Point IV assistance without an adequate background such as was possessed by the two Karame cabinets and a realization that the United States does not feel that Lebanon needs grant aid of the type previously furnished under the auspices of Point IV.

At the same time there is a definite malaise in the country. The continuous manifestation of strikes for higher pay is causing serious concern to the Government and to impartial observers. Although certain sectors of the economy are flourishing, others are depressed. The cost of living has steadily risen and in many cases wages have not maintained parity with the increase in the price of daily bread.

Fortunately President Chehab is aware of the past measures which the United States has taken to aid Lebanon and of our very reserved view on the need for future assistance to Lebanon. Nevertheless political pressures will build and in my judgment we will receive requests for aid far in excess of our desire to respond affirmatively.

Generally typical of this attitude was the position revealed to me this morning by the Acting Minister of Finance, Maurice Gemayel, who is a very sincere friend of the United States. Gemayel portrayed a dark picture of Lebanon’s economic future unless the Government should embark upon a new rationale involving nation-wide reform of the entire economy. He also intended to use Professor Higgins’s report as the basis for an extensive program of fiscal reform and said he would call upon Higgins to return to Lebanon to draft the necessary legislation.

The Acting Minister of Finance showed me charts indicating past and projected future revenues and expenditures. It was clear that he was attempting a scientific approach to the problems confronting the Ministry of Finance; but whether he would find the financial means to make possible the carrying out of the reform program seemed much in doubt. The Minister spoke of asking for American assistance both in the field of low interest, long term loans and cash grant aid, but was unable to estimate amounts under either heading.

I told Maurice Gemayel, as I had previously remarked last week to the Minister of Planning, that so long as Lebanon had an 85% gold coverage of its currency, practically no public debt and a non-functioning of the income tax system which resulted in most Lebanese not paying any income tax, it was perhaps a bit too much to expect American taxpayers to fork over large sums for Lebanon, particularly when the customs revenues for the past two years had been the highest in history.

Despite the impact of such an answer, it is certain that we will be called upon once more to go through the not very rewarding process of convincing the Lebanese that Charles Malik’s promise of “unlimited, unconditional American aid” is a figment of Lebanese political imagination. I said somewhat wearily this morning to Maitre Maurice that I wished the Lebanese Embassy in Washington had to carry some of the burdens of furthering Lebanon’s interest vis-à-vis the United States.

It is very apparent to the Country Team that if the contemplated winding up of USOM/L is carried out as was apparently forecast by ICA/W earlier this year, there would be unfortunate political repercussions seriously affecting U.S. prestige in Lebanon which would likewise make us vulnerable to Soviet countermeasures taking advantage of the situation. ICA/W will recall that during the heyday of Point IV, the Americans practically pushed their way into Beirut because it was a good base of operations and a pleasant place to live. Likewise during the period when the Department of State was seeking to “sell" the Eisenhower doctrine, Judge Richards practically bartered ten million dollars of economic aid in return for the sole joint communiqué by an Arab Government supporting the premises of that doctrine. In 1958 the United States went to immense expense and risk in sending an expeditionary force to Lebanon and in addition gave $12.5 million of cash grant aid to this small client country. Despite the unremitting efforts of the undersigned to put the aid picture in a proper and much restricted focus, where in fact it is today, for the United States abruptly to eliminate the USOM mission would in my considered judgment invite invidious comparisons with what we do elsewhere and might even leave Lebanon in a resentful frame of mind, ready to deal with the USSR on terms prejudicial to our interest. Withdrawal of USOM/L would also arouse an outcry in the Christian half of the Lebanese population and would exacerbate Christian–Moslem differences.

I continue to feel that we should endeavor to restrict the aid program for Lebanon, but not to wipe it out altogether. Ultimately, as I have told high officers of the Department and ICA, I would anticipate a much truncated USOM/L as a branch of the Embassy, the Mission Director to become a regular Counselor of Embassy for Economic Aid Affairs.

McClintock

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 783A.5–MSP/10–2060. Confidential.

382. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 382. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, November 10, 1958—7:09 p.m.

1183. Please inform King that we believe most effective way for HKJ to handle incident arising out of King’s flight across Syria2 would be to present matter to Spinelli as being flagrant contravention of principle set forth in Arab Resolution August 25.3 We understand clearance for flight was obtained through Spinelli and therefore would seem Syrian action engages Spinelli’s position as well as that of King. We believe handling matter this way would have favorable repercussions from view Jordanian prestige and with regard reaction other nations. We think it would be undesirable for Jordan attempt retaliate in some dramatic manner against UAR as no long range benefits would be obtained by Jordan and such action might indeed be harmful from Jordanian point of view by provoking retaliation in return. In matter of plane incident Syrians clearly in wrong and we believe best way to make this clear, while minimizing possibility of UAR’s taking steps adverse to Jordan, would be to have recourse to Spinelli who is present in Amman precisely for such purpose.4

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.11/11–1058. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and in IO by Cargo. Repeated to Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, and USUN.

2 On November 10, King Hussein, flying his own plane en route to a European vacation, was ordered to land by Syrian authorities while in Syrian airspace. Hussein raced for the Jordanian border while two MIGs with UAR markings tried to force his plane down. After landing in Amman, Hussein broadcast a statement protesting the incident, and intervened to prevent units of the Jordanian army from launching a spontaneous attack on Syria. The King maintained the army units in a state of readiness on the Syrian border, and cancelled his European vacation. (Tosec 2 to Seattle, November 10; ibid.)

3 Apparent reference to the resolution adopted by the General Assembly on August 21; see Document 287.

4 Wright reported, in telegram 1332 from Amman, November 12, that he had discussed the plane incident with Prime Minister Rifai and, as instructed, counseled moderation. Rifai indicated that a military response was unlikely, but noted that Jordan might submit a request for Security Council action on the matter. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/11–1258)

383. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, November 19, 1958 383. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, November 19, 19581

Washington, November 19, 1958

SUBJECT

U.S. Military Survey Mission

PARTICIPANTS

Brig. General Richard A. Risden, United States Army

Col. Stanley Harding

NEA—Mr. William M. Rountree

NE—Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell

NE—Mr. Richard B. Parker

General Risden, who had just returned from Jordan, gave a brief summary of his survey of the Jordan military forces. He and his team had approached the problem of what could be done to strengthen the Jordan forces in two ways: (1) what Jordan could do and (2) what we could do. They had made a complete survey of all units of the Jordan military services. They had given to King Hussein 25 pages of recommendations for action2 which could be completed within the resources of the Jordanians. The King had seemed pleased with these recommendations and had issued immediate instructions to his staff to implement them.

The Jordan Army was not bad, but had been on police duty for almost two years. General Risden felt we should investigate the possibility of strengthening the police forces and returning the army to military duty. Although the Jordanians undoubtedly had the capability of maintaining internal security with the army, this function should be given to the police as much as possible. The army needed training and he had suggested a plan for rotation of units through a training cycle at Zerqa. The police forces needed mobility, weapons and training.

Mr. Rountree asked if the program of strengthening the police would be expensive. General Risden said he believed not. It would require training in the US, some jeeps, and an increase of about 1, 000 men.

Mr. Rountree asked if the Jordanians had pressed the question of two additional brigades? General Risden said they had not. They did not have depth in trained officers to staff an expanded army and should concentrate on improving the units they had on hand. The Deputy Chief of Staff, General Shara’, seemed to be well aware of this. However, the army did need some additional equipment. Perhaps this should include anti-aircraft equipment (40mm cannons and cal., 50 machine guns), communications equipment and vehicles. It was perhaps advisable that equipment supplied should come primarily from the UK in order to avoid yearly requests for spare parts from us. The army also needed training of staff officers. However, there was a shortage of officers who were capable of benefiting from training in the U.S.

General Risden said that the organization of the Jordan army was basically sound and he saw no requirement for change. He listed the strength of the army as follows:

Regular Army—35, 000

National Guard—29, 000

Border Guard—15, 000

Reserves—10, 000

Inactive National Guards—20, 000

This was a sizeable establishment for Jordan. The primary requirement was for improving these existing forces. The Jordanians needed a staff school and their military academy was in terrible shape because of the varying levels of education and experience of the students. He had recommended the establishment of a prep school in order to provide a body of relatively uniformly educated candidates.

Mr. Rountree asked if General Risden had been able to talk to the British about these matters. General Risden said that he had talked to them a little but most of the British officers had been extremely busy with preparations for withdrawal and he had had little chance to consult with them. He had found that the British held a rather low opinion of the capabilities of Jordanian military personnel. He did not share this opinion and had been very favorably impressed by the officers and men with whom he had come in contact. The Chief of Staff, General Majali, was not the real brains of the army. The most effective officer was General Shara’, the Deputy Chief of Staff, who was an excellent man. He probably was willing to serve whoever was in power and therefore could be classified an opportunist. This was not necessarily a bad thing.

Mr. Rountree asked if the Jordan army could maintain the modern equipment which we might supply to them. General Risden replied that they had very high maintenance standards and that he had been very favorably impressed by their work shops and by their ability to continue operating vehicles which we would have discarded long ago. He thought their ability to maintain new equipment was comparable to that of West European armies.

Mr. Rountree said that we had three considerations which we thought should be borne in mind: (1) We wished to avoid adding further burdens to the Jordan economy;

(2) We hoped to be able to satisfy the requirements of the Jordan Government; and

(3) We would wish to consult with the British, who had been extremely interested in this matter, before taking any definitive action. General Risden said that he understood these considerations and had kept them in mind. He hoped his report would be completed by November 24 and that we would have a copy soon after that date. He was planning to return to his division on November 25 but would be available to come to Washington for consultation with us at any time.

General Risden spoke very highly of the work which Mr. Bennsky had done in Jordan. Mr. Rountree expressed his thanks to General Risden for undertaking to lead the survey mission and said that we had considered this mission particularly important in terms of US policy in the area.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/11–1958. Secret. Drafted by Parker.

2 Not found.

384. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 384. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, November 30, 1958—10 p.m.

1442. Early this evening Palace protocol officer called said King Hussein wished see me. On arrival Palace I was surprised find King alone (usually he has Rifai with him).

He opened conversation by saying he had not seen me for several days and while he had no urgent problems, did wish discuss some matters general interest. He began by asking my opinion on decision lift martial law which he said was designed first counter influence foreign press which had labeled Jordan police state, second, serve as answer Nasser’s latest propaganda attack which inferred Hussein afraid his own people. I replied on basis my conversation early today with Prime Minister Rifai it would appear so-called lifting martial law was for purely psychological reasons, from practical standpoint would be little change present conditions. King admitted this, but said he hoped over period months army could be relieved its police duties which are destroying its effectiveness both as fighting force and as special instrument suppress public demonstrations when situation gets beyond control civil authorities.

King launched into bitter attack on Nasser for his latest insults, said he has about reached limit his patience. He would like counter propaganda offensive but Prime Minister Rifai takes position Nasser has violated GA resolution therefore it is UN Ambassador Spinelli’s responsibility deal with matter. Hussein is convinced neither Spinelli or UNSYG can handle Nasser even if they wanted to which he doubts. He said Spinelli’s record to date most disappointing pointed out not a single Jordanian oil truck has been permitted transit Syria while charges on phosphate trucks have been raised to point margin profit completely wiped out. Although GA resolution passed August 21 it is now December, yet neither Spinelli nor any member his organization has even visited Damascus where UN was supposed to open office. [3 lines of source text not declassified]

King expressed his appreciation delivery Hawker Hunter aircraft, was pleased to hear spare parts should begin arriving December 9.

[2 paragraphs (11/2 pages of source text) not declassified]

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.00/11–3058. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Cairo, Damascus, and USUN.

385. Memorandum of a Conversation, Amman, December 10, 1958 385. Memorandum of a Conversation, Amman, December 10, 19581

Amman, December 10, 1958

SUBJECT

Meeting with Prime Minister Rifa’i

PARTICIPANTS

Prime Minister Samir al-Rifa’i of Jordan

Assistant Secretary William M. Rountree, NEA

Mr. Wright, Chargé d’Affaires

Mr. Walstrom

Mr. Harrison M. Symmes, Special Assistant to the Assistant Secretary, NEA

Prime Minister Rifa’i met with Mr. Rountree at the house of Mr. Wright. Discussions took place before dinner, during dinner, and after dinner over a period of several hours. The Prime Minister began the talks with an eloquent and persuasive presentation of his views on area problems, U.S. policy in the Middle East, and the future of Jordan.

Rifa’i began by pointing out that all of the countries of the area desire stability and progress. However, there are several obstacles, not least of which are the many facets of the Palestine Problem, which have stood and still stand in the way of the achievement of political stability in the Middle East. The Prime Minister said he did not wish to review the Palestine Problem in detail. It had had grave effects on area stability, as Mr. Rountree was surely aware, but the Palestine Problem is by no means solely to blame for area instability and unrest. Taking off from this point, the Prime Minister launched into a historical review of the role of Nasser in producing area instability. Rifa’i introduced no new facts concerning the role of Nasser, but he emphasized that Nasser is now in decline and that it is therefore of overriding importance that the United States should not do anything at this time to slow the process of Nasser’s decline. If events were allowed to develop in the present trend, Nasser would soon no longer be the predominant leader and force in the Middle East.

In further development of his idea that factors other than the Palestine Problem are also to blame for area instability, Rifa’i observed that Arab leaders at the time had made a major error in including Egypt when they formed the Arab League. Egypt has never been a part of the Arab world but is now attempting to dominate it. It has been enabled to do so through the Arab League and through its exploitation of Arab nationalism. After a long exploration of this thesis, the Prime Minister then said that the only natural expression of Arab unity would be a union that included present-day Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, and Israel. This would be a viable geographical entity, but it was obviously not feasible to contemplate a union that would include Lebanon and Israel. However, the importance of bringing about a union of Jordan and Syria could not be exaggerated.

In pursuing his discussion of a union of Jordan and Syria, Rifa’i said that “the map must now be reexamined and the colors changed”. He emphasized that in the present situation the union of Jordan and Syria would be somewhat easier to bring about than it had been for several years, for today Syria is no longer an independent republic but an unhappy colony of Egypt. If Jordan should become amalgamated with Syria, then Arab unity would have been achieved as “God and Nature intended it”. The only solution to the long-term problem of Jordan’s viability is the union of Jordan and Syria. Such a unity would help to bring political stability to the Middle East because Jordan would no longer serve as an invitation for adventures on the part of Israel and the nearby Arab states.

In commenting on Rifa’i’s various propositions, Mr. Rountree took the opportunity to temper the possible effects on Jordan of remarks on U.S. policy toward Nasser which had been attributed to him by the Beirut press on the previous day. Mr. Rountree reviewed the development of the present U.S. attitude toward Nasser emphasizing that the U.S. is not seeking at any cost to improve relations with Nasser. However, the U.S. does seek a better basis for improved relations with the UAR, which if they come will have resulted from a gradual process on a two-way basis. Mr. Rountree said that in so doing the U.S. would not “sacrifice” its friends among the independent countries with which we have good relations. Prime Minister Rifa’i appeared to grasp and to understand this statement of the U.S. position toward Nasser, but he made it clear in various remarks that he feels strongly that Nasser should not be aided in any way at this time. He also stressed that if a better basis for improved relations with Nasser should be found, Nasser should not be allowed to use improved relations with the U.S. as a means of playing off the U.S. against the Soviets, which he would surely seek to do.

Mr. Rountree told the Prime Minister that the U.S. in principle does not object to changing of colors on the map provided that the change is in the interest of and results from the freely expressed desires of the peoples concerned. The U.S. would be greatly interested, therefore, that the right means be used to bring about a union of Jordan and Syria and not an improper means. Mr. Rountree then said that he did not believe the future of Jordan could be assured by military action against Syria. Although he could agree with the Prime Minister’s analysis that the outlook for Jordan as a separate and independent state is not bright because of Jordan’s lack of resources, nevertheless we do not believe that the aim of union with Syria would justify resort to military action. At this point Prime Minister Rifa’i shifted his ground and said that he had not been thinking of overt aggression. However, the vital interests of Jordan are continually affected adversely by actions taken by so-called sister states against Jordan. He stressed that Jordan must have an outlet to the Mediterranean and cannot remain at the mercy of a hostile Syria.

The conversation shifted at this point to Jordan’s financial situation. The Prime Minister said that the Jordan Government and the whole country are deeply grateful for U.S. assistance. “Our only hope is that Jordan’s role will continue to be appreciated and that further material support will be forthcoming to keep Jordan going”. Rifa’i noted that Jordan has had an important role in preserving peace in the Middle East and in preventing the area from falling to a new kind of imperialism. Jordan’s present and its near future are by no means clear or assured, and it is important that Jordan not be allowed to shake economically at any time. The Prime Minister then went into detail concerning Jordan’s need for an additional $10 million in budgetary assistance. He stressed that this deficit had resulted almost entirely from budgetary arrangements for the Army made under the short-lived Arab Union and then inherited by Jordan following the Iraqi Coup.

Mr. Rountree described frankly the U.S. attitude toward budgetary support and told the Prime Minister he could give him no encouragement that the U.S. could help to make up this deficit. The Prime Minister then argued that Jordan would be a “show case" for the United States in the Middle East and urged, if necessary, that other countries be cut to provide for modest Jordanian needs. Mr. Rountree commented that the U.S. had already amply demonstrated its generosity. The Prime Minister should consider what the U.S. has already given Jordan in comparison with the total Jordan budget. Moreover, budgetary support was the most difficult form of aid to justify to Congress, and he could therefore offer the Prime Minister no hope that the U.S. would be able to help defray the $10 million deficit.2 At this point the conversation broke up, and Prime Minister Rifa’i in making his departure laughingly said that the King would renew the attack the following day.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 110.15–RO/12–1058. Top Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Symmes. The conversation took place during Rountree’s visit to Jordan December 10–11. Rountree visited several Middle Eastern posts during the trip.

2 Rifai took up the request for budgetary support again with Rountree on December 11 before taking Rountree in to meet with the King. Rifai also requested in this conversation that arrangements be made for a visit by King Hussein to the United States. (Memorandum of conversation, December 11; ibid., 110.15–RO/12–1158; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Footnote [81/2 lines of text] not declassified.

386. Editorial Note 386. Editorial Note

In briefing the National Security Council on December 11 on significant world developments affecting U.S. security, Allen Dulles offered the following assessment of developments in Jordan, which prompted a response from the President: “Mr. Dulles stated that there was also a plot against King Hussein in Jordan, a plot directed from a new and unusual source, namely, one of the Bedouin tribes. We have been less concerned than some others about the likelihood of this plot succeeding but both King Hussein and his Prime Minister, Rifai, are at the moment greatly concerned about the violability of Jordan and we fear that they will undertake plots with the objective of trying to detach Syria from the United Arab Republic and join Syria to Jordan. In this connection Mr. Dulles also stressed the need to watch for mounting hostilities between Syria and Israel as a result of border incidents. It was somewhat worrisome that [2 lines of source text not declassified].

“The President inquired of Mr. Dulles whether the latter had more information to indicate connivance between Jordan and Israel. Mr. Dulles replied that there was no evidence of conniving between the two states but that the actions of the one might trigger the actions of the other and they might then move along parallel lines. The President inquired whether such parallel movement would not have the result of lining up all the rest of the Arab world against Jordan and Israel. It seemed to the President that something was going on in this area that did not clearly meet the eye. Mr. Dulles agreed with the President and suggested the possibility that the French might be involved in something. While he doubted any dramatic moves in the near future, the situation needed to be closely watched. The President said that as far as he was concerned, he suspected the worst.” (Memorandum of discussion at the 390th Meeting of the National Security Council, prepared by Gleason on December 11; Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, NSC Records)

387. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 387. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, December 11, 1958—9 p.m.

1510. Joint Embassy/USOM message. Deptel 1315.2 Budget situation prominent among items discussed by Rifai and King with Rountree. Rifai made long and urgent appeal for $10 million additional aid this JFY, reciting earnest efforts of GOJ to keep requirement to minimum. He said inevitable increase in budget needs followed financial confusion arising from establishment and later dissolution of Arab Union. He said failure obtain additional funds would mean cut-back in security forces which would be not only serious but even “catastrophic”.

Rountree informed both King and Rifai that matter under active consideration by USG and response would be communicated by Wright as soon as instructions received from Washington. However he wished explain situation as he saw it. At urgent request GOJ US had several months ago indicated maximum budgetary assistance which Jordan could expect this JFY. It did so since it realized Jordan needed aid in that magnitude and should have firm knowledge ceiling for FY in order to permit realistic planning. It wished avoid situation in which GOJ without knowing what to expect would incur obligations exceeding availabilities. Amount of aid was appreciable, particularly considering extreme difficulty of USG in providing budgetary support for any country. Difficulty understandably greatly enhanced if budget problems rather than decreasing increased as in case of Jordan over past three fiscal years. He felt Jordan’s leaders would appreciate frankness so that they did not have false hopes re extent which US might now find it possible to assist in resolving new deficit problem. He thought it unrealistic to expect USG would provide $10 million for this purpose. Jordan itself must take firm and vigorous action. For example, we thought Jordan should use that part of reserve ($5.6 million) representing increase from amount in reserve as of time US budgetary support commenced. Rountree said he had been disturbed re reports of negotiations by Jordan for procurement from Britain of additional aircraft which would impose direct drain upon budget. He thought expenditures of this kind should not be undertaken outside of previously approved budget items. Other economies in budget should be effected. He thought USG might be able provide some flexibility between third and fourth quarters JFY. Under most optimistic circumstances, however, problem could not be resolved without serious efforts on part of GOJ. Rifai reiterated he would make all possible efforts but urged, as did King, that way be found for US to help meet serious situation.

Country team has reviewed with Rountree various aspects of budget crisis in light political considerations. Following comments and recommendations are submitted with his approval and concurrence: (1) Even assuming earnest efforts by GOJ to resolve problem, it appears unlikely that budgetary deficit can be eliminated without additional US assistance if serious cuts in security forces expenditures to be avoided. In present situation this not only would be highly demoralizing to armed forces but also to GOJ leaders who attach paramount importance to forces which they regard as Jordan’s greatest asset in tense Middle East situation. Rifai persistently stated that regime would collapse if security forces reduced. While this may be exaggeration, it contains enough elements of truth to render it unwise take chance at this juncture.

(2) Whatever further concessions are made to GOJ in matter of budget, it should be made abundantly clear that they can not be taken as precedent. (Rifai positively assured Rountree in this connection that GOJ would not regard additional budgetary assistance this year as basis for requesting more aid next year, although in Arab fashion he did add words to effect it would be nice if next year budget could be established in round figure $45 million.)

(3) We recommend that Rifai now be told that provision additional $10 million out of question. First measure to meet situation should be utilization $5.6 million of reserve, bringing total down to figure of September 1957. We believe, however, that deficit remaining after all other practicable economies effected up to $4.4 million should be provided by US, and earnestly hope funds for this purpose can be made available. Thus Jordan’s budget deficit for JFY 1959 would be covered. Figure of $4.4 million might be reduced by as much as $500, 000 representing balance POL net counterpart expected, although impossible at this time to estimate precise amount.

(4) Immediate authorizations required to meet December budget situation, primarily army payroll, are (a) release of $1.7 million currently on deposit POL counterpart special account, and (b) release $4 million previously reserved for last quarter current JFY.

(5) As to source of up to $4.4 million additional funds, we believe this must be in addition to $10 million set aside for first quarter JFY 1960. In discussing matter with GOJ and setting forth what we prepared to do meet current budget, we propose make it clear that USG not planning on budgetary aid to Jordan JFY 1960 above level provided JFY 1959 excluding $4.4 million added assistance which for special non-recurring purposes, and GOJ must understand there can be no assurance of any sum before appropriation of funds by Congress and determination world-wide allocation by USG.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–1158. Secret; Priority.

2 In telegram 1315 to Amman, December 10, the Department instructed the Embassy to discuss with Rountree the Jordanian budget crisis, and the possibility of asking the Jordanian Government to use its reserves to meet the budget problem. No action was planned in Washington on the question until the Embassy’s assessment was received. (Ibid., 785.5–MSP/12–1058; included in the microfiche supplement)

388. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 388. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, December 20, 1958—3 p.m.

1556. Joint Embassy–USOM message. Re Deptel 1359.2 Conveyed appropriate portions reference telegram in form aide-mémoire3 Prime Minister Rifai today. His first reaction was program unacceptable. However I responded in very frank terms pointing out USG aid program most generous, suggested in our mutual interest he take realistic approach. Following are Prime Minister’s preliminary observations which at my request he will confirm in writing on more elaborate scale next few days.

(A) HKJ will dip into reserves cover third quarter JFY 1959 expenses, leaving untouched POL counterpart funds which they had previously planned begin drawing against as of December 20.

(B) Rifai believes HKJ can get through fourth quarter JFY 1959 which ends March 31 with $7.5 million previously committed by USG plus approximately $1.7 million POL counterpart funds and $4.4 million additional budgetary support.

(C) Rifai most emphatic HKJ cannot possibly manage on $40.5 million budgetary support JFY 1960. He set as very minimum budgetary support $50 million pointing out Jordan Army budget cannot be reduced from current level JD 16.5 million without requiring reduction troop strength which politically impossible if present pro-western government to continue in power. He emphasized next year defense requirements will be greater not less than this year due expansion Jordan Air Force by delivery twelve Hawker-Hunter aircraft together necessary ground support maintain them.

Rifai said King Hussein will be bitterly disappointed, undoubtedly will feel USG has made major policy decision hold Jordan in leash which contrary his (Hussein) expectation that US intended make Jordan freedom fortress. I replied so long US willing put over $40 million in budgetary support plus economic development funds into Jordan I sincerely felt no grounds existed for thinking USG letting Jordan down.

Comment: Rifai again demonstrated he realist who operates on theory one never loses taking profits. I agree King may think he sees in this latest US Government decision pattern which indicates change in trend US policy toward Jordan but King has little choice but go along with Rifai agreement if for no other reason that there is no one else prepared make this size investment keep Jordan afloat. I would suggest that possibility British might come in make up difference between what US willing provide and what HKJ feels they require maintain present level Jordan defense establishment should not be overlooked.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–2058. Secret; Priority.

2 In telegram 1359 to Amman, December 19, the Department authorized the Embassy to approach the Jordanian Government with a proposal relating to the Jordanian request for budget support essentially along the lines outlined in telegram 1510 from Amman (supra). Specifically, Wright was instructed to inform Rifai that provision of an additional $10 million in budget support was “out of the question”. Assuming that Jordan was prepared to use $5.6 million in reserves, the United States would be prepared to provide the additional $4.4 million when it became necessary to do so. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–1958; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 The text of this aide-mémoire, dated December 20, was transmitted to the Department on December 29 as enclosure 1 to despatch 122 from Amman. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–2958; included in the microfiche supplement)

389. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 389. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, December 21, 1958—4 p.m.

1559. Reference: Embtel 1556;2 Deptel 1359.3 Last night received urgent call from palace protocol officer saying King Hussein wished see me immediately.

On arrival palace found British Ambassador Johnston in reception room. He seemed surprised see me asked if I knew what had caused King call us in at such unusual hour. Before I could answer we were ushered into King’s private office where Prime Minister Rifai as well as King were waiting receive us.

King opened conversation on polite note by voicing his appreciation past help given Jordan by its two good friends US and UK. [191/2 lines of source text not declassified]

He invited Prime Minister Rifai make whatever comments he wished. Rifai repeated in much same words what he told me earlier (see Embtel 1556) but with new twist that Jordan reserves could not be equipped without endangering country’s financial stability.

[3 paragraphs (23 lines of source text) not declassified]

(B) USG had global commitments all designed provide maximum protection entire free world from Communist encroachment. During past year this required expenditures particularly increase far in excess of anything anticipated yet those expenditures were indirectly a contribution to Jordan’s security as member free world community.

(C) While fully appreciative King’s reluctance cut back army troop strength, I wish point out even US had had to do same thing with prospects even greater costs to come.

(D) US aid proposed JFY 1960 adds up to impressive figure when include 40.5 million dollar budget support plus technical, economic assistance together distinct possibility substantial DLF loans. [31/2 lines of source text not declassified]

(E) In as much as British Ambassador had been invited sit in on discussion my aide-mémoire I suppose HKJ intended ascertain what assistance HMG might be willing provide close gap Jordan budgetary deficit.

King said in as much as US and UK work closely together global basis, he hoped HMG would either be able increase its own assistance Jordan or convince USG it in interest free world prevent collapse present pro-Western regime which would inevitably result loss not only Jordan but entire Middle East.

Ambassador Johnston who I am certain from subsequent conversations I had with him was caught flatfooted said in all fairness to King and Prime Minister he could hold out little hope HMG could increase its contribution. He made point UK as banker sterling area must carefully consider any further drain on its financial reserves which would endanger other sectors sterling area politically as well as economically. He promised report to London Hussein position re US aid with recommendation it be urgently discussed with Washington.

[1 paragraph (31/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

I replied that in many cases type aid he referred to took form commodities which when sold within recipient countries generated local currency used meet critical needs. In Jordan’s case not possible to absorb large importation commodities of type available as surpluses US. I said my opinion Jordan has received very preferential treatment by US Congress which is most reluctant provide any country with budgetary support as matter of fact for two successive years substantial increases Jordan budgetary support has been granted despite difficult domestic problem it poses for executive branch my government.

In view serious implications inherent in His Majesty’s statement, I requested clarification as to exactly what he wished British Ambassador and myself transmit our Government.

King said while it may be possible HKJ can somehow get through last quarter JFY 1959, under no circumstances could government continue if budgetary support held to $40.5 million. He requested immediate reconsideration USG commitment urged HMG do everything possible increase its own contribution or persuade USG revise upward to minimum $50 to $55 million its budget support JFY 60. [6 lines of source text not declassified]

[2 lines of source text not declassified] I assured him I understood his position and would convey his request my government at once. However, I cautioned him against expecting any reply prior early January due absence Secretary from Washington together fact Assistant Secretary Rountree would not be back on job until day or so before Christmas.

[3 paragraphs (7 lines of source text) not declassified]

(c) Request made shortly after Iraq revolution for expansion Jordan Army by two brigades opposed by USG which dispatched General Risden mission which to date has made no recommendations along lines hoped for by Hussein in his determination build army with substantial offensive capabilities.

[ Subparagraphs (d) and (e) (81/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

(f) What appears on basis facts available be US decision force cut back personnel Jordan armed forces at very moment continuing drought now in its tenth month is creating serious unemployment problem which will be further aggravated by reduction armed forces.

(g) Current press reports indicating US in face increasing Communist threats Middle East especially Iraq searching means reach accommodations with Nasser as only potential ally in Arab world possessing sufficient following offer resistance Communist threat. [l line of source text not declassified]

[1 paragraph (121/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–2158. Top Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution.

2 Supra.

3 See footnote 2, supra.

390. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 390. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, December 29, 1958—4 p.m.

1585. Joint Embassy–USOM message. Reference: (A) Embtel 1359,2 (B) Embtel 1556,3 (C) Embtel 1559.4 Subject: Budget Support.

Chargé and acting USOM director met today with Prime Minister at latter’s request to receive written reply dated December 28 to Embassy aide-mémoire provided Prime Minister December 205 per reference telegram B.

Prime Minister paraphrased reply orally in English for stated purpose of “providing any necessary explanations and answering questions.” Following are Prime Minister’s paraphrased statements of contents of HKJ reply.

(1) HKJ continues to be highly grateful for generous US support in trying circumstances last several years.

(2) HKJ disappointed that request for additional $10 million for budget support current JFY considered “out of question” but accepts this language as final. Accordingly HKJ planning use during last four months current JFY at least $5.6 million from reserves “and even more to extent necessary”. On basis US will provide $4.4 million in addition $7.5 million previously promised, HKJ can thus cover budget expenditure requirements during balance JFY 1959. Re US contention that increase during last 11/2 years of HKJ reserves by $5.6 million represents unutilized US aid, HKJ considers this erroneous and probably result “superficial analysis or lack of understanding”. In fact, outstanding indebtedness HKJ substantially in excess of cash reserves on hand, which really means HKJ has no actual reserves and is practically bankrupt.

(3) While as outlined above HKJ can manage balance JFY, to use US phrase, “out of question" for HKJ to manage during JFY 1960 with $40.5 million offered by US.

(4) Assuming HKJ can finance with local and other revenues budget cost for civil governmental operations, impossible to reduce Jordan Army and public security budget requirements below level current JFY. In fact Jordan Army budget will require increase in JFY 1960 to meet requirements (A) operation/maintenance of Hawker–Hunter aircraft and (B) inclusion in new army brigade of personnel now in National Guard. Prime Minister stated latter contemplated per General Risden recommendations.

(5) Accordingly, HKJ renews its requests for FY 1960 of US budget aid of $50 million on basis such aid essential if present pro-free world regime and policies are to survive.

In addition to above, Prime Minister referred to 2 note sheets on his desk which he stated were in King’s handwriting and submitted by King for inclusion in aide-mémoire reply. Prime Minister stated that he had “sweetened” King’s language for inclusion in reply but that King was emphasizing again that US offer for JFY 1960 “contrary to assurances of US support he has received from highest US levels, and that the present Jordan could not survive with the aid offered”.

Prime Minister then stated he “could not put his hand" to a budget situation such as the limited US aid of JFY 1960 would require and that in such case he “would retire to his house and give the King opportunity to form another government to cope with the crisis”.

During meeting it was made obvious by Prime Minister that upon serious reflection and study since December 20 prospective situation for JFY 1960 continues appear untenable, as stressed to Chargé in meeting December 20 with Rifai, and again same day with King at which UK Ambassador Johnston present. Rifai again emphasized the situation re Syria and now Iraq even more serious than previously and accordingly “impossible" for HKJ to assume different defense posture or policies in foreseeable future.6 He emphasized that Syria and Iraq much more of problem in this country than Israel.

Aide-mémoire text follows next pouch.7

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–2958. Secret; Priority.

2 See footnote 2, Document 388.

3 Document 388.

4 Supra.

5 See footnote 3, Document 388.

6 The Department replied to the Jordanian aide-mémoire on February 12 with an instruction to the Embassy to reiterate the position that the United States could not assure Jordan of more than $40.5 million in budget support during Jordanian fiscal year 1960. (Telegram 1629 to Amman; Department of State, Central Files, 885.10/2–659; included in the microfiche supplement)

7 The text of the Jordanian aide-mémoire, dated December 28, was transmitted to the Department as enclosure 2 to despatch 122 from Amman, December 29. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/12–2958; included in the microfiche supplement)

391. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 391. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, February 4, 1959—1:14 p.m.

1572. Embtel 1765.2 We are becoming increasingly concerned by indications contained reftel and other messages from Embassy that King and Rifai expect to use King’s forthcoming trip as means attempt force USG agree provide substantially increased aid to Jordan on indefinite basis and to commit itself to indefinite preservation of Jordan as independent state. We have no intention of agreeing to either of these requests and we foresee that irreparable damage could be done to our relations with Jordan should King and Rifai come here in effect to deliver unacceptable ultimatum to USG, especially if such a development were to become public knowledge. We desire you in discreet manner to ensure that King and Rifai can have no possible grounds for expectation, before coming to US, that USG will be in a position to satisfy grandiose ideas. Following points which you should tactfully convey to King and Rifai are provided to assist you in this effort.

1. This visit is private one undertaken at King’s initiative. As King has been informed, USG welcomes opportunity to receive him informally in Washington and to exchange views with him. Such exchange of views would be entirely appropriate during an informal visit of this nature but it neither customary nor desirable for foreign Chiefs of State during informal visits at their initiative to utilize occasion to carry out negotiations or seek obtain commitments from USG. While US is of course entirely prepared to discuss US–Jordan relations generally with King and to indicate its views as to future course of these relations, it is not prepared to engage during visit in specific negotiations or commitments regarding problems which may exist. Preferable for these matters to be discussed via normal diplomatic channels.

2. US has given firm and repeated evidence of its full support for Jordan and has, in view of its deep interest in Jordan and its desire to support King and Jordan Government, violated long established strong preference by indicating level of support which it plans to provide Jordan during Fiscal 1960, prior to authorization by Congress of necessary funds. US has thus clearly shown its support for continuance of Jordan as sovereign independent state. US however is very heavily committed in global aid programs and is not prepared to provide large sums of money over and above level already indicated to HKJ. Department desires to be frank with King and Rifai on this point in order that they may have no false hopes regarding position of USG.

3. US had on number of occasions through such instruments as the Tripartite Declaration and Middle East Resolution revealed its deep interest in preservation of independence and security of Middle East states. This interest was dramatically illustrated last summer by despatch of US troops to Lebanon, by important US support for British troops sent to Jordan, and by substantial support for Jordan in many fields. US does not have mutual defense treaty with any Arab state and has resisted recurrent and powerful Israeli pressures for such defense arrangement. US furthermore believes that mutual defense treaty with major Western power would not be in best interests of Jordan and of King in view of prevailing political trends in ME and deterioration of relations which occurred between Jordan and UK when Jordan had defense treaty with UK, subsequently denounced by Jordan. Accordingly King and Rifai should have no reason to believe that US now prepared conclude defense treaty with Jordan.

4. Finally you should emphasize to King and both Rifais that USG sincerely welcomes forthcoming trip and opportunity for exchange of views with Chief of State for whom it has such high admiration. USG, in view of the relations of trust it shares with HKJ, plans to speak with King and Rifai on basis of confidence. King will of course have access to US press and since his remarks may be widely reported we feel sure that in spirit of close US-Jordanian relations he will exercise special care in public references to matter which may be discussed with USG in Washington. King will also appreciate desirability of refraining from any public references to other states, particularly in NE, which could embarrass US in its relations with those states.3

Dillon

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.11/2–259. Secret; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Rockwell and cleared by Rountree and in U.

2 Telegram 1765 from Amman, February 2, reported on a discussion between Wright and Rifai concerning the King’s planned visit to Washington. Rifai noted that the “real issue” to be resolved in Washington was whether the United States was willing to admit that the continuance of Jordan as a sovereign, independent state was essential to the maintenance of free world influence in the Middle East. If so, Rifai was certain that the amount of money necessary to accomplish this was unimportant. (Ibid., 785.11/2–259)

3 In telegram 1819 from Amman, February 9, Wright reported that he had conveyed the substance of telegram 1572 to Rifai. As a result, Wright felt certain that neither the King nor Rifai were left with any illusions concerning the limitations imposed by circumstances on the form and amount of assistance which the United States could provide to Jordan. (Ibid., 785.11/2–959)

392. National Intelligence Estimate 392. National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, March 10, 1959.

NIE 36.3–59

THE OUTLOOK FOR JORDAN

The Problem

To assess the situation in Jordan and to estimate the outlook over the next year with particular reference to various courses of action open to King Hussein.

Conclusions

1. King Hussein and Prime Minister Rifai feel that their regime urgently needs reassurances of strong US moral and material support if it is to maintain its pro-Western position and even survive in the face of strong domestic discontent and isolation from the prevailing trends of Pan-Arab nationalism. (Paras. 5–6, 8, 10)

2. Over the long run we have little confidence in Hussein’s ability to hold his throne or, indeed, in the viability of Jordan as a state. In the short run, however, his own position and Jordan’s existence are bolstered by an uneasy equilibrium of external forces, which maintains Jordan as a buffer and preserves the regime in default of a generally acceptable alternative. Israel prefers Hussein to a pro-Nasser successor. Nasser wants to avoid a showdown with the West and Israel over Jordan’s future particularly while he is preoccupied with the Communist threat in Iraq. (Paras. 6, 9, 10, 12, 14)

3. If Hussein should receive convincing reaffirmation of the Eisenhower statement of April 1957,2 he would probably continue policies of co-operation with the West. If at the other extreme he became convinced that the US was anxious to disengage from Jordan, he would reassess his entire position. He would seek increased support from the UK, and possibly from Nasser, Saudi Arabia or even Iraq. None of these alternatives is very promising. It is more likely that Hussein would abdicate rather than try desperate measures to recoup his fortunes—such as an attack on Syria. (Paras. 19–22)

4. Hussein would face another choice if he failed to get the degree of US backing that he would like but was still convinced of US readiness to continue substantial support to Jordan and his throne. In this situation he would probably seek peace with the Pan-Arab nationalists while maintaining the best possible relations with the West. He would probably feel compelled to replace Rifai and other members of his government with less pro-Western politicians. Although there is no assurance that such a course would preserve Hussein’s position, we believe that some such adjustment represents his best hope of retaining his throne for the longest period of time. (Paras. 23–24)

Discussion

I. The Situation

5. King Hussein and Prime Minister Samir Rifai are coming to Washington in March to seek clarification of the US attitude toward the Hussein regime and Jordan. In particular, they will press for an increase in the US proposed FY 1960 level of economic assistance for Jordan3 and for a more specific US guarantee of the independence of Jordan.4 Both Hussein and Rifai take the position that, in the absence of such support, not only will the pro-West orientation of the regime become less certain but the existence of the monarchy and even the independence of Jordan will be placed in jeopardy. Therefore, they may be expected to argue in strong terms that they are entitled to such increased support on the grounds that on the assurance contained in President Eisenhower’s statement of April 1957 and on the urging of the US and UK, the Hussein regime has taken the exposed and dangerous position in the Middle East of being an ally of the West and an opponent of Nasserism.

6. Hussein does indeed face a very precarious situation. The monarchy and the Rifai government are unpopular with most of the Jordanian people of Palestinian origin, including some half-million refugees from Israeli-held areas of former Palestine. The Palestinians have a relatively high degree of political consciousness and among them not only do the doctrines of Pan-Arab nationalism have great appeal, but Nasser himself has considerable prestige. The Jordanian Communist Party, although illegal and severely harassed, is active among the West Jordanians. The King’s chief source of domestic support is among the more traditionalist half-million East Jordanians—largely Bedouin tribes—and the army, most of which is recruited from the latter groups. Between Jordan’s disparate elements there are virtually irreconcilable antagonisms and there is little loyalty to the idea of Jordan as a state.

7. The political instability of Jordan is intensified by its extreme poverty and dependence on Western assistance for sheer survival. The combination of a nonviable economy and military expenditures far beyond it resources results in large and chronic budgetary deficits. These were once offset by UK subsidies but since 1957 they have been made up largely by the US. In the coming fiscal year Jordan will require more than $45 million in direct budgetary aid merely to overcome the deficit in a $70 odd million ordinary government budget.

8. For almost two years, Hussein has kept his domestic opponents off balance by repression and intimidation, including the use of martial law, the jailing of numerous opposition figures, and rigid controls over the parliament. Prime Minister Rifai is an especially strong advocate of these tactics and is so identified in the minds of most Jordanians. Some nationalist opposition leaders have gone into exile in Syria or other Arab states, where they continue to engage in conspiracies against Hussein and his regime. The effectiveness and activities of those who remain have been circumscribed by the regime’s security measures.

9. The King has shown striking personal courage and determination in the face of dangers and provocations, such as recurrent conspiracies against himself, the assassination of his Hashemite cousins in Baghdad, the isolation of Jordan by a UAR land and air blockade following the British intervention last July. There are, however, indications that the strain is beginning to tell on Hussein and that he stands in increasing need of reassurances that the US is effectively behind him.

10. But the regime and Jordan have survived primarily because external forces in the area have operated to maintain the state as a buffer zone and to bolster its government in default of a generally acceptable alternative. The UAR has not recently encouraged the overthrow of the King because of: (a) preoccupation with problems in Syria and Iraq; (b) fear of Western reaction; and (c) fear of war with Israel. Israel for its part has also reduced pressures upon the Jordanian regime, principally because it is apprehensive that the collapse of Hussein’s regime would lead to a pro-Nasser successor.

11. In these circumstances, while Hussein’s and Jordan’s short-term prospects appear better than they have for some time, it cannot be concluded that their position is strong. The extent of hostility toward Hussein and his dynasty within Jordan makes possible at any time a coup or even assassination—a fate which his grandfather met at the hands of an Arab refugee from Palestine. Even the loyalty of some army elements and East Jordan tribal leaders is not above question. There has been considerable evidence of conspiracies among officers, which is sufficient to demonstrate that the Jordanian Army is not immune from the kind of conspiracies against entrenched regimes that have been successfully brought off in other Arab states. Finally, a shift in the external forces might upset the equilibrium at any time.

II. The Involvement of Other Interested States and the UN

12. The UAR. Nasser’s supporters in Jordan and his influence throughout the Arab world give him at a minimum the capability of creating severe difficulties for Hussein’s government. The degree of pressure Nasser will choose to exert on Hussein is likely to be governed more by the trend of developments in the area as a whole than by events in Jordan.

13. The present trend toward a lessening of active hostility between Nasser and the Jordanian monarchy may continue for some time. If Nasser’s troubles over Iraq persist, and especially if they lead Nasser to seek better relations with the West, he will almost certainly, in the interests of expediency, accompany this policy by fostering improved relations with Hussein. However, we have little confidence that any accord between Nasser and Hussein will prove lasting. Even if the UAR wished as a matter of policy to avoid the risks and disadvantages of having Jordan tied to it, it would almost certainly feel compelled to give support and encouragement to a Pan-Arab nationalist move in Jordan if one were made.

[Numbered paragraph 14 (141/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

15. The USSR. The Soviets do not have diplomatic relations with Jordan and have shown little direct interest in Jordan beyond beating the usual propaganda drums against Western imperialism. On the whole, we do not believe that the Soviets are likely to take an initiative in the Jordanian situation under present conditions. They would probably prefer to see a situation of instability and anti-Western trends encouraged by local forces—both Pan-Arab nationalists and Jordanian Communists. If, for example, the Communists come into control of Iraq or if an Arab-Israeli explosion occurred, the Soviets would probably take a more active role.

16. The UK. With the British subsidy to Jordan now but a fraction of what it was, British influence has inevitably declined. In these circumstances, the idea of disengagement from Jordan has been accepted with good grace in most quarters of the British Government, and with actual relief in other quarters. There was, for example, only limited enthusiasm in the UK over the British intervention in Jordan in 1958, and little opposition to the withdrawal of the British troops six months later.

17. Nevertheless, the UK does not count itself out as a factor in the Jordanian situation, and is particularly interested in maintaining Jordan as a buffer against the extension of Nasser’s influence. There is considerable evidence that the UK would like to replace Samir Rifai—commonly considered pro-US—with a more pro-British candidate. [5 lines of source text not declassified]

18. There may be differences between the UK and the US over Jordan stemming primarily from different views concerning Nasser. Divergencies at the local level will persist—notably in political maneuvering with various Jordanian politicians, and over the sale and supply of arms to the Jordanian forces. We do not believe, however, that the Macmillan government (much less a Labor government) will seriously attempt to restore British influence to its former status. Even if it considered such an attempt feasible, it would probably not be willing to pay the price.

19. The UN. The UN is also involved in the situation through UNRWA support of Jordan’s half-million Palestine refugees. A UN move to abolish or reduce support of the Arab refugees or to resettle them in Arab lands would add critically to Jordan’s political difficulties. UN support of the refugees constitutes a vital contribution to the Jordanian economy and if it were withdrawn, without resettlement of the refugees elsewhere, it would have to be replaced by equivalent aid from other sources in order to prevent economic chaos. Any proposal for setting up a UN trusteeship over the West Bank would be rejected both by Jordanian opinion and by Arab opinion as a whole.

III. Prospective Courses of Action by Hussein and Their Consequences

20. If Hussein should receive from the US convincing confirmation of the kind of support represented by the Eisenhower statement of April 1957, he would probably retain Rifai and persist in policies of cooperation with the West. His position and that of Jordan would be strengthened at least in the short run. Some of his opponents would probably be intimidated, and certainly his own will and determination to cope with his problems would be fortified. In the longer run it is doubtful that Western support per se would prove effective in maintaining Hussein in power if he were faced with determined efforts by Nasser or anti-Hashemite forces in Jordan to overthrow him. Continued repression of the opposition may serve stability for a time, but it also fans the fires of hostility to the regime. Moreover, the more his dependence upon the West is made manifest, the greater his vulnerability to the potent Arab nationalist charge that he is a Western stooge.

21. If, at the other extreme, Hussein should become convinced that the US was anxious to disengage from the Jordanian situation and from support for his government, he would feel compelled to reassess his entire position. He would almost certainly move to disassociate himself from Prime Minister Rifai, though Rifai would probably relieve him of any decision in the matter by resigning first.

22. In the above case, Hussein’s alternatives would be few and unpromising. What bargaining power he has in the area would be substantially reduced. He would almost certainly seek renewed British support and aid. However, he would have little chance of getting the British to resume assistance on the previous scale. He could also seek support from Saudi Arabia, the UAR, or Iraq, but past experience shows that he would be unlikely to get adequate economic and political support. Hussein might even consider an approach to the Soviet Union, but we think it unlikely that he could work out an arrangement with the Bloc which would provide for the survival of his regime.

23. If in these circumstances Hussein met with no success, he might give serious consideration to desperate measures. He might, for example, attempt to implement his frequently expressed wish to invade Syria, in the belief that discontented elements there would rally to him, and in the hope that the West would come to his support. On the whole, however, we believe he would be more likely to abdicate than to attempt such moves.

24. If Hussein fails to get the broader commitments which he and Rifai will be seeking, but is convinced that the US will continue political support and financial assistance at about present levels, he would be likely to try a third course of action. In this situation he would probably feel that he must make some retreat from his present outspoken pro-West and anti-Nasser position. He would probably seek to assume a posture somewhat like that of Saudi Arabia and of Lebanon—maintaining relations with the Western Powers, but seeking his peace with the Pan-Arab nationalists and trying to foster a Jordanian brand of Arab nationalism as well. Hussein’s prospects for success in such a course would still depend on public evidence of continued US moral and material support, since without such backing, Hussein’s position would probably be too weak for him to deal effectively with the Pan-Arab nationalists.

IV. The Longer Term Outlook

25. On the whole, we believe that some accommodation to the forces of Pan-Arab nationalism represents King Hussein’s best hope of retaining his throne for the longest period of time. There are, of course, dangers involved in making concessions to his opponents in and out of Jordan and in releasing turbulent political forces previously suppressed. But these dangers are inherent in the essential political instability of this weak and heterogeneous state.

26. Even with the best of policies and outside support, we have little confidence in Hussein’s ability over the long run to hold his throne in the face of the political forces at work in Jordan and throughout the area. Eventually, it appears probable that his regime will give way, gradually or abruptly, to a successor more in tune with the political trends prevailing in the Arab world. This may not come without a violent struggle involving external intervention and the breakup of Jordan.

1 Source: Department of State, INR Files. Secret. A covering note indicated that this estimate, submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence, was prepared by CIA and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. All members of the U.S. Intelligence Board concurred with the estimate on March 10, with the exception of the representatives of the AEC, the NSA, the FBI, and the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Special Operations who abstained on the grounds that the topic was outside their jurisdiction.

2 At a news conference in Augusta, Georgia, on April 24, 1957, Press Secretary Hagerty stated that he had been authorized to say that both the President and the Secretary of State regarded the independence and integrity of Jordan as vital. For the transcript, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1957, p. 1024.

3 Presently proposed US economic assistance for Jordan for FY 1960 totals over $50 million, of which $40.5 million is direct budget support. Rifai is expected in this visit to ask the US to increase the latter by $9.5 million. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 The present US commitments with reference to the integrity of Jordan are contained in the Middle East (Eisenhower) Doctrine of March 1957 and in President Eisenhower’s statement of April 1957. In the latter the President declared that the integrity of Jordan was vital to the Security of the US. [Footnote in the source text.]

393. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Rountree) to the Acting Secretary of State 393. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Rountree) to the Acting Secretary of State1

Washington, March 14, 1959.

SUBJECT

Policy Line and Tactics in Discussions during Visit of King Hussein of Jordan (March 23–26)2

Although the forthcoming visit of King Hussein of Jordan is to be unofficial and we have made it clear to the Jordanians that we shall not expect to engage in formal negotiations on this occasion, the King and his Prime Minister, Samir Rifa’i, have been assured that there would be an opportunity for discussions with the President, you and other officials of the Department while they are in Washington. The schedule for these discussions is the subject of a separate memorandum,3 and individual briefing papers on specific topics are being prepared. The coming visit may well have a crucial effect on U.S.-Jordan relations, however, inasmuch as we can anticipate a concerted effort by King Hussein and his adroit Prime Minister to extract from the U.S. assurances that we are firmly committed to the proposition that the continued existence of Jordan as presently constituted is vital to the maintenance of the Western position in the Near East. Prime Minister Rifa’i has on several occasions asserted to our Charge in Amman that he views such an assurance from the U.S. Government as essential if he is to continue at the head of the Government, and has made it clear that in his mind such an assurance would mean a continuing commitment to Jordan of military and financial assistance significantly above the present substantial level, as well as political and diplomatic support for the present regime in its self-envisaged role as the leader of an anti-Communist and anti-Nasser Arab nationalism.

It is not possible for us to satisfy the desires and ambitions of the King and Rifa’i, and it is important that we obviate any possible misunderstanding on that score, while at the same time avoiding too great a disappointment to our visitors (with a possibility of highly undesirable repercussions). NEA therefore considers it of the utmost importance that there be clear understanding within the Government of the line of policy to be followed and agreement on the tactics to be pursued in the forthcoming talks with the Jordanians. To this end, the following recommendations are offered for your urgent consideration.

Recommendations:

1. Our general objective in discussions with King Hussein and Samir Rifa’i should be to encourage the ending of Jordan’s isolation from its Arab neighbors and cautiously to explore possible means of lessening its almost total financial and political dependence on the U.S. (and, to some degree, the U.K.).

2. Our tactics (to be reflected in position papers) should be designed to further our general objective without provoking a reaction of desperation or despair, which could possibly lead to the King’s abdicating without making provision for an orderly change of regime, or, alternatively, to his embarking on military adventures in Syria.

3. In keeping with the foregoing, we should be prepared to employ the following tactical line vis-à-vis Hussein and Rifa’i:4 a. We should stress our continuing interest in the welfare of Jordan and its people, pointing to the considerable aid we have already extended as evidence of this.

b. We should point out the legislative and constitutional situation which prevents our making long-term aid commitments or giving indefinite political undertakings. We are making a special and unique5 exception to established USG practice by telling Jordan what we plan to provide in aid for FY 1960, prior to Congressional authorization of the necessary funds. This reveals our intention to continue to be helpful to Jordan.

c. We should firmly make clear that in our thinking about future assistance to Jordan we do not envisage the U.S. contribution as being substantially above the present level.* In U.S. FY 1959 this is expected to amount to $38.23 million direct budgetary support, $1.9 million technical assistance, $5 million emergency assistance for procurement and delivery of petroleum products and related equipment, and $5.3 million PL 480 commodities (at market value). For U.S. FY 60 aid $40.5 million for budgetary support and up to $5 million in PL 480 commodities for drought relief have already been offered HKJ. In addition we plan to carry out a program of economic development and technical assistance in an amount to be determined following Congressional action on the U.S. FY 60 MSA program. We consider the level of U.S. FY 60 budget, development and technical assistance generous, given our expectations of the likely level of U.S. FY 60 MSP funds and world-wide demands upon these funds. It should be indicated to the Jordanians that in view of the magnitude of U.S. assistance it is important that prior consultations with U.S. representatives take place concerning Jordan’s annual budget levels. We would also expect to be consulted about any contemplated activities by the HKJ which might materially affect the budget level.

Note: Figures given herein are for U.S. fiscal years. In detailed discussion with the Jordanians it is necessary to talk in terms of the Jordan fiscal year, which is from April 1 to March 31.

d. We should say that, while we do not envisage any increase in our FY 60 planned special assistance to Jordan for budget support and economic development, we are prepared to give sympathetic consideration to additional PL 480 assistance, above that to which we are already committed, if Jordan’s drought situation so requires. We should also be prepared to be somewhat flexible, in view of Jordan’s acute budget problems, as regards the division of available special assistance funds between direct budget support and economic development (e.g., we have already promised $40.5 million for budget assistance and would be willing to consider making available an additional amount for this purpose by transferring a portion of such economic development funds as might be allocated to Jordan following Congressional appropriations). We cannot, of course, specify the amount of development assistance nor of additional budget aid which may be anticipated.

e. As our past aid activities indicate, we are interested in furthering Jordan’s economic development. In this regard, the DLF has received additional technical data which it requested on the Jordan Phosphate Mines Co., and we hope that this project7 will be ready for consideration by the DLF Board of Directors in the very near future. The DLF is prepared to consider other applications which meet DLF criteria.

f. We should state that we are prepared to implement the recommendation of the Risden report, phasing the program over a period of three years.8 (The Risden report recommended a $12.8 million program of military aid, largely in the form of new military equipment to be procured principally in the U.K.) Our willingness to do this, would depend upon Jordan’s willingness to accept the Risden assumptions regarding the limitation of force levels and other measures, such as the elimination of obsolete equipment, designed to hold recurring costs to a minimum.

g. As the discussions develop, we should seek to implant and cultivate in the King’s mind the concept of a gradual and orderly rapprochement with the UAR and other Arab neighbors, making it clear that the U.S. is not thinking of abandoning Jordan to Nasser’s tender mercies but would be prepared to help explore the possibilities for an understanding with the UAR which would serve Jordan’s interests.

1 Source: Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 64 D 560, CF 1223. Secret. Drafted in NEA/NE by Lakeland and Rockwell and cleared with E, W/MSC, H, Defense, and ICA. Sent to Herter through Dillon and Murphy.

2 Following a State visit to Taiwan, Hussein planned to spend 5 days in Hawaii (March 17–21) and then proceed via San Francisco to Washington, where he would remain from March 23 through 28. No official functions were planned for the King after March 26. Thereafter he planned to tour the United States for 3 weeks, departing from New York on April 17 for a brief visit to England and the continent before returning to Jordan.

3 Dated March 11. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.11/3–1159)

4 Herter initialed his approval of recommendations 3a–g on March 17.

5 Herter inserted by hand the words “and unique.”

7 The text of Rountree’s memorandum read at this point: “can be given sympathetic.” Herter crossed out those words and wrote in: “will be ready for.”

8 A marginal notation at this point, in Herter’s hand, reads: “beginning in FY ’60”.

394. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 24, 1959 394. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 24, 19591

Washington, March 24, 1959

SUBJECT

Future US Support and Assistance for Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

Jordanian Participants His Majesty King Hussein

Prime Minister Samir el-Rifa’i

H.E. Midhet Juma, Jordanian Ambassador

American Participants The Acting Secretary

Hon. Robert Murphy

Hon. William M. Rountree

H.E. Hazza’ el-Majali, Court Minister

H.E. Bahjat Talhouni, Chief of the Royal Cabinet

H.E. Abdul Moneim el-Rifa’i, Chief of National Guidance

Hon. Sheldon T. Mills

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell

Mr. William C. Lakeland

The Acting Secretary opened the discussion by welcoming the opportunity for a frank exchange of views with His Majesty and Prime Minister Rifa’i. Mr. Herter noted that no formal negotiations were envisaged during the King’s visit to Washington but said that he was particularly happy for the chance to meet the King and Prime Minister Rifa’i since personal relationships were of great importance in the conduct of foreign affairs.

King Hussein in replying thanked the Acting Secretary for the warm reception which he had been given and said that he too welcomed the chance to discuss with complete frankness Jordan’s problems and other matters of mutual interest.

The Acting Secretary, during the subsequent discussion, said that from the point of view of implementation of US aid programs he wanted to make it clear that factors beyond the control of the Executive Branch of the Government made it impossible for the United States to give any kind of long-term commitments. The Acting Secretary briefly described the role of Congress in authorizing and appropriating on an annual basis the necessary funds for foreign aid programs, and alluded to the serious difficulties which the program was currently facing in Congress. He stressed, however, that the assistance which the US had been giving to Jordan was a gauge of our concern for Jordan’s integrity and internal stability and should be taken as an earnest of our intentions for the future. Mr. Herter said he was particularly happy to be able to inform the King and Prime Minister that the Development Loan Fund had just taken favorable action on an application for a loan to the Jordan phosphate industry.

Prime Minister Rifa’i replied that Jordan was certainly extremely grateful for the generous assistance which the US had given and mindful of the considerations mentioned by the Acting Secretary. He suggested, however, that Jordan because of its strategic location and political role in the Near East had special significance from the US viewpoint and argued that in determining the amount of aid for Jordan, the US should take into account not only US-Jordanian relations, but also Jordan’s role in connection with the US position vis-à-vis other Arab states as well as Jordan’s role with respect to the Israeli situation. Mr. Rifa’i said Jordan’s case was really quite simple. For good or bad, Jordan existed as an independent state. Jordan hoped the US would agree that its continued existence was important. If it were concluded that Jordan should disappear, the Jordanians would decide how that should be brought about. If Jordan were to survive over the long run, however, the Jordan Government estimated it would need substantial assistance over a five to seven year period in order for the country to become established on a stable basis. To achieve this, Jordan would count primarily on US aid.

The Acting Secretary reiterated the inability of the US to make any commitment over a five to seven year period, to which Rifa’i replied he was only explaining the Jordanian position in the hope that general agreement on Jordan’s needs could be reached.

There followed a brief discussion of the Arab refugee problem with the Acting Secretary alluding to the prospective expiration of UNRWA’s mandate in 1960 and to the Congressional desire to see progress towards a solution of the refugee problem. The Jordanians acknowledged the importance of this problem and emphasized the status of the refugees as citizens of Jordan. The King pointed out that Jordan was trying to absorb the refugees but that the problem was related to the economic development of the country which in turn was largely dependent upon the level of US aid.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/3–2459. Secret. Drafted on March 31 by Lakeland and approved as accurate by Herter on April 15.

395. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 24, 1959 395. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 24, 19591

Washington, March 24, 1959

SUBJECT

Exchange of Views with King Hussein and Prime Minister Rifa’i on Current Situation in the Near East

PARTICIPANTS

Jordanian Participants His Majesty King Hussein

H.E. Samir el-Rifa’i, Prime Minister

H.E. Midhet Juma, Jordanian Ambassador

H.E. Hazza’ el-Majali, Court Minister

H.E. Bahjat Talhouni, Chief of the Royal Cabinet

H.E. Abdul Moneim el-Rifa’i, Chief of National Guidance

American Participants The Acting Secretary

Hon. Robert Murphy

Hon. William M. Rountree

Hon. Sheldon T.Mills

Mr. Stuart W. Rockwell

Mr. William C. Lakeland

King Hussein reviewed the situation in the Near East as seen from his point of view, stressing that Jordan’s difficulties stemmed principally from its refusal to follow blindly in Nasser’s footsteps and accept without question Nasser’s domination of the Arab World. The King expressed gratitude for US support and assistance without which he said Jordan could not have survived. He said that Jordan is fighting a battle against international Communism not for the sake of the West but because of its own convictions. The King emphasized Nasser’s role in helping to bring the Soviets into the area in the first place and giving them the chance to achieve respectability in the eyes of the Arab people. He reviewed Nasser’s efforts in the past to subvert Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Sudan, and Saudi Arabia. The King asserted Syria had been an easy target because of internal dissension. Nasser had succeeded in taking it over through bribery and political manipulation. The King asserted that Nasser was attacking Iraq not because of Communism but because the Iraqi Government had failed to fall into line. Nasser was indirectly responsible for the Communists’ gaining control in Iraq, because Qasim had been forced to turn to the Communists for support against Nasser.

The King rejected the idea of neutrality for the Arab World as being unrealistic in view of the relative weakness of the area. He asserted that a Nasser victory in Iraq would be extremely dangerous, opening the way for subversion of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, after which Jordan would be an easy target. Finally, Hussein asserted the situation in Syria was worsening for Nasser and warned that Nasser could only maintain himself if he got outside support at this juncture when he was “practically collapsed”. On the other hand, now is the time for Jordan and like-minded countries to take the initiative with US help in order to defeat Nasser and the Communists.

Prime Minister Rifa’i followed up the King’s remarks with a more detailed discussion of events in the last two years. The Prime Minister asserted Jordan was motivated by two principles a) anti-Communism and b) non-intervention by one state in the internal affairs of another. Mr. Rifa’i conceded that after two years Nasser had come to the same position as that held by Jordan on Communism but said the UAR still had not accepted a principle of non-intervention. He ridiculed Nasser’s attempt to differentiate between the USSR and Communism, alleging this was analogous to trying to differentiate between Israel and Zionism. Prime Minister Rifa’i stressed the non-Arab nature of Egypt and the fact that Arab nationalism was a “sacred” doctrine long ante-dating Nasser. Mr. Rifa’i, finally, carried the King’s remark about the danger of a Nasser victory in Iraq one step further, asserting that Jordan was not too much concerned about Communism in Iraq since even if the Communists were successful there, the other Arab states were not likely to be infected but would in fact fight Communism all the harder. A Nasser victory in Iraq, however, would open the way to his domination of the whole area.

Mr. Rountree said that the US had been greatly concerned over two aspects of UAR (and formerly Egyptian) policy. One was the respectability which it had lent to the Soviets in the Arab world, and the other was the nature of UAR relationships to other countries in the area. He cited the Lebanese and Jordanian cases as two occasions when the US had helped small nations of the area to defend themselves against UAR subversion. Mr. Rountree stated, however, that recent developments had had an important effect in two respects: a) without going into the question of motivation, we considered the conflict over Iraq had brought about a completely new situation as a result of which there was a much wider appreciation among Arabs of the real nature of the relationships between the Soviets and local Communists; b) again leaving aside the question of motives, it was obvious there had been an improvement in relations between the UAR and other Arab states. Perhaps this had occurred because Nasser’s efforts in countries such as Jordan, Lebanon, and Sudan had failed—but whatever the reason, these two factors added up to a notable improvement in the Free World position, except in Iraq. It was our hope that if the Iraqi situation could be contained, the improvement brought about partly by UN actions would present an opportunity for a period of peace and tranquility in which solutions to underlying area problems, such as Jordan’s relations with UAR, could be sought.

Mr. Rountree took exception to Mr. Rifa’i’s view that a Nasser victory in Iraq would be more dangerous than a Communist take-over, asserting that the Free World would retain a good deal more maneuverability in the former case than in the latter. He also made the point that, in our view, although the Communists were making great headway in Iraq, important elements in that country desire to maintain freedom from domination by the Communists or any other element.

Prime Minister Rifa’i agreed the situation in Iraq was dangerous but said it would not be remedied by Nasser’s methods. He averred that Nasser in attacking Iraq really was fighting a battle to hold Syria. Mr. Rifa’i concluded by remarking that Jordan wished to see Nasser go on fighting the USSR since the more he did so the weaker he became. He cautioned, however, that Nasser should not be saved at the very moment when he had weakened himself in his battle against the Soviets.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 780.00/3–2459. Secret. Drafted by Lakeland and approved as accurate by Herter on April 15.

396. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 24, 1959, 2:45 p.m. 396. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 24, 1959, 2:45 p.m.1

Washington, March 24, 1959, 2:45 p.m.

SUBJECT

Jordan–U.S. Discussions at Department of State—Long-Term Aid Commitment and Budget Support for JFY 60

PARTICIPANTS

Jordanian Participants Prime Minister Samir el-Rifa’i

Sam’an Daoud, Minister of Finance and of National Economy

Akef el-Fayiz, Minister of Agriculture

Anastas Hanania, Vice President, Jordan Development Board

Abdul Moneim el-Rifa’i, Chief of National Guidance

Maj. Gen. Sadiq Shara’, Deputy Commander and CGS, Jordan Armed Forces

American Participants NEA—William M. Rountree

DOD/ISA—John N. Irwin

ICA—Leonard J. Saccio

ICA—Leland Barrows

Hon. Sheldon T. Mills, U.S. Ambassador-designate to Jordan

W/MSC—John O. Bell

NE—Stuart W. Rockwell

NE/E—George Bennsky

Mr. Rountree, who chaired this meeting, said he thought the exchange of views in the morning meeting with the Acting Secretary was very useful and had indicated a wide range of interests between the U.S. and Jordan on which there was substantial agreement, especially regarding objectives. This afternoon’s meeting provided an opportunity for joint discussion of past and future U.S. aid to Jordan. As had already been agreed, preparations had not been made for formal negotiations on specific proposals. However, these discussions would give Jordan an idea of what the U.S. could and could not do, and indicate that the U.S. was prepared to be helpful within these limitations. He then invited Prime Minister Rifa’i to set forth his views on U.S. assistance to Jordan.

The Prime Minister referred to Mr. Rountree’s December, 1958 visit to Amman and noted that he was sure we were already aware of his views on U.S. assistance from reports by our Embassy in Amman. Thus his task was comparatively easy. After expressing the gratitude and indebtedness of his country for past U.S. financial assistance, he took the position that Jordan was an essential factor in the Middle East and had made a critical contribution to the West in its struggle with the disruptive forces in the area. Because of Jordan’s geographic position vis-à-vis Israel, its army carried defense responsibilities for all the Arab states and was not required solely for the internal security and defense of Jordan. He felt it was fair to say that Jordan, with its limited resources, should not be expected to bear alone this overall defense burden. The budget support which Jordan has received, and continues to require, is for its army. The question is whether or not Jordan should maintain such a large army. If the answer is no, then the financial burden could be reduced and the remaining budget expenditures could be generally handled by Jordan. But, if as he believed, because of Jordan’s special defense role in the Arab Near East, the answer is yes, then outside budget support must be continued. At this point he reviewed the history of the Anglo-Jordanian Treaty2 (with its British subsidy to the Jordan Army), its termination in the spring of 1957 and the prompt and generous way in which the U.S. had stepped in to fill the gap. If Jordan was to be successful in carrying out its internal and area responsibilities, it was necessary to move beyond the present day-to-day aid operations to a longer term aid commitment from the U.S. Specifically, what Jordan required was: (1) some form of assurance that the U.S. would continue its assistance for some defined period of years; and, (2) an indication of the magnitude and scope of such assistance. This Jordan requirement remains valid, he said, even though he clearly understood, from the morning meeting with the Acting Secretary, our constitutional and legislative problems in this regard.

Mr. Rountree said the U.S. felt that the size and role of the Jordan military was a matter largely to be determined by the Jordan Government. However, in arriving at this determination, the Jordan Government would obviously have to resolve the problem of balancing defense and security plans with financial limitations. He noted that U.S. budget support contributions have tended to be somewhat larger than those previously provided by the British, and that budget support per se was difficult for us to justify to Congress. In fact, it is only because of Jordan’s position in the Near East situation that we have been able to provide this type of aid. Further, in order to help the Jordan Government plan its budget for the coming year, we made a special and unique exception to the established practice of the U.S. Government not to commit funds until they are appropriated, and authorized our Chargé in December to commit the U.S. Government to make available (subject to Congressional approval) $40.5 million of special assistance funds to support Jordan’s fiscal 1960 budget. Recognizing that budget support merely meets Jordan’s day-to-day operating requirements and not its economic development needs, the Jordan Government should take a hard look at its budget, in terms of putting as much as possible into activities which build up the country’s economic potential. After completion of Congressional action on the USFY 60 Mutual Security Program and review of world-wide requirements for these funds, we hoped to be able to provide some special assistance funds for economic development in Jordan. If this proves possible, we would be prepared, in view of Jordan’s acute budget problem, to be somewhat flexible as regards division of such funds between budget support and economic development projects. However, if the Jordan budget requires U.S. assistance above and beyond the $40.5 million, the special assistance which we might be able to make available for economic development would be reduced by a corresponding amount. Taking into account all resources likely to be available to Jordan, including UK aid, the $40.5 million in U.S. budget support should provide the Jordan Government with sufficient resources to finance a budget which meets its essential security and operating requirements.

In addition, Mr. Rountree pointed out, we have already committed ourselves to provide up to 100, 000 tons of Title II PL 480 grains (valued at $8.1 million), and agreed to acceleration and flexibility in the use of special assistance funds previously obligated for economic development projects in Jordan. These actions alone provide the Jordan Government with significant resources to meet its drought relief requirements during its coming fiscal year. Further, we are prepared to increase the level of Title II PL 480 assistance to meet additional human and livestock needs if Jordan’s drought situation so requires. Also, in the realm of economic development, the DLF is prepared to consider applications for development projects in Jordan which meet its criteria. Mr. Rountree also noted, as the Acting Secretary had in the morning meeting, that the DLF had approved a loan of up to $2.5 million for the Jordan Phosphate Company project.

As for a long-term U.S. aid commitment to Jordan, Mr. Rountree referred to the Acting Secretary’s statement in the morning meeting that, due to legislative limitations, the Executive Branch of the U.S. Government could not make such commitments. However, the best assurance that Jordan could have of future U.S. aid intentions was our already demonstrated policy of helping Jordan and our policies regarding the independence of states in the Middle East and the economic development of underdeveloped countries. Mr. Rountree then asked Mr. Saccio if he would like to comment.

Mr. Saccio said that, as the Prime Minister was undoubtedly aware, the Executive Branch of the U.S. Government was taking a very strong position re holding down USFY 60 budget expenditures, and that this necessarily affected the anticipated level of foreign aid funds. With reference to a long-term U.S. aid commitment, he pointed out that Congress, and the American people, backed the objectives of our foreign aid program, as was evidenced by the continued annual appropriation of funds for this purpose. However, they were looking for results in terms of concrete economic development, and, therefore, were not particularly impressed by budgetary aid.

Prime Minister Rifa’i stated that there appeared to be no disagreement on general principles, and that he understood our difficulties; his Government had problems also. He then turned to discussion of U.S. budget support required in JFY 60 to cover the cost of the military establishment. He explained that U.S. budget support exceeded that obtained from the British in past years because (1) circumstances in the area necessitated an increase in the size of the military; and, (2) units had to be provided which the British had previously undertaken to make available from their own forces. He then turned over to General Shara’ further discussion of the Jordan military establishment.

General Shara’ said that the Jordan Army had not been enlarged very much since the termination of the Anglo-Jordanian Treaty. The addition of one brigade and supporting units had been necessary to fill gaps left by the British. In any case, it is not expansion of troop strength but increasing costs of maintaining worn-out, obsolete equipment from diverse sources that were running up the bill of the military establishment. The Jordan Army required a complete standardization of equipment, which, although costly now, would in the long run effect economies. He noted that the army still did not have enough artillery and, that, although Hawker Hunters were now on hand, it was necessary to build up the Air Force to handle them. In conclusion, he stated that Jordan cannot be expected to reduce the size of its armed forces, since they are now at absolute minimum strength given their internal security and defense responsibilities, and because such a move would be disastrous from the internal politico-security standpoint.

The Prime Minister followed up by saying it clearly had not been the intention or desire of the Jordan Government to increase the size of the army, rather it was the circumstances prevailing in the area and the necessity of closing gaps left when the British pulled out. Jordan’s military budget, supported by the UK, amounted to $35 million. Jordan originally planned a military budget of $40.6 million for JFY 59. During Arab Union negotiations in Baghdad, the military figure was raised to $46.2 million, but the Jordan Government saw no reason to be concerned since it expected the increased financing to come from Iraq. However, when the Arab Union broke up after the July 14 Iraqi revolution, it was not possible to cut these expenditures without reducing army manpower, which is something no government in Jordan can do.

Mr. Rountree stated that, while we appreciated Jordan’s problem regarding the size of its military establishment, we thought these forces should be at the minimum possible level in relation to requirements.

The Prime Minister reiterated that it was not his Government’s intention to increase the size of the army, but that reduction is a problem. In the first place, the army is now at minimum strength. In the second place, up to 75 percent of military expenditures relate to troop support costs, which indirectly aid the economy. Any reduction in manpower would have to be accompanied by economic projects to provide employment for the demobilized soldiers. However, every endeavor would be made to hold to the present manpower level and a study of overall military expenditures had been initiated, which the Prime Minister hoped would result in some savings. Turning to his JFY 60 budget, he pointed out that the military establishment’s requirements are $53.2 million, the increase (over JFY 59) being necessitated by a build-up of the Air Force more than anything else. In terms of cash disbursements during the year, he expected military expenditures to be somewhat less than $53.2 million. Specifically, he requested that U.S. budget support for JFY 60 be at least at the level of the military budget in JFY 59, namely, $46.2 million. The present U.S. offer of $40.5 million is $5.6 million short of meeting Jordan’s minimum budget support needs.

Mr. Rountree said that he understood the UK was planning to provide some aid to Jordan during JFY 60, and hoped that this aid would be helpful in meeting Jordan’s military budget problem. The Prime Minister replied that he hoped so, but that he did not want the army, which is the pillar supporting Jordan, to be paid for by scraping up piasters here and there. In any event, he wanted us to know where Jordan stood regarding U.S. budget support requirements. Mr. Rountree said that we appreciated the Prime Minister’s statement of his position, and that it was in the context of helping his Government plan its JFY 60 budget that we came forward with an offer of $40.5 million. At this point Mr. Rountree turned the discussion to military aid.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/3–2459. Secret. Drafted by Bennsky.

2 Signed on March 15, 1948, and terminated by exchange of notes on March 13, 1957. For text, see United Kingdom Treaty Series No. 26 (1948; Cmd. 7404).

3 In the discussion of military aid, Rountree indicated that, on the basis of General Risden’s recommendations and subject to Congressional authorization and appropriation of the necessary funds, the United States was prepared to initiate a modest program of military aid to Jordan. (Memorandum of conversation, March 24; Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/3–2459) Prime Minister Rifai also discussed with Rountree and the other U.S. officials the possibility that some FY 1960 special assistance funds might become available to support Jordanian economic development. Some consideration was given to what might be possible through the Development Loan Fund and under Title II of P.L. 480, but Rountree indicated that no definitive reply was possible at the time. (Memorandum of conversation, March 24; ibid.) Both memoranda are included in the microfiche supplement.

397. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, March 25, 1959 397. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, March 25, 19591

Washington, March 25, 1959

SUBJECT

Conversation with King Hussein of Jordan

PARTICIPANTS

The United States The President

Mr. Christian A. Herter, Acting Secretary

Major John Eisenhower

Mr. William M. Rountree, NEA

Jordan King Hussein I

Prime Minister Samir el-Rifa’i

Ambassador Midhet Juma

The President noted that King Hussein was scheduled to visit the Pentagon during the afternoon and assumed that in his briefing he would be told about recent scientific developments. The President then discussed several outer space experiments and their importance to scientific progress. The King obviously was greatly impressed.

Responding to the President’s query, King Hussein said he planned, following his tour of the United States, to visit England for about ten days before returning to Jordan. He anticipated that he would be in Amman by the end of next month. Prime Minister Rifa’i said he would return to Amman very shortly and would endeavor to keep things under control while His Majesty was away.

The President made complimentary remarks concerning King Hussein’s courageous attitude and leadership. He noted the similarity of views between Jordan and the United States on many questions and expressed the hope that we would continue to work together toward the resolution of problems which confront us. King Hussein acknowledged with gratitude the President’s comments and assured him that he and his government would work closely with us on common objectives. He noted that recent efforts had been made to bring about an Arab League meeting in Baghdad to reconcile the UAR and Iraq. The meeting was scheduled to be held at the Foreign Minister level at the end of this month. The President noted that it would be a fine thing if the Arab League could resolve this problem satisfactorily. Prime Minister Rifa’i agreed, but noted that when Jordan had great difficulty with the UAR no suggestion was made by the Arab League that it meet to resolve the dispute. In discussing the leadership of the Arab League, Mr. Rifa’i said the former Secretary-General, Azzam Pasha, talked too much, while the present head, Mr. Hassouna, “doesn’t talk”. He said the Arab League was not serving the purpose for which it was organized, in that it reflected merely the policies of one of the member states.

The President expressed the hope that agreement could be achieved so that neither Nasser nor Qassim would push each other too far. He feared that if Qassim was pushed too hard there would be no place for him to go except to the Soviets.

The President inquired what might be a proper, specific program for rapprochement between the UAR and Iraq. He said that, for example, the occasion might present itself whereby he could make comments or suggestions if he felt they would be useful. King Hussein replied that the best formula would be full implementation of the Arab Resolution passed by the United Nations last year. However, that Resolution had been disregarded to the extent that it was now obsolete. What was needed was, in effect, another such resolution. In agreeing with the King, Prime Minister Rifa’i said the Arab League should support respect for the independence and integrity of the member states, non-interference in the internal affairs of each other, and joint efforts to promote the welfare of all Arab peoples.

The President referred to a speech which he had made in the UN expressing the willingness of the United States to give assistance to an Arab plan for Middle East development.2 He felt that cooperative efforts along these lines might lead to a greater readiness among the Arab states to pull together against communism. He realized that the Arabs were concerned also with Israel, but the real danger to the Middle East was communist imperialism. He referred to his talk with King Saud in which he had stressed the danger of communism. King Saud had replied that while he recognized that danger, Israel was a more immediate threat. That was before the recent developments in Iraq, and before the strength of communism in Iraq had become evident. The President hoped that present preoccupations with Israel would not be permitted to disrupt defense against communism.

Prime Minister Rifa’i agreed and said that the smaller evils should be sacrificed if necessary to cope with larger ones.

The President commented that our actions in the Middle East had demonstrated clearly our interest in helping the area. We had come to the assistance of Jordan when it needed our help. A particularly difficult aspect was presented, however, when our friends fought among themselves, as in the case of Israel and the Arab states.

Prime Minister Rifa’i, in discussing the UAR and Nasser, criticized the latter for using “Arab nationalism" to achieve his personal ambitions. He felt that Nasser’s policies had been detrimental and had upset peace and tranquility in the area which are urgently needed if the problems there were to be solved.

The President commented upon the importance of making as much progress as possible in education, public health, etc. He asked what was being achieved in Jordan in these fields. The Prime Minister replied that Jordan had the highest percentage of literacy among the Arab states, except Lebanon. Seventy percent of the people could read and write. A number of hospitals had been constructed throughout the country in every district, and even in many villages.

The President observed that doctors, who had the confidence of their patients not only in medical matters but generally in political affairs, could play an extremely important role in the development of healthy public attitudes. He asked where Jordanian doctors had been educated and what their political orientation generally was. The Prime Minister replied that most Jordanian doctors were educated at the American University in Beirut and in universities in Damascus and Cairo. He said that when the Jordanian Government was forced to suppress the communists, they found it necessary to arrest a large number of doctors. His government was trying now to keep to a minimum the number of Jordanians trained in the UAR.

The President said he had always felt that the Arabs’ religion was so incompatible with atheistic communism that the communists could never get hold of the common people in Arab lands. He had thus been astonished at the strong support which communists seemed to have in such places as Baghdad and Damascus. He wondered how this was possible. He recalled that in Turkey communism was so unpopular that any single communist would receive very severe treatment if he were uncovered.

Prime Minister Rifa’i replied that in general communism was extremely unpopular in Arab countries. Communists had, however, been able to capitalize on special situations. For example, in Iraq there had been a tremendous gap between the top and the bottom, with the masses of the people living in utter poverty but with some few in extreme wealth. He recalled that the Iraqis, during the discussion of the Iraq–Jordan union, had said that it would take twenty years at the present rate of progress in Iraq for the average villager in that country to reach the level of the average villager in Jordan. In Jordan there was virtually no class distinction, and thus communism had far less to work on.

The President said he understood that the King and the Prime Minister had had discussions in the State Department of detailed problems, and thus he had not planned to go into details himself. The Prime Minister responded that he had had excellent talks in the Department, and he merely wished to say that he would welcome the President’s support with respect to the various matters which the Jordanian representatives had raised.

The President emphasized again that we had a great and special interest in the Middle East and wished to be helpful in resolving problems which the nations there had. At the same time, we had a broad responsibility which came from our firm belief in freedom and our knowledge that the destruction of freedom anywhere would affect our own. Thus our obligations were world-wide, and it was not always possible for us to do in any particular country or area everything we would like to do. The Prime Minister expressed appreciation for this situation, and said what he would like was to have in Jordan a “showcase" to demonstrate the advantages of cooperating with the free world with the United States as its leader.

King Hussein said that it was his hope that he and his government would be able to do something for their people. He needed help but wished to be of minimum trouble to Jordan’s friends. He wanted to show all what friendship with the United States meant. He wanted to show stability, peace, and progress. He did not wish to live only for Jordan but wanted to do more for the area as a whole, which was facing communism and must adopt policies and programs to combat it. He would do the best he could. One of his greatest needs was with respect to his army. In two out of five regiments, for example, he now had pre-war tanks and other equipment. This was a bad situation, particularly since other states in the area had Joseph Stalin tanks “against us”.

Without committing himself, the President said we would have to look into that situation.

The Prime Minister observed that communist supporters had their friends, and Jordan had its friends. The people were observing what the communists were doing for those cooperating with them, and would naturally draw comparisons with Jordan. He thought it would be unfortunate if the comparison should show that Jordan did not fare nearly so well.

The President thought the Prime Minister had raised a very important question. The communists were undertaking an aggressive program designed to achieve international revolution, with domination from Moscow. In this program they could proceed as the attacker, others as the defenders. Our help and assistance must be given throughout the world. By their tactics the Soviets can be selective, as they were in Egypt and later in Iraq. Through these means they can take one-tenth of the resources which we use and can have tremendous effect since it takes far more to defend than to attack in isolated and selected places. However, the free world countries which oppose communism have a bond of a common dedication to spiritual values. The Soviets do not have that. In this field they are extremely weak. We value human dignity and freedom, and are not slaves of a dictator of any kind. Thus we must present a common defense against communism.

King Hussein again expressed his warm appreciation for his reception in the United States and the friendly conversations which he had had.

(Note: Following the meeting the President spoke privately to Mr. Rountree, referring to the King’s comments regarding Jordan’s obsolete tanks. He mentioned the possibility of making some M–47’s available to Jordan, perhaps by writing down their value to a nominal sum. Mr. Rountree told the President that the Defense Department had prepared a list of military items, including twelve M–47 tanks, that we were prepared to give Jordan over a three-year period. The Jordanians were told generally what was on the list, a copy of which soon would be given them. They no doubt were not satisfied that twelve tanks were enough, and could be expected to raise the question again. The President thought that, if they did, we should give further thought to the matter.)

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, International Series. Secret. Drafted by Rountree.

2 See Document 269.

398. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 26, 1959 398. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, March 26, 19591

Washington, March 26, 1959

SUBJECT

Concluding Discussions on Current Situation in the Near East

PARTICIPANTS

Jordanian Participants Prime Minister Samir el-Rifa’i

H.E. Sam’an Daoud, Min. of Finance & Min. of National Economy

H.E. Akef el-Fayiz, Min. of Agriculture

H.E. Anastas Hanania, V.P., Jordan Development Board

American Participants The Acting Secretary (at 11:30 a.m.)

Hon. Robert Murphy

Hon. William M. Rountree

Hon. Leonard J. Saccio, ICA

Hon. Sheldon T. Mills

Mr. Donald D. Kennedy

Admiral Grantham, OSD/ISA

In response to a request by Mr. Murphy for his views on the meaning of the term “Arab Nationalism” and the significance which the US should attach to the concept, Prime Minister Rifa’i noted that King Hussein would be discussing the Jordanian interpretation of “Arab Nationalism” in the speech which he was scheduled to give at the National Press Club luncheon the same day. The Prime Minister went on to say that the term “Arab Nationalism” was subject to a number of interpretations by different Arab nations and individuals. He asserted that in recent years this “attractive term” had been abused to some extent by ambitious leaders who sought to use it as a means of influencing the Arab peoples for selfish political ends. He said that some interpret “Arab Nationalism” as implying the union of the whole Arab World under one leader and the imposition of a certain type of government over the area. Others think that in view of the very different characteristics of the different Arab peoples, “Arab Nationalism” should more properly be interpreted as implying the creation of a loosely grouped community of Arab states, perhaps somewhat akin to the British Commonwealth of Nations. He concluded that the essential idea inherent in “Arab Nationalism” is the idea of unity.

Mr. Murphy commented that the United States is interested in doing what it can to alleviate tension in the Near East and bring about cooperation among the countries in the area. He wondered whether the US should be doing things in the political sense which it is not already doing.

Prime Minister Rifa’i replied that although it was not up to Jordan to advise the US on its policy, he was very flattered that his opinion should be asked and would suggest a few things for the US to consider. He felt that the rivalry between individual leaders in the Arab World was a principal cause of present difficulties in the area but he believed it was only a question of time before things returned to a more normal state of affairs. Matters must be left for the Arabs themselves to sort out. The role of the US as the leader of the Free World, in his view, should be to strengthen friendly elements in the area. If the US was persuaded that certain leaders were exploiting the high interests of the Arab nation, it should refrain from extending the hand of support to these leaders.

In response to Mr. Murphy’s question as to what importance he attached to the current meeting of Presidents Chehab of Lebanon and Nasser of the UAR, the Prime Minister replied that he did not attach great importance to this meeting. He felt that Lebanon’s principal motivation in seeking to smooth its relations with the UAR was economic, since Lebanon is heavily dependent on income from transit trade through the Port of Beirut, from tourism and from exports of apples and citrus fruits. The country was extremely vulnerable to UAR, and particularly Syrian, economic pressure.

Mr. Rountree commented that in our view the present situation in the Near East gives more hope of improvement than at any time in the recent past. It was our feeling that the overall interest of the people of the area and the Free World as a whole might best be served if every possible effort were made by Jordan as well as Lebanon to bring about an improvement in relations with the UAR. We were not suggesting humiliating concessions, but felt that, particularly in view of the Iraqi situation and the Communist threat, now is the best time to try to improve relations among the Arab States.

Prime Minister Rifa’i responded that he did not wish to give the impression that the Jordanians would not be the happiest of persons to see good relations established among the Arab states. He said that, despite the bitter and extremely personal attacks in the past against King Hussein and his own person, Jordan was ready to forget the past and open a new page in its relations with the UAR. He observed, however, that despite the young King’s nobility in disregarding the unjust attacks upon him, there were two matters which His Majesty could not easily forget. The Prime Minister wished for some gesture from the UAR to help him in his advocacy of improved relations between the two countries. The two matters which still rancored were: 1) the attack by Syrian fighter planes on His Majesty’s aircraft last fall and 2) activities against the present government of Jordan by former Jordanian nationals resident in the UAR. With regard to the first, the Jordan government felt that someone should come from Cairo to express official regret over the unwarranted attack upon His Majesty’s person. With regard to the political émigrés in the UAR, they had all been sentenced in Jordan courts and deprived of Jordanian nationality. The UAR should either surrender these people under the terms of the extradition treaty in force between the two countries or should at least force them to cease all political activity against Jordan. Unless these minimum gestures were made, he did not see how an improvement in relations could be brought about. The Jordanians, and particularly the young King, could not be expected to go humbly to hail Nasser as the Lord of the Arab World.

The Acting Secretary, who joined the meeting toward its close, closed the session with an expression of the real satisfaction with which the visit of His Majesty and his counselors had been received. He asked that Mr. Rifa’i convey to the King how much we had been honored and pleased by his presence among us and our hope that he felt the genuine warmth of his welcome.

The Prime Minister responded by thanking the Acting Secretary for his kind words and apologized for His Majesty’s absence from the final meeting. He assured the Acting Secretary that His Majesty and all the members of his party had been overwhelmed by the warmth and generosity of the hospitality which had been extended to them.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 786.00/3–2659. Drafted by Lakeland on March 30 and approved as accurate by Herter on April 15.

399. Letter From the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell) to the Chargé in Jordan (Wright) 399. Letter From the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Rockwell) to the Chargé in Jordan (Wright)1

Washington, April 2, 1959.

Dear Ken: With King Hussein’s visit to Washington now a matter of history, I thought it might be useful to apprise you informally of some of the background developments connected with his trip.

As far as we can determine, all has gone well and there have been until now no major hitches. Apparently His Majesty enjoyed his brief stay in Hawaii, although Hawaiian hospitality was so extensive that His Majesty felt called upon to cancel a hurried air trip around the Islands. Our State Department representative at CINCPAC reports that our military authorities in Hawaii as well as the Governor spared no effort to make the King happy.

Although we and probably even the Jordanians may have had some forebodings as to the official discussions which would be held in Washington, our talks with the Jordanians were surprisingly cordial and smooth. You will be receiving copies of the various memoranda of conversation which deal with the substance of the talks. The King himself participated only in the discussion with the President and in the initial talk with Acting Secretary Herter. In the other discussions at the Department Samir el-Rifa’i ably expressed Jordanian views. There was common agreement that we had not come together to conduct any negotiations and this helped to clear the air. In our discussions of our over-all assistance to Jordan there was virtually nothing new. We were pleased to be able to indicate that the DLF loan for the phosphate company was approved in principle. Perhaps of greatest interest to the Jordanians was the revelation that we are prepared to follow up the Risden recommendations with a modest three-year military assistance program. Assistant Secretary of Defense Irwin orally conveyed the rough outlines of what we proposed to do by way of military aid but we avoided disclosing any priorities, time schedule, or any monetary implications. We hope to convey to the Jordanians in writing at a later date more precise information concerning our military assistance intentions but in general believe that much of the detail will have to be worked out through continuing consultations. What seemed to please the Jordanians more than anything else was the fact, subject to Congressional appropriations, that we are prepared to commit ourselves to a program of three years’ duration.

In his public appearances while in Washington, His Majesty conducted himself extremely well. He spoke at the National Press Club and made a TV appearance on “Face the Nation”. In both he produced highly diplomatic answers despite some very loaded questions. As you can imagine, there were quite a number of questions about the Arab-Israeli issue. The King answered most of them by resorting to a simple formula that it behooves the United Nations to find a “just solution" to this question. No amount of badgering moved him very far from this safe line. Other questions centered largely on general Middle East matters such as Iraq and Nasser. Your coaching and our own may have done some good but His Majesty found it difficult to avoid occasionally thinly veiled criticism of Nasser. For example, when asked about Iraq, his usual reply was that to appraise the Iraqi situation properly one must place it in a general area framework. He would then note that “certain governments” allowed communism to enter into the Arab world by accepting aid from the Soviets and in other ways cooperating with the Communist bloc. He would note that Jordan was first among those who recognized the Communist threat and inveighed against it. For their efforts, the Jordanians (the King) were violently attacked. Now these “certain governments” are preaching the same message which caused Jordan to be subjected to such heavy criticism. The newsmen, of course, found no difficulty in identifying Nasser as the primary target for the King’s critical remarks.

Publicity on the King’s visit has been unusually good. Even while he was in Washington and New York newspapers published pictures about his visit. All during his Washington stay, Washington and New York newspapers gave him a remarkable amount of space, particularly in the society columns. Even since his departure from Washington our papers have been covering quite adequately his visits to Annapolis, Norfolk, Williamsburg, and Knoxville. One of the reasons for this unusual amount of publicity no doubt is the fact that Americans are generally attracted by a youthful monarch. In addition, of course, many have heard of his great courage during the crisis of last summer. There also, of course, may be considerable interest in him as a potential rival in the Arab world to President Nasser of the United Arab Republic.

As far as his post-Washington tour is concerned, it apparently is going along satisfactorily. However, the King has been registering some complaints that the schedule is too crowded. Apparently he had in mind primarily a vacation tour with plenty of relaxation. In fact, the tour is not as crowded as that of most official visitors. [10 lines of source text not declassified] Also responsible undoubtedly is the fact that His Majesty’s personal habits have been to stay up late in talking sessions with his cronies and to rise late in the mornings. Today he is moving on to California where there are at least three nights free as well as all day Sunday. We would hope that in California his spirits will improve. Actually, almost all the places included on the King’s itinerary were those which he had suggested to you in Amman. Perhaps he did not realize at that time that visiting these various points of interest would sharply curtail time available for complete relaxation.

In your recent telegrams there has been considerable emphasis on the point that unless Rifa’i and the King come back with significant sums of money there may be political changes in Jordan. As you know, no significant additions have been made to our Jordanian assistance program as a result of this visit. Our impression, however, is that both the King and Rifa’i left Washington far from being displeased. On the contrary, they both seemed very happy. The impression given is that more important than actual quantities of assistance was the success which they achieved in selling themselves as upstanding friends of the West, deserving of full understanding and respect. The most friendly attention and publicity which they received undoubtedly gave them great personal satisfaction and encouragement. We would hope that this satisfaction will tide them over in the months ahead and encourage them to constructive leadership wherein the quantities of American assistance would be placed in proper perspective.

All in all, we feel the King’s trip was a success. We believe it is important that the Jordanians also have the same feeling and trust that in your discussions with the Jordanians you will be able to encourage them to consider the trip as having been successful. The psychological element is always an important factor and in this case it would be well if the Jordanians generally reached the conclusion that the visit to Washington by the King and the Prime Minister was highly worthwhile.

In closing, let me thank you for the fine work which you and your associates did in providing us with advance information which contributed significantly to the visit’s success. We will, of course, be interested in Jordanian reactions as you report them to us in the weeks ahead.

Sincerely yours,

Stuart W. Rockwell2

1 Department of State, NEA Files: Lot 61 D 43, 1959—Hussein’s Visit. Confidential; Official–Informal. Drafted by Meyer.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

400. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 400. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, May 7, 1959—3 p.m.

2336. Beirut pass Ambassador Mills. Prime Minister Hazza Al-Majali2 called me at 0630 this morning apologized for not being able see me last night due necessity finalize formation his new Cabinet3 and requested I come his home 0900 today. Following is digest our conversation lasting nearly two hours.

(A) Prime Minister began by reciting in schoolboy fashion an obviously prepared statement which followed very closely the “line” he asked me to convey to Washington on night he was appointed.4 It was laudatory of all things American, reiterated Jordan’s strong anti-Communist policy both at home and abroad, stressed need for “even greater cooperation between US and Jordan in future”. Majali said as evidence importance he attaches USG/HKJ relations he wished tell me I was his first foreign visitor since he took office. He said wished to clear up one very important matter. He was well aware many persons considered him be strongly pro-British even inferred that as Prime Minister he would welcome a return to modified Glubb Pasha era. This was not true. Jordan unlike other Arab States and certain Arab leaders has never tried play East off against West. Its record is 100% for the free world. The recognized leader of the free world is the US, its greatest ally is the UK the preference be only natural Jordan should enjoy close relations with both, however, he personally leaned more toward US because in dark days following Glubb Pasha ouster termination treaty with UK only US came Jordan’s rescue. However, despite his appreciation US role during that crucial period and substantial assistance since that time he wanted it clearly understood he was neither pro-American or pro-British but only pro-Jordanian. I remarked jokingly that he had made no mention being pro-Nasser as some people said he was (this was designed draw him out on most important foreign policy subject). Majali replied he recognized desirability united front among member Arab States but this could only be achieved if all those concerned really wanted to cooperate. He then launched into impassioned speech extolling virtues King Hussein, his destiny as future leader Arab anti-Communist world, concluded by saying “I am only the shadow. King is the power, no one but the King can lead, all others must follow.” He replied “Nasser is a snake who has bitten our King, who in turn cracked Nasser’s head; until both wounds are healed there can be no talk of reconciliation.”

(B) Prime Minister said as his friend he wanted me know something concerning reasons which influenced choice certain Cabinet Ministers. Minister Interior Wasfi Mirza had been selected because he is Turk (Embassy records him Circassian), extremely wealthy therefore above bribery, he has no blood relatives in Jordan (his sister however is married to Under Secretary Minister Finance Munirar-Rifai, brother former Prime Minister), “will follow without question wishes His Majesty King Hussein.” Anwar Nashashibi was chosen for Defense Minister because he is West Banker (Jerusalem) whose appointment will tend silence charges East Bank Beduins completely control military. I pointed out Nashashibi was also designated Minister Development and Reconstruction which seemed to me like heavy load for one man. Prime Minister put his hand on my arm said “my good friend we both know except for period when Rifai took over Defense portfolio Defense Minister was mere figurehead with all important decisions made by C-in-C Armed Forces. This is the way it will be from now on with King himself keeping in close touch on defense matters.” Re Foreign Minister, Majali said first choice was Musa Alami but unfortunately he was difficult man pin down, furthermore at present time he was in US. Decision has been reached Prime Minister will hold both portfolios time being. If Musa Alami accepts appointment Majali will release it, if not he will continue act dual capacity foreseeable future.

(C) I told Prime Minister in view number of problems involving economic assistance we were very much interested in knowing who he intended appoint as Vice-President Jordan Development Board and when. He said having held that post himself he recognizes its importance therefore in order there should be no slowdown in Board’s operations he had directed the new Minister of Economy Khulusy Al-Khairy temporarily assume responsibility its operations. In a few days he hopes have chosen new Vice-President replacing Anastas Hananiya now Minister of Justice and Communications. He intends appoint someone who is able, energetic and with whom US officials will find it easy to work. He said when appointment finalized he will invite acting USOM/J Director, myself sit in with him have frank discussion Board’s policies/programs particularly its relations with US officials Jordan.

(D) I took opportunity clarify as part new Prime Minister’s indoctrination subject US budgetary aid pointing out $10 million already given HKJ would be last which could be expected until after US FY–60 budget passed by Congress which in practical terms meant no more US money before late August or September. Majali confessed he is deeply concerned over budget as a whole and particularly over certain supplementary requests which he understands will shortly be brought forth by various government departments particularly Defense. He said he intends to rely very heavily on his personal friend Budget Director Adib for whose professional competency he has great respect. I took occasion to point out necessity that ARMA Colonel Delaney be provided as soon as possible with a complete breakdown of the military sector of the budget in order that Washington might be apprised of the exact status and future requirements of the Jordan Armed Forces. I said Colonel Delaney in his dual capacity as Military Assistance Advisor as well as Military Attaché needed this detailed breakdown at the earliest possible moment to ensure that Jordan’s needs might be given the proper consideration by the military in Washington.

I said our USIS people were interested in knowing whether or not Abdul Munim Ar-Rifai, Director National Guidance, would remain on since they had now reached the point in working out a program with him where such information was essential. Majali said he considers Munim Ar-Rifai as his own brother and has asked him if he would be willing to continue in his present post not only because of the specific need in the propaganda field but equally as much in the role of foreign affairs advisor. Prime Minister explained that Rifai as Jordan’s most experienced diplomat cannot be spared particularly at a time when the Foreign Ministry is vacant or may possibly be filled by a completely inexperienced person. It is Majali’s intention to send Rifai as Jordan’s representative to any international conferences which may come up in the near future. He said Munim Rifai has agreed to stay on.

I thanked Prime Minister for his consideration in giving me so much of his time when I knew there were such heavy demands on him. As he walked me to the car he said “I want you to know that you may call me at any hour day or night on any subject on which you believe I may have information that will advance the mutual interests of our two countries.” I thanked him once again for his generous offer pointing out that I would soon be leaving Jordan and I interpreted his offer as extending to our new Ambassador5 and to such other officers in USOM/J and USIS as could profit from it.

[1 paragraph (21 lines of source text) not declassified]

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.13/5–759. Secret; Priority. Repeated to Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, London, Tel Aviv, and Beirut.

2 King Hussein asked former Prime Minister Hazza Al-Majali to form a new cabinet on May 5 after Prime Minister Rifai submitted his resignation in a dispute with political opponents over the question of whether to require the removal of the Chief of Staff of the Army. (Telegrams from Amman: 2285, April 29; 2312, May 4; and 2329, May 6; ibid., 785.00/4–2959, 785.00/5–459, and 785.13/5–659, respectively; all included in the microfiche supplement)

3 A nine-member cabinet was established by Majali on May 6, but the Embassy felt that it was not a strong cabinet and would not last very long. (Telegram 2339 from Amman, May 7; Department of State, Central Files, 785.13/5–759)

4 In telegram 2328 from Amman, May 6, Wright reported that new Prime Minister Majali had taken him aside at a dinner the previous evening to assure him that there would be no change in Jordan’s foreign policy under the new government being formed. Majali asked Wright to convey to Washington the assurance that Hussein continued to be the effective ruler of Jordan, and that Jordan would continue to stand firmly with the United States against the Communist menace in the Middle East. (Ibid., 785.13/3–659; included in the microfiche supplement)

5 Sheldon T. Mills was appointed Ambassador to Jordan on February 16, 1959, and presented his credentials on May 12.

401. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 401. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, May 7, 1959—6 p.m.

2341. Pass Defense. Beirut pass Ambassador Mills. Reference: Embtel 2336.2 Palace official telephoned early this afternoon said King wished to see me as soon as possible. On arrival at Palace I found usually crowded reception room deserted except for Chief of Protocol who took me immediately to King.

Hussein opened conversation by saying he wished have “one of our informal talks in order he could tell me something concerning composition new government”. He said government former Prime Minister Rifai had with help army and police brought Jordan to a state of stability which permitted greater freedom of action in international field. In selecting new Cabinet greatest stress had been laid on personal and professional integrity, loyalty, willingness to work as a team submerging personal ideas and opinions to “higher authorities” (meaning Palace and/or army).

King told me he had ordered study policies and programs all Ministries with particular attention to their effect on already unbalanced budget. I took opportunity point out to King as I had earlier to Prime Minister Majali fact HKJ had already received initial $10 million installment for JFY–60 could not expect any further US budgetary support payments before end of summer. King said he had issued orders budget must be “cut to bone”, however this means not reduce effectiveness armed forces.

King proceeded branch out into discussion foreign affairs saying Rifai government had shown lack imagination foresight in fields international affairs with result Jordan had failed assume its proper role leadership free Arab States. He said for more than two years Jordan had stood firm against Communist penetration Middle East while Nasser during same period had been ally of Russia playing East against West in bid dominate Arab world. He (Hussein) had been special target Nasser’s attacks but despite everything he (Nasser) could do Jordan stood like a rock. Now belatedly Nasser having failed to secure control over Iraq as result July 14 revolution has suddenly become violently anti-Communist demanding all other Arab States recognize him as their leader in fight against Red Menace. Hussein emphasized Jordan will never accept Nasser whether he poses as anti-Communist or reveals himself in his true light as a dictator bent on creating an Arab empire. I pointed out regardless Nasser’s motives there was no gain-saying he had “pulled out all stops” in his attacks on Communists both Soviets and ChiComs. [121/2 lines of source text not declassified]

[7 paragraphs (11/4 pages of source text) not declassified]

Comment: Taken brief glimpses of so-called “third position in Middle East” suggested by Hussein’s remarks [1 line of source text not declassified] indicates King may seriously consider himself “man of destiny”. I am concerned that without Rifai [l line of source text not declassified] King may inadvertently place Jordan beyond point no return with catastrophic results for free world in Middle East. I am not reassured as information continues pile up indicating Beduin hot heads in army may over-reach themselves trigger crumbling of relatively stable internal situation which prevailed last few months under Rifai regime.

Wright

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.13/5–759. Secret; Priority; Limited Distribution. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Cairo, Damascus, Jerusalem, London, Tehran, Tel Aviv, and Beirut.

2 Supra.

402. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 402. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, May 14, 1959—5 p.m.

2368. Following advice afternoon 14th Hussein wished see me immediately, I spent hour and quarter in first tour d’horizon with King.

Obvious King had received report from Majali of his visit with Wright and me 13th.2 In view this assumption I launched into what I believed was most on King’s mind, namely question of Nasser. I drew on extremely helpful appraisal given me by Assistant Secretary Hart in conversation about April 20 stating among other things US extremely pleased that Nasser had come to realize Communism and USSR principal menace to Mid East today and that we encouraged Nasser in maintaining this stand.

Hussein spoke at length of past efforts Nasser to undermine governments in other Arab States including Jordan and asked several times whether we convinced we could trust Nasser. I replied we could trust Nasser to follow policy he considered in his own best interests, as well as in interest of Arab world as he sees it, and we would spare no effort to reinforce and maintain Nasser’s present attitude towards Communism and Soviet Union. Hussein replied difficult believe Nasser really opposed to USSR since he continues receive Soviet economic aid and permit Soviet technicians roam freely in Egypt and Syria.

Hussein stated he has solid information Nasser arming tribesmen in Syria for incursion into Iraq. At end of conversation he translated report he had received from Beirut that incursion into Kirkuk area with participation Iranian tribesmen being planned and UAR had requested USG to deposit in Syrian banks $500 million to finance such effort and USG favorable. I replied USG has no such massive sums available without going to Congress and such statement to my mind suggested spurious character such report. King said story undoubtedly will be carried on Baghdad radio in day or two.

I told Hussein I believed Iraq situation was under constant review by USG and I could not anticipate what lies ahead. I believed at moment US would do everything possible to discourage “adventures” by neighboring states. I could conceive of situation deteriorating to point where Iraqi Communists perhaps with Soviet assistance set up Soviet satellite regime either open or disguised, and if this occurred US would have to decide what should be done. But at moment seemed to me any military adventures by Iraq’s neighbors would be unfortunate in extreme. Tenure of Hussein’s comment was that UAR was preparing just such a military adventure.

Apparent Hussein convinced Nasser largely responsible for bringing about July 14 overthrow in Iraq and intended doing same in Jordan. I was able to tell King that our Ambassador in Cairo convinced that Nasser and UAR at present time wish see maintenance stability in Jordan. I said I also learned from Ambassador Hare Nasser attempting mend fences with Arab countries with which relations have been bad, such as Sudan and Tunisia, but supposed no approaches made to Jordan. King said Nasser had made approaches. But question is one of principle and again asked how we could trust Nasser. I replied we often had to take foreign leaders as we find them and if even belatedly they adopt policies considered helpful for survival free world, then we forget past and cooperate in new situation.

King most friendly and invited see him at any time. I of course told him I would be available whenever he wished see me.

As I was leaving from call on Turkish Ambassador morning 14th (during which I had voiced “no adventure" theme), latter stated I should not be worried by what King had said to Wright (Embtel 2341)3 (report on which he had received from Ankara) and promised to elucidate later.

Mills

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 787.00/5–1459. Confidential. Repeated to Ankara, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, London, and Tel Aviv.

2 Mills reported on this meeting, which was similarly an initial tour d’horizon, in telegram 2365 from Amman, May 14. (Ibid., 785.00/5–1459; included in the microfiche supplement)

3 Supra.

403. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 403. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, May 22, 1959—7 p.m.

2158. Joint State ICA message. Budget Support. Your 23362 (para D) and 23733 (para C) cause for concern here since our position re US budget support during JFY 60 remains same as stated King and Rifai during their Washington visit. Even after taking into account committed US and UK budget support, JFY 60 budget as presented by Rifai during visit, required HKJ find way reduce expenditures. King and Majali should be clearly aware consequences if they acquiesce in additional expenditure demands of military and other Government agencies indicated reftels. Therefore you should at first appropriate opportunity explain to King and Majali US position on JFY 60 budget support and other non-military aid utilizing material contained Deptel 18774 and memorandum conversation between Rifai and Rountree of March 24.5

British Embassy officer informs us Ambassador Johnston told Majali on May 11 UK would make available one million pounds its budget aid in July. Majali’s reported reply was he might well require these funds earlier. We have informally indicated to British Embassy advantages coordinated transfers installments US and UK budget aid as means exercising some control over Jordan budget. In particular we indicated transfer first installment UK aid in early part second quarter JFY 60 would be preferable since second installment our budget support does not appear likely until late August or early September (Icato 562).6 Furthermore it would not appear wise for US and UK allow predominant portion their budget support funds be utilized first half JFY 60 when experience has shown budgetary crises tend develop in latter part third quarter and in fourth quarter.7 We suggest you discuss subject this para with Ambassador Johnston.

Dillon

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/5–2259. Confidential. Drafted in NEA/E by E. G. Berns and cleared by Lakeland and Rockwell and with ICA. Repeated to London.

2 Document 400.

3 Telegram 2373 from Amman, May 15, reported on a conversation between Wright and former Prime Minister Rifai. In paragraph C, Wright summarized Rifai’s remarks on the budgetary problem. Rifai noted that Hussein was greatly concerned about the problem, and felt, on the basis of conversations with the Commander-in-Chief of the army, that the 19.5 million dinars proposed as the defense share of the FY 1960 budget was a “bone-bare" figure which could not be reduced without serious consequences for the King and his government. Rifai estimated that sufficient funds would be available to meet “this stepped-up army spending” until approximately July 1, when the Treasury would face a crisis and be unable to meet the army payroll. (Ibid., 785.13/5–1559; included in the microfiche supplement)

4 Telegram 1877 to Amman, March 26, summarized the conversation concerning U.S. aid to Jordan which took place on the afternoon of March 24 between Rifai and Department officials. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/3–2659)

5 Document 396.

6 Icato 562, April 22, a joint ICA–State message, authorized the allotment through USOM of $10 million for Jordanian budget support for the first quarter of JFY 1960. The Embassy was instructed to caution Prime Minister Rifai to keep expenditures at a minimum during the first 4–5 months of JFY 1960 in view of the likelihood that U.S. budget support funds for the second quarter would not be available until September. (Department of State, Central Files, 885.10/4–2059; included in the microfiche supplement)

7 Mills responded, in telegram 2438 from Amman, May 28, that he had met with Majali and had given him a memorandum making the U.S. position on the limits and timing of budgetary support explicit. Majali indicated that he recognized the overall limits of U.S. support, as outlined to the King and Rifai in Washington in March, but he was surprised that the second installment would not be available until September. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/5–2859; included in the microfiche supplement)

404. Despatch From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 404. Despatch From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 5, 1959.

No. 95

REF

Department’s Circular Telegram 149 of August 19, 19592

SUBJECT

Objectives of the United States in Jordan and How to Achieve Them

Reference is made to the Department’s Circular Telegram No. 149 of August 19, 1959, which notes my responsibility and authority with respect to the mutual security and related programs of the United States in Jordan, and requests my analysis of the objectives of the United States in Jordan and the role of both US and non-US programs in achieving them in Fiscal Year 1961.

The Department, and other interested governmental agencies in Washington, have voluminous background on developments in Jordan since 1956–57 when the Jordanian Government dismissed Glubb Pasha

and terminated the 1946 Treaty with the United Kingdom (under which Transjordan had achieved full sovereignty) with the result that shortly thereafter the subsidy which the UK annually had paid Transjordan (and later Jordan) in ever increasing volume was withdrawn. Jordan went from crisis to crisis from 1956 to the current year, and, just as it had done in Greece and Turkey as well as in numerous other parts of the world, the US stepped in financially to prevent collapse and perhaps chaos in Jordan which could have brought on an area-wide crisis the consequences of which could well have been disastrous not only for Jordan but for the region as a whole. Our hope that Iraq might take on some of the financial burden of supporting Jordan, which was high when the Arab Union of Jordan and Iraq was established early in 1958, was dashed to the ground when the Union fell apart with the July 14, 1958 Iraqi Revolution. To date no possibility of finding another solution to the problem of assistance to Jordan has presented itself, nor have we been able to think up an alternative to the present arrangement towards which we can gradually work.

Absorption of Jordan into the United Arab Republic of Egypt and Syria is not a practical possibility at the present time; it would be resisted by the dominant elements in Jordan, and probably is not currently desired by President Nasser since one consequence probably would be that large scale assistance from the US and the UK to Jordan would be withdrawn or greatly diminished. In fact from the standpoint of the US the reduction in such assistance would be about the only recommendation of such a development. The Egyptians no doubt realize that in these circumstances their absorption of Jordan would rapidly bring on the economic collapse of the country, and Egypt would be faced with having on its hands a million persons (a million and a half including the Arab refugees) expecting better, not worse, times, with Egypt quite incapable of satisfying such aspirations.

Even should the Egyptians revert to the ambition they had in 1957–58 of absorbing Jordan, it could not be accomplished except by military force or subversion, and either course could quite easily be taken by Israel as a signal to achieve the long-held Zionist ambition of grabbing the part of Palestine now in Jordan and perhaps old Transjordan as well. (This was what the more extreme Zionists demanded in 1919 and still demand.) Since Israel would wish the land without the people, in order that it could be populated by Jews from Eastern Europe, Africa and Asia, such a step by Israel would undoubtedly lead to war with the whole Arab world and perhaps part of the Muslim non-Arab world as well. None of the Arab states are in a mood or position to absorb into their economic life the million Arab refugees now living largely in Jordan, UAR, Lebanon and the Gaza Strip upon the bounty of UNRWA. To have half of them, as well as a million more Jordanians (half Palestinians and half Transjordanians), or even

50 percent of this number if the Transjordanians were not disturbed, uprooted would be a major tragedy which the rest of the Arab world simply could not tolerate. If the Free World did not prevent such a tragedy the Arab countries could be expected to seek the support of the Communist World.

To Summarize: 1. A partial solution of the problem presented by Jordan by the establishment of the Arab Union of Jordan and Iraq failed and there is no chance that it can be revived in the foreseeable future. As conditions are now in Iraq few Jordanians could be found who would favor such a union.

2. Union with the UAR of Egypt and Syria is not believed to be desired by Egypt because of the dire economic consequences and because, if forced by subversion or invasion, it could easily lead Israel to make a grab at the West Bank (Arab Palestine) if not at all of Jordan. If Israel succeeded the proportions of the Arab refugee problem could be doubled, that is, to the half million Arab refugees outside Jordan would be added up to all the population of Jordan of a million and a half, most of whom would prefer becoming refugees to living as a partly disenfranchised alien element in Israel, and Israel would not want them. Such an aggression by Israel, however, probably would set off an Arab–Israel war (and perhaps a Muslim–Israel war) which might lead to a Third World War.

This boils down to the fact that for the time being there is no real alternative to a continuation of the maintenance of Jordan as it is and this is possible only with continued assistance from the US and the UK.

In the meantime the US should continue to do what it can, with whatever help can be given by others such as the UK, UN technical assistance, and West Germany, to assist the Jordanians in developing their economic and human resources in order that the growing population can be provided with at least a tolerable life. Without this there could easily be chaos, intervention and disaster. With luck over a period of time such assistance could mean that Jordan could absorb some of its half million Arab refugees in its gradually expanded economy. Whether the rate of such absorption of refugees can equal or exceed the rate of natural increase among them is an open question. There are no industrial projects in sight which could absorb refugee or other labor on a large scale. Small scale undertakings certainly help by preventing the situation from becoming worse and should be encouraged. But it is not possible to have great optimism that half a million refugees who fled from their homes in what is now Israel eleven years ago, and their children, can be absorbed by Jordan to any significant extent at least in anything other than the very long run.

If Israel could be induced to apply a major portion or at least some of the compensation payments it is receiving from West Germany, as well as other resources, to recompensing the Arab refugees in Jordan for their properties in Israel, many of which are providing incomes and amenities such as housing for Israeli citizens, then some of the refugees could use such stakes to try to make a new life for themselves, either in Jordan or elsewhere. There has been little indication that Israel intends to make such reparation now or in the future. Yet without it the refugees in Jordan (and elsewhere) remain a millstone around the necks of the UN and Jordan. They form an excessive supply of labor which forces down wages in Jordan; they form a viper’s nest of discontent and hatred which, because of their susceptibility to extremists, is a constant danger to the security of the Jordanian Government.

Past events have shown that as long as this one-third of the citizens of Jordan remain in their current miserable and hopeless state, Jordan must maintain very strong security forces to keep on top of the situation. Similarly the Jordanians are convinced that their regular military forces must be strong enough, as at present, to deter an aggression from Israel for up to five days to permit international machinery to operate and stop an aggression. In the past what Israel has seized it has held (regardless of UN resolutions); at least this was the case with respect to Israeli seizures of Arab occupied and allotted Palestinian territory during the period between the two armistices of 1948 and 1949. Jordan cannot hope to have military forces which could be a serious threat to Israel or to the UAR. It insists, however, on having forces sufficient to hold up an invasion from Israel (or the UAR) for a few days until the UN can act. If it were too weak to do this, Jordanians are convinced that sooner or later Israel, flouting the UN, would move to seize more of Arab Palestine which now is part of Jordan.

Such a situation could be greatly relaxed if Israel would abandon its policy of the “ingathering of the Diaspora” under which it invites persons of the Jewish faith from all over the world to come to Israel as immigrants. Jordanians, and many others, are convinced that the absorptive capacity for immigrants of the present territory of Israel must be reaching the saturation point, even if the figure quoted by the Hammarskjold Report3 of an $8, 000 investment in creating each immigrant job is increased; as Jordanians see it, this inevitably will mean that Israel eventually will try to seize more territory, and the territory most coveted by Israel is that of Arab Palestine now in Jordan.4 So Jordan must maintain security and military forces of at least an insurance character. That is what they, and we, believe Jordan now has. We have made it perfectly clear that the Jordanian military and security forces cannot be expanded beyond the present level without greater budgetary support which will not come from us. The Jordanians reluctantly are attempting to reduce their military forces, having no choice in the matter; but they insist that the efficiency of their insurance military force must be improved if this can be accomplished without increasing the cost of such forces to the operating budget.

Approximately half the budgetary expenditures of the Kingdom of Jordan come from the budget support accorded by the US and, to a much lesser extent, by the UK. By coincidence this is approximately the figure of the cost of the security and military forces of Jordan. Jordan, the US and Britain cannot be happy over this situation. It is, however, justified as peace insurance. In essence the very large sums the US contributes to such countries as Pakistan, Iran, and Laos can be and probably are justified also as peace insurance. It is unlikely that the forces of any of those countries would play any important part in a Third World War. Yet they are justified as war deterrents. At very much smaller cost the US similarly is paying a war deterrent insurance premium in the form of its budgetary support to Jordan. The length of time such peace insurance will be necessary in Jordan, as in Iran, Pakistan and Laos, depends on forces operating on a much larger stage than the countries themselves. Because two of them (Iran and Laos) have powerful and dynamic Communist states as neighbors, and threats from these neighbors are periodic, whatever assistance is needed can be provided by the US without much complaint on the part of the American taxpayer and Congress. Jordan is in a situation more akin to that of Pakistan. The latter is threatened by the USSR only indirectly, because Afghanistan is still something of a buffer. Also Pakistan has felt the threats of India, in the past, much more than the threat of the USSR, and the US is a friend of India and is helping it on a massive scale. Similarly the threat to Jordan from Communism is not direct, although it is conceivable this situation might change should Iraq fall under Communist sway. Currently the threat to Jordan is from Israel, a country which is friendly to the US and which the US has helped on a massive scale many times as great as the assistance given Jordan. Israel also receives massive assistance from world Jewry, some elements of which try, openly or covertly, to discourage the provision by the US of assistance to the dissatisfied Arab neighbors of Israel, including Jordan. A great deal of indirect assistance is provided to Israel by the US Government by means of the tax-free status that is granted to the United Jewish Appeal.

I believe that the above situation is thoroughly understood by those with accurate knowledge in the Department of State, the Department of Defense, and ICA. I do not believe that the general public in the United States, or most of the Congress, have any idea of the situation in which Jordan finds itself and the need of American assistance to Jordan as peace insurance.

Most of this peace insurance premium for Jordan for the current Jordan Fiscal Year (ending March 31, 1960) consists of $40.5 million in budget support. During the visit to Washington in March, 1959, of King Hussein, his then Prime Minister, and other Ministers (including the present Prime Minister), the Jordanians made an effort to obtain a pledge that budgetary assistance on this (or if possible a greater) scale would be forthcoming for a considerable period of time; they requested such an assurance for a period of seven years. The Secretary of State (then Acting) explained that under the American system financial pledges cannot be made for future periods since the Congress alone has authority to appropriate money and it does so only on an annual basis. The Secretary asked the Jordanians to take what we have and are doing as an earnest that we would continue to assist on about the same level in the future, given the approval of the Congress. The Jordanians consider that this was a conditional pledge, conditional on Congressional appropriations. Since I was present at this meeting, I believe I can speak with some degree of knowledge of the nature of the conditional pledge and how it was understood by the Jordanians.

I consider that a peace insurance premium of approximately the same size will have to be paid to Jordan in its fiscal year starting April 1, 1960. I say this because I do not foresee any fundamental change in the Jordanian or the regional situation in the near future, that is between now and next April, or between next April and April 1961. If there are fundamental changes, then the situation will have to be reappraised. Such a change could conceivably be a final solution of the Palestine problem with a substitution for the uneasy armistices between Israel and its Arab neighbors (UAR, Jordan and Lebanon) of a final peace. As I see the present situation, I do not believe Israel is at present ready to pay the price for peace and I do not believe the US or the UK are willing to bring pressure on Israel to do so.

In my opinion the price Israel would have to pay for peace with its Arab neighbors at a minimum would include the following: (1) Recognition that Arab refugees have the right to return to Israel and be given back their homes and properties. No Jordanian I have talked with thinks many of the Arab refugees in Jordan would return, and they believe that most who did would leave again as soon as they could sell their properties and arrange for the transfer abroad of these assets.

(2) Fair compensation for the properties of the Arab refugees who do not return.

(3) Abandonment by Israel of the policy of the ingathering of the Diaspora so that its Arab neighbors, particularly Jordan, could breathe freely again and not live night and day under what they believe to be the threat that Israel is just waiting for an opportunity to seize Arab Palestine and drive out the Arabs now fully occupying this area.

(4) Rectification of frontiers so that West Jordan (Palestinian) villagers who still have their homes in Jordan (and so are not technically refugees and thus receive little assistance from UNRWA) would have returned to them their farms adjoining their homes and thus once more have a means of earning their livelihood.

Peace would have many advantages for Israel. Not only would the boycott of the Arab countries be lifted, but Israel could expect to find a market for its agricultural and industrial products in the neighboring Arab countries, particularly unindustrialized (and perhaps unindustrializable) Jordan. Haifa and Jaffa would again become entrepôts for Jordan to the benefit of both Israel and Jordan.

In my opinion if Israel does not make peace with its Arab neighbors, in the long run, perhaps 50 years, it is doomed as an independent state. It will be no more lasting than the Latin (Crusader) Kingdom of Jerusalem, and perhaps less so. Its Arab neighbors are acquiring skills rapidly, just as the USSR, Communist China, and India are rapidly acquiring skills. Some day the Arab countries, or a considerable number of them, will be united politically. The Arabs for some time to come will be winning the battle of the cradle since their families, even among the educated, are much larger than those of the Israelis, at least those from Europe.

I believe that a very large number of influential Jordanians would be willing to accept the existence of the State of Israel if the latter is willing, or is successfully urged particularly by the US, to pay the price of peace somewhat as outlined above. If this does not occur, the US, as I see it, has little choice but to continue paying the peace insurance premium to Jordan for an indefinite period.

I and other Embassy officers have reviewed with USOM/Jordan officials the proposed USOM/Jordan program for fiscal year 1961 recently sent to ICA. We believe that in Jordan, as in other countries, there have been some false starts in the past. At present the USOM/Jordan Director and his staff are doing their best to rectify any mistakes that have been made. They also are trying to concentrate on projects of the highest priority and eliminate or scale down projects which they, and the Jordanians, consider of lesser utility. They have the full support of myself and other Embassy officers in this endeavor. We have gone over the proposed FY–1961 program and approve it.

There are other things which we can and should do when plans have been worked out. Jordan needs additional help in education. The King, the Prime Minister and the Minister of Education are now considering ways and means of reorienting the educational system so that the high schools of the country will not turn out 5, 000 plus graduates each year whose training is entirely academic while the job openings for people with such training, now and for some years to come, cannot be expected to exceed 500 per year. When plans mature Jordan will ask us for and should receive help in changing the high school curriculum to emphasize practical skills.

In ten years this situation may change as the country develops its resources. Jordan simply cannot afford, however, to build up a backlog of 50, 000 or more academically educated young men (and women) who have no opportunity of earning a living. (These figures do not include the high school graduates from the refugee camps who, at least, have food and shelter while unsuccessfully seeking employment.) This group of educated unemployed dogs the Ministers in charge of many of the projects in which USOM is involved. The Jordanian Ministers cannot close their eyes to this problem. Tremendous pressures are brought on them to give jobs, any jobs. This group is like quicksilver, pushed back here only to push out there. The greatest pressure is brought on the Minister of Public Works and, unless he wishes to see educated young men (non-refugees) starve, or secretly join extremist (perhaps Communist) ranks, he must find something to keep body and soul together for the most persistent. This group may total 10, 000 at present.

The USOM Director and I have been considering this serious problem and on September 1, 1959, we discussed it with His Majesty the King and the Minister of Economy. I told the King that we faced precisely the same problem during the depths of the depression; our Government realized we simply could not let young men from the cities rot morally and physically; so the American Government created the Civilian Conservation Corps and put young men to work, under the Army Engineers, doing useful tasks of conservation and improvement. The greatest result of the CCC, I told him, was saving human beings, and the skills they had acquired, which were of inestimable national benefit when the war came. I told the King that if he wished, some of the experts of USOM would try to come up with some ideas on this subject for his consideration. The King was enthusiastic and stated that the problem of the educated unemployed (mostly at the high school graduate level) worried him greatly both as a human and a political problem; and he had often thought of some kind of a labor corps. We told him that he would have to give such an effort attractiveness by labeling it a “Build Jordan” or “Save Jordan” program or young intellectuals would rebel against doing manual labor. Also for the time being such a corps should be confined to the intellectual unemployed since to mix in illiterate or nearly illiterate peasants, no matter how deserving, would ruin the chances of getting the intellectuals to enroll. The advantage of such a corps in Jordan would lie not only in the useful work they would accomplish, and the saving of human assets, but also in imbuing these young men with a sense of discipline and civic pride. It could only work in my opinion if supervised by the Jordan Army. If such a corps existed, then the temptation of the Ministers to load projects, many of which are cooperative with USOM, with unneeded functionaries could be resisted. Job seekers could be invited to enroll and if they refused the Government could wash its hands of them. Financing should, in our opinion, be separate from the Army budget, although administered by the Army officers because they are the only element with sufficient administrative ability. Probably the funds will have to be allotted from the proceeds of the sale of PL–480 wheat.

The Department and ICA will be hearing more of this from Mr. Burns and myself as the idea takes shape. In our opinion it is essential that something be done for the unemployed intellectuals that will develop the country and save their skills, and their loyalties, for Jordan. If it is not done, as stated above, many will be recruited secretly into underground Communist ranks or by other political adventurers equally dangerous to Jordan and to the tranquility of the area. After an enlistment in the CCC of a year or two, during which such young men could be taught manual skills on the reclamation and construction jobs which engaged them, many could find employment, it is hoped, in fields less overcrowded than the clerical work which is about all the purely academically trained can now do. We have no idea at the present time whether assistance, other than the allocation of some of the proceeds of the sale of wheat, will be required from the US. If it is, we hope that Washington can be flexible enough to find a way to provide such limited additional assistance on fairly short notice. Very important political, as well as human, values will be at stake.

In the past we have granted Jordan limited quantities of military assistance in the form of hardware, for example following the emergency of April 1957. We are now about to embark on a three-year program of military assistance, the details of which are still under negotiation with the Jordan Government. The only comment that needs to be made on this program is that it is designed to meet pressing requirements and it has the same aim as the budget support discussed above—that is, peace insurance. The sole problem of coordination between programs entailed in this program of military assistance is that we must be careful that our military assistance does not increase the Jordan Army’s requirements for budget support. We have gained the assurance of the GOJ that an increase in the Armed Forces budget level will not result from our contributions of military hardware, and we shall exert overselves to see that it is held to this understanding.

Last year the US furnished some unplanned assistance, specifically a $5 million fund for emergency procurement of petroleum products, and a Title II, PL 480 program of grains donated for drought relief. No such programs are now planned for FY–1961 since such emergencies are not known in advance.

Coordination of the US program on the operating level has been extremely good in Jordan, and a tradition exists of frequent consultation. I expect such coordination to become even better now that the Embassy and USOM soon will be adequately staffed. The Country Team has shared in the task of preparing the MSP program for FY–1961. I intend to exercise fully my responsibility for coordinating US programs in Jordan to assure that they are well conceived and are being carried out as effectively as possible.

As for non-MSP and non-US aid programs in Jordan, they are of relatively small significance compared with the large MSP program. One important segment of non-MSP US assistance is our contribution to the budget of UNRWA. Jordan’s share of our contribution to UNRWA is about $11 million. This is an absolutely necessary form of US assistance, for without it we could not attain any of the objectives we are aiming at with our MSP assistance; the refugees must be taken care of one way or another for Jordan could not survive if the Palestinian refugees became a sole responsibility of Jordan. There is no problem of coordination in this area, for UNRWA activities are primarily of the direct-relief variety; in the fields of education, health and welfare the refugees are handled separately from other Jordanian citizens by the GOJ. In other words, the refugees are outside the realm of our activities and must remain so for the present.

The Ford Foundation is planning to provide the Jordan Development Board with five economists. We have met several times with the Ford Foundation area representative and are thus coordinated with this effort.

Other non-MSP US assistance encompasses activities by missionary and voluntary agency groups and by private enterprise such as the exploration for oil by the Phillips Petroleum Company, the backstopping of Air Jordan by Transocean Airlines, and royalty payments to the GOJ by TAPLINE. With none of these activities do problems of coordination arise.

Great Britain is the only other country that gives assistance of significant proportions to Jordan, and the level of UK assistance has been greatly reduced since 1957 when we began to assume most of the UK’s financial responsibilities in Jordan. This year the UK’s efforts are directly supplemental to ours, that is, a limited amount of budget support plus an interest-free loan for economic development (earmarked for the Desert Road and Aqaba Port projects). The UK is also assisting Jordan with a small military training mission. Coordination with the UK in the field has been good and whatever problems have arisen have been worked out with the UK Embassy in Amman. We do not know what assistance the UK is planning to give Jordan in the next fiscal year, but it is likely to be in the forms and at the level of the present year. The Aqaba Port project will be completed this year, but an additional loan for the Desert Road will probably be required.

The Federal Republic of Germany is engaged in a small technical assistance program in Jordan, for the time being limited to equipping a vocational school in Irbid and supplying technical advisers to the school. No problems of coordination with the West Germans exist. It would be helpful if West Germany and others of our Western Allies could be induced to undertake assistance programs in Jordan, both governmental and private, to supplement our efforts in the field of economic development.

West German technicians are assisting the Arab Potash Company in developing the extraction of potash from the Dead Sea. Two East German technicians are due to arrive in Jordan soon for the same purpose. Personnel from the Yugoslav trust YUGOMETAL are managing the Jordan Phosphate Mines Company on a contract basis.

An Italian firm will construct Jordan’s petroleum refinery. These projects are business propositions and are therefore not foreign assistance under the usual definition.

One possibility that has not yet been fully exploited is assistance from other Arab states which have a surplus of capital for investment. This idea has been talked of much in the past, but it is hedged in with so many political and economic complications (instability in Jordan in the recent past and greater returns from investments elsewhere) that about all we can do is hope something can be done. An example is the investments a number of Arab states made in the Arab Potash Company. It would be helpful if we could find a means to convince the richer Arab states to invest in Jordanian projects rather than building apartment houses or casinos in Beirut. If Jordan continues to enjoy a period of relative stability, this possibility has more chance of success.

The United Nations Technical Assistance Board engages in technical assistance efforts in Jordan in a variety of fields, mostly concentrated on participant training, furnishing technical advisers, and making basic economic studies. Coordination with our own technical assistance programs is good and is carried out on both the working and planning levels. I recently met with representatives of some of the governments and organizations engaged in assisting Jordan in its economic development for the purpose of informal coordination, and I intend to have more meetings in the future.

The US program of $40.5 million for budget support is a conditional promise which, as I see it, cannot be reduced. We shall do our best to keep it from rising, as we have done up until now. Economic development aid, which has been around $10 million annually, should be maintained approximately at that level. To cut this element of aid would have a disastrous impact in Jordan. A drastic cut would to all intents and purposes put a stop to economic development in Jordan, and, by killing all hope, would contribute to political instability. In his joint television broadcast with the British Prime Minister in London on September 1, President Eisenhower stated that “one billion seven hundred million people today are living without sufficient food, shelter, clothing and health facilities. Now they are not going to remain quiescent.” A million and a half of this vast army of the have-nots live in Jordan. We cannot afford to deprive them of hope. A drastic cut in economic assistance would have precisely this effect.

I do not share the pessimism about Jordan which, with reason, was fairly widespread in certain circles in Washington when I arrived there early in February of this year. In a sense the peace insurance, which our major expenditure on behalf of Jordan is in essence, must continue until peace between Israel and its Arab neighbors can be concluded, or war occurs between them which could well inflame a very wide area if not the whole world. A major portion of our military expenditures in our own country, as well as in some fifty allied countries, is, similarly, essentially peace insurance.

Paying the peace insurance premium in Jordan, and elsewhere, does not absolutely guarantee peace any more than our colossal expenditures for our own defense structure guarantee that war will not occur. But certainly it makes the likelihood of war much less.

In the current and the following fiscal years, I advise that we proceed with our program in Jordan much as we did in Fiscal Year 1959, doing our best to see that we have the wisest order of priorities, and being flexible enough to undertake new or phase out old projects as our best judgment directs. Our overall stance in Jordan is appropriate to the situation as it exists today. It will be kept under constant review by the Country Team, as it is by the Department, ICA and the Department of Defense.

Sheldon T. Mills

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–559. Confidential.

2 Not printed.

3 On June 15, 1959, U.N. Secretary-General Hammarskjold submitted to the General Assembly a report entitled “Proposals for the Continuance of United Nations Assistance to Palestine Refugees.” (U.N. doc. A/4121; printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1959, pp. 1033–1041)

4 A recent American visitor to Jordan told me that some close Jewish friends of his, American citizens (who are reasonable in most things), told him with obvious sincerity that the Jewish people have a covenant with Jehovah under which all of the territory of present day Jordan was promised to the Jews. These otherwise kindly American Jews apparently are totally indifferent to what becomes of the present Arab occupants of Jordan. Palestinian Jordanians have heard such assertions for the last 40 years and know they are believed. [Footnote in the source text.]

405. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 20, 1959 405. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State, Washington, October 20, 19591

Washington, October 20, 1959

SUBJECT

Jordanian Concern over Situation in Iraq

PARTICIPANTS

The United States The Secretary

NEA—Mr. Parker T. Hart, Deputy Assistant Secretary

NE—Mr. William C. Lakeland, Officer-in-Charge, Iraq–Jordan Affairs

Jordan Foreign Minister Musa Nasser Ambassador Yusuf Haikal

During a call on the Secretary the Jordanian Foreign Minister stated that he had been requested by King Hussein personally to convey the deep concern of His Majesty and the Government of Jordan over the current situation in Iraq. The Minister stressed the dangers to all the Arab countries, as well as the Free World, of a Communist takeover in Iraq. He made it plain, however, that Jordan was also extremely worried over the possibility of UAR intervention and that the United States might favor a Nasserist solution to the Iraqi problem. The Minister acknowledged that there was very little Jordan itself could do about the current situation in Iraq and said the King desired a frank exchange of ideas on this subject with the United States. He urged the United States consider sending promptly to Jordan a high-level emissary who could discreetly discuss the problem and possible measures to deal with it. The Minister stressed the King’s complete willingness to take whatever measures might be mutually agreed to be desirable under the circumstances. In discussing the situation in Iraq, the Minister professed to draw a distinction between the personal position and role in the Arab World of Gamal Abd al-Nasser (whom he acknowledged to be a popular and important leader in the area) and the threat of Egyptian domination of the Arab World—a prospect which he suggested was as unpalatable to the Iraqis as to the Jordanians themselves.

The Secretary said that the United States shared Jordan’s concern over the situation in Iraq. He pointed out, however, that if someone were sent to Jordan to discuss the Iraqi situation it would soon become widely known, no matter how discreetly the matter was handled, and would be taken as clear evidence that we were plotting against the Government of Iraq.2

1 Source: Department of State, NEA Files: Lot 62 D 25, Memos of Conversations, 1959. Secret. Drafted by Lakeland on October 21. Musa Nasser, who was appointed Jordanian Minister of Foreign Affairs on September 20, was head of the Jordanian Delegation to the General Assembly. Nasser took advantage of his trip to New York to request a meeting in Washington with Secretary Herter.

2 According to telegram 709 to Amman, October 21, Herter also discussed proposed FY 1960 aid levels with Nasser, and told him that the United States would be able to provide Jordan with $6.5 million in development assistance in addition to the $40.5 million in budget support previously promised. (Ibid., Central Files, 785.5–MSP/10–2159; included in the microfiche supplement)

406. Airgram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 406. Airgram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, February 8, 1960.

G–27

Ref: CG 409, December 31, 1959.2

A. Country team has given earnest consideration to possible ways and means adapting US program of assistance to Jordan to requirements of Section 503(c) 1959 Mutual Security Act,3 i.e., specific plan for each country receiving bilateral grant assistance whereby, wherever practicable, such grant assistance shall be progressively reduced and terminated.

Political and economic situation in Jordan such that we can foresee no specific timetable either for reduction or termination of US grant program in Jordan within period 1960–1965. We can, however, see several means by which US grant aid could possibly be reduced to a presently unpredictable extent and at a time we cannot now specify. Before reviewing these possibilities, might be useful restate basic Mutual Security Plan Objectives in Jordan, as country team sees them: 1. Encourage and assist Government of Jordan to increase its economic development activity so as (a) to reduce ultimately magnitude of its dependence on external aid, and (b) to bring about discernible rise in present low standard of living, a requisite to political stability.

2. Encourage the maintenance of armed forces capable of maintaining internal security, aiding in continuance of governmental stability, and successfully resisting encroachments until United Nations or Free World countries can take effective action to protect Jordan.

B. Our grant assistance to Jordan is designed to meet the above-stated objectives. Jordan is not a viable country and depends for its very existence as well as political stability on external assistance. With a population growth estimated at 3 percent per annum; a large military establishment presently essential to internal stability; the unsettled conditions in the area, and particularly the lack of settlement of the Palestine question; it is impossible to foresee any possibility of terminating our program of grant assistance in the period 1960–1965. Furthermore, the people of Jordan share the aspirations for improving their standard of living common to all the peoples of the underdeveloped countries. The disparity between their own standard (per capita GNP of $84) and that of Israel ($722) may be particularly painful to them.

If there should be a relaxation of tension in the area and a solution of the Palestine refugee problem resulting in a reduction in military expenditures, releasing funds which could then be diverted to economic development, we should have a brighter picture indeed. However desirable that situation is, it is not one on which we can prudently predicate a reduction or termination of US grant assistance.

C. We believe Jordan should be encouraged to increase its economic development expenditures and to restrict future military expenditures to the present level. While our major objective in Jordan has been the maintenance of political stability, and it must remain our major objective, an essential corollary here as in other less-developed countries is the realization of a perceptible rise in standards of living through economic development. However, within this policy, there are several possibilities for reducing US grant assistance: 1. Induce Western European countries, e.g., Federal Republic of Germany and Italy, to extend capital assistance to Jordan, and induce the UK to increase its assistance. To the extent that such assistance is increased, our present annual grant of $40.5 million for budgetary support could be reduced.

2. If a multi-year program of sales of US agricultural surpluses to Jordan under Title I of Public Law 480 could be initiated, the maximum proportion of the dinar sales proceeds to be granted to the Jordan Government, we might be able to: a) increase the total expenditures for economic development in Jordan and b) simultaneously reduce the amount of our grant aid. Our intention would be to recommend reduction of US grant assistance, but only to the extent of part of the amount generated by the PL 480 program. The feasibility, extent, and timing of such a Program cannot be determined now.

3. If Development Loan Fund should be willing to undertake to finance a substantial volume of economic development projects in Jordan, consistent with Assumption 1 as stated by Department and ICA/W, our grant aid could be reduced. Country Team would welcome this development and appreciates activities already financed by DLF. However, uncertain as to how extensive DLF activities here will be.

4. If, as we strongly hope, GOJ increases its tax revenues and collections, US grant aid might be diminished. Here the Ford Foundation fiscal study team coming in June–August 1960 may be extremely helpful. But the magnitude of this source of governmental revenue is not large, because of the extremely low GNP in Jordan.

5. The new International Development Association, if it has a liberal lending policy applicable to Jordan’s economic and financial circumstances, could make a significant contribution to Jordan’s economic development, as well as permitting a reduction in US grant aid.

6. Utilization of Jordan’s considerable internal credit potential for purposes such as working capital in the agricultural sector and for financing of capital investments, not excluding a small fiduciary issue to be used for the latter purpose. Aiming at achievement of the above objective by helping to put into effect the law establishing the Central Bank in order to enable Jordan gradually to build up its own monetary and credit policies and facilities to best serve the national interest.

Summary

While Country Team cannot now predict timing or specific extent of measures or developments which could safely permit reduction US grant aid, the above six possibilities give us hope that ways and means may be found to permit a reduction. We cannot predict time when elimination of US grant aid may be possible consistent with US interest in Jordan’s stability as contribution to peace in area.

Mills

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/2–860. Confidential.

2 Not found.

3 P.L. 86-108, July 24, 1959. (73 Stat. 246)

407. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 407. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, July 23, 1960—10 a.m.

360. From Dillon. At meeting with Heathcoat-Amory, Chancellor of Exchequer, July 22,2 Dillon presented case for increase in percentage contribution by UK to budgetary support for Jordan. In response, Chancellor outlined difficulties, stressing increased demands on UK for assistance to Commonwealth countries, particularly nearly independent nations, considerable increase in British private overseas investment, current difficult balance of payments situation, fact that Jordan imports chiefly from Germany, and domestic POL opposition to assisting country from which UK “thrown out”. Chancellor agreed, however, that present distribution (UK 15 percent, US 85 percent) “not fair”. Dillon adduced numerous reasons why increased contribution by UK important from viewpoint both countries, and suggested solution lay in agreement on respective percentages contributions. Dillon indicated 50/50 division of responsibility most desirable outcome but recognized POL difficulties for UK this solution and suggested UK consider assuming at least 40 percent contribution. Chancellor said they had thought of possibility that Germany might be willing to assume share of support, but did not pursue subject in detail. He indicated that British are currently engaged in assessment of the need for existing military bases and stressed that any increase in commitment on one hand, i.e., Jordan, would only be possible through reduction in some other existing commitment.

Chancellor concluded that they would look at question of increase in UK contribution to budgetary support and would study it in the light of their “reappraisal of priorities” of their over-all commitments. He stated that while they are unable to commit themselves at this time, they would be able to give a definite answer in September at time of Bank and Fund meetings. Dillon accepted this commitment, but re-emphasized importance of reaching definite decision before US has to prepare Mutual Security Program budget presentation October.

Houghton

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 841.0085/7–2360. Confidential. Repeated to Amman and London.

2 Dillon and Heathcoat-Amory were in Paris July 22—23 to participate in the ministerial conference on the reconstitution of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation.

408. Editorial Note 408. Editorial Note

At 11:30 a.m. on August 29, a bomb exploded in the Prime Minister’s office in Amman. The explosion killed Prime Minister Majali and two Foreign Ministry officials. A second explosion followed several minutes later in another part of the building, but King Hussein and others hurrying to the scene escaped injury. (Telegram 250 from Amman, August 29; Department of State, Central Files, 785.13/8–2960) Newly-appointed Chargé Eric Kocher called on Hussein on the afternoon of August 29 to express official condolences and was informed by the King that available evidence indicated that the bombs had been planted by two custodial employees who had disappeared into Syria earlier in the day. Kocher noted that the UAR Ambassador and Counselor had also left Jordan several days previously, leaving a Third Secretary as Charge. The King said that proof of Syrian complicity in the matter would awaken the world to the fact that amicable relations between Jordan and the “dictatorial UAR” were impossible. (Telegram 255 from Amman, August 29; ibid.)

King Hussein immediately appointed a new cabinet headed by Prime Minister Bahjat Talhouni. This cabinet, which retained most members of the Majali cabinet, was sworn in on the evening of August 29. (Telegram 261 from Amman, August 30; ibid., 785.13/8–3060) The Embassy concluded that there would be no change in Jordan’s overall foreign policy under the new government, but noted that, owing to Hussein’s conviction that the UAR had played a part in the assassination, “peace between Jordan and President Nasser is farther away than ever and propaganda warfare between the two, seldom at a low pitch, will probably rise to new heights.” (Telegram 264 from Amman, August 30; ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

409. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 409. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, September 9, 1960—3:51 p.m.

302. UK Embassy has shown Dept Ambassador Johnston’s reports on latest talks with King which update info which Embassy has reported. You should see King soonest possible. Under instructions you should stress same line of reasoning as Ambassador Johnston against any intervention by Jordan outside of Jordan.

Your presentation should include following points: 1. Our appraisal is that UAR’s overwhelming air superiority assures that Jordan would reap disaster should hostilities occur.

2. Jordanian intervention likely have chain reaction in which UAR southern region air and perhaps land forces, as well as those of Israel could be expected to intervene. Aside from plunging Mideast into war, Jordan itself can only come out loser.

3. If any Jordanian forces, land or air, should cross Jordanian border, Jordan in US and world opinion would be guilty of aggression. It would immediately lose widespread sympathy which it now has, and would prejudice most adversely any UN consideration.

4. US has proven its friendship for Jordan. If Jordan should undertake any aggressive action, US cannot be expected to be of any assistance.

5. US has admired statemanship King has displayed until now. We believe King has shown wisdom in seeking an end to activities such as led to Majali’s assassination through Arab League and United Nations. We convinced this course not only wisest statemanship but offers best prospects for maintaining independence and territorial integrity of HKJ.

Parallel approaches should be made to Prime Minister and Foreign Minister emphasizing points above.2 Arma should seek means make same presentation to Habes Majali or highest Jordanian officer available. Advise British Ambassador and Spinelli of Department’s views as set forth above and actions you are taking.

Herter

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project “Clean Up”, Jordan. Confidential; Limit Distribution. Drafted by Mills and Meyer, cleared in BNA by James D. Moffett, in UN by Stephen Palmer, in NEA by Jones, and by Herter. Repeated to London, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Beirut, Damascus, Jerusalem, and USUN.

2 Assistant Secretary G. Lewis Jones and Ambassador Mills, who was in Washington on home leave, called in the Jordanian Ambassador, Dr. Yusaf Haikal, on September 9 and expressed parallel concern about military preparations in Jordan. (Department of State, Central Files, 785.54/9–960; included in the microfiche supplement)

410. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 410. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 9, 1960—6 p.m.

347. Reference Embtel 339. UK Ambassador Johnston saw King Hussein evening of eighth as planned. I have seen UK Ambassador’s report to HMG [21/2 lines of source text not declassified]. Sir Charles’ impression was that King heard him out but UK Ambassador not sure what impression he had made at end of talk. Sir Charles told me that for first time since he has been in Jordan he is “shaken” by present course of events.

I obtained appointment with King 1:00 p.m. on ninth directly before Spinelli also saw His Majesty. I told King I had come to see him on matter of considerable concern not only to myself personally but also to my Government. We had heard reports concerning extensive troop movements from Jordan along Syrian frontier that appeared particularly disturbing at this time. I had come to His Majesty personally without authorization from my Government because USG had not had sufficient time to react to news of border build-up, but I said we would appreciate any clarification he could give us concerning present situation.

[1 paragraph (15 lines of source text) not declassified] I said that in last 10 days I had had Jordan’s problem constantly in mind. I had tried to visualize all possible actions and solutions. Natural impulse was certainly to strike out in fury. No one could blame Jordan for anger after series of incidents of last ten days. At same time, if Jordan acted out of emotion in present affair and tried to use forces across border, I personally could see only blow-up of disastrous proportions ahead. [51/2 lines of source text not declassified]

[1 paragraph (10 lines of source text) not declassified]

I continued that more I had thought about this problem the more it came back to solution through channels of UN. Speaking personally I saw no helpful role for any individual third country in this affair. Equitable solution required prestige of some supra-national body and only organization which fitted this description was UN. King indicated he had already assured me Jordan would take no precipitate action before informing his close friends US and UK. I said I very much appreciated this reassurance, especially at this time and could His Majesty assure me that Jordan would rely on UN action before taking matters into its own hands? He [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] assured me that Jordan was moving “step by step” in complete consultation with UN and he was shortly going to see Ambassador Spinelli who, he supposed, would be talking to him about same problem.2 In parting I again thanked King for his reassurances.

Comment: Like UK Ambassador I am not sure what impression this démarche made on King. He received my comments attentively but I could feel underneath a sense of strain and tension. Since he remains highly emotional over whole series of UAR-inspired incidents, I would imagine he has not been preceptive to pressures of those favoring across border action.

Kocher

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project “Clean Up”, Jordan. Secret; Niact; [distribution indicator not declassified]. Received at 4:56 p.m.

2 Spinelli subsequently indicated that his conversation with Hussein had run along lines similar to the conversation which Kocher had with the King. Kocher, Spinelli, and U.K. Ambassador Johnston agreed that the best course to follow was to seek and use messages of concern from the United States, the United Kingdom, and Secretary-General Hammarskjöld in an effort to restrain military action on the part of Jordan. (Telegram 348 from Amman, September 9; ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement)

411. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 411. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 10, 1960—8 p.m.

361. Reference Deptel 302.2 I met with King and Talhouni together afternoon of tenth. I opened by stating that yesterday I had come to see His Majesty to express deep personal concern of myself and my government at Jordanian build-up of troop strength along Syrian border. Today I had come under specific instructions which, I had explained to King yesterday, I expected to receive momentarily. I then expanded on points in reftel and ended up urging in strongest terms that GOJ weigh most carefully in terms of its own future and welfare as well as in terms of international relations consequences which might occur if it should embark on an adventure in Syria.

King heard me out without interrupting and when I stopped he smiled and said he hoped I would forgive him if he went over some of same ground we had covered yesterday. [101/2 lines of source text not declassified]

[1 paragraph (8 lines of source text) not declassified]

I then asked if Jordan intended to allow sufficient time to have its grievance heard by UN, why at this particular time should troops and armored strength be built up along Syrian frontier. [91/2 lines of source text not declassified]

In considering these three reasons, I said I realized there must be elements in Jordan which were crying for vengeance and which perhaps could not be satisfied except through some form of action. At same time, it occurred to me that troop build-up was subject to considerable danger. Tempers could easily be inflamed and any small incident at frontier could develop into large scale conflagration. King replied he recognized dangers inherent in this but thought necessity of safety valve justified present risk.

[2 paragraphs (131/2 lines of source text) not declassified] I thanked King and said I knew my government would be pleased to have his assurances. USG recognized there might be pressures on him, but we were sure that as a leader of the Arab world with considerable international stature he would be able to control those elements in his country which might desire hasty or ill-considered action. My government had come to same conclusion as he, namely that UN offered most satisfactory and possibly only method of seeking redress in situation. King agreed, said he would keep in touch with me, and again gave his reassurances.

Comment: I was most encouraged by this talk. Some of evasiveness of yesterday’s conversation was missing and King’s reassurances were clearer and sharper. I came away with firm feeling King in control of extremist elements and at least for moment will not allow them gain satisfactions they desire immediately. Moreover, I believe as of now he fully intends give UN adequate opportunity consider case.

Considerable danger still exists, of course, small border incident could provoke full scale attack. Also King might lose control to extremists. Greater danger than either of those perhaps is possibility of provocative reply from UAR to GOJ note requesting extradition or another incident similar to PriMin bombing. Latter case, I am convinced, would lead to instant and violent retaliation by GOJ against UAR.3

Kocher

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project “Clean Up”, Jordan. Confidential; Niact; Limit Distribution. Repeated to London, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Beirut, Damascus, Jerusalem, and USUN.

2 Document 409.

3 On September 10, President Eisenhower approved a personal message from him to King Hussein praising Hussein’s restraint since the assassination of Prime Minister Majali, and counseling against military retaliation to avenge the death of Majali. The message, which was drafted by Mills in NEA and approved by Herter, warned that an aggressive action by Jordan against the UAR could start a chain reaction in the Middle East “the final repercussions of which could easily be disastrous not only for Jordan but for the area as a whole and indeed for the world.” The message was sent to Amman on September 10 in telegram 322, with instructions to Kocher to deliver it to Hussein if, in Kocher’s judgment, the situation was such that the message would have a constructive impact. (Eisenhower Library, White House Office Files, Project “Clean Up”, Jordan)

Kocher replied, in telegram 367 from Amman, September 11, that he felt it advisable for the moment to hold the President’s message in reserve. He felt that the démarches which he and British Ambassador Johnston had made within the past few days had made clear to the King “extreme concern both US and HMG regarding present situation.” Kocher concluded that the President’s message would have little additional impact if delivered on the heels of those démarches. Later, however, he felt it could be of “incalculable help to us.” (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement) A handwritten notation on the copy of telegram 322 found in Project “Clean Up" files reads: “Never delivered.”

412. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State 412. Telegram From the Embassy in Jordan to the Department of State1

Amman, September 18, 1960—2 p.m.

451. Embtel 446.2 Immediately after telling me he intended go to UNGA in October, King Hussein summoned in British Ambassador Johnston and UN Ambassador Spinelli and gave him same information. Later in evening three of us got together to compare notes. Both Johnston and Spinelli believe King’s visit to UN a healthy development. Spinelli states that King said he intended visit New York to confer with SYG re redress Majali assassination plot but Hussein likewise stressed he also has “right to take problem to GA” which obviously reflects pressure on SYG to produce some results for Jordan in current problem with Syria. As for Spinelli, he will probably also appear in New York “since everyone else going to UN”.

Question remains concerning future of troop concentrations near border. During my interview with King I asked him whether he intended keep troops near border during time he was at UN and suggested advisability of removing at least some units back to previous positions. King said this was most difficult. One of his reasons for build up had been to offer safety valve to his people and if troops now ordered away from border without apparent redress for assassination plot it would weaken him in eyes of army. Therefore, he believed it preferable to leave troops in present positions and let them undergo extended maneuvers and training “for some time” and then gradually return them to previous positions, assuming of course that his trip to UN produced some positive results. Johnston had brought up related question with King concerning possible impulsive decision on part of CINC during Hussein absence in New York, but King had given reassurances this point.

Comment: Decision on King’s part at end UN in effect focuses attention on that organization as potential mediator between Jordan and UAR. Conceivable Hussein may tire of lengthy political processes New York and still decide on some unilateral action his part, but every reason to expect tempers will progressively cool during next few weeks. As occasion offers Johnston and I will try to impress on King reality of UN mechanism, as Spinelli is doing, so that Hussein will less likely be suddenly or sharply disappointed. Rifai and Musa Nasir, shrewd judge of UN processes, should be helpful in this regard.

Kocher

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 320/9—1860. Secret; Priority. Repeated to London, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Beirut, Damascus, Jerusalem, and USUN.

2 In telegram 446 from Amman, September 17, Kocher reported that Hussein had decided to head the Jordanian Delegation to the United Nations. While in the United States, Hussein stated that he hoped to be able to “renew acquaintance with old friends.” Kocher commented, in passing this information to the Department, that while Hussein’s decision would obviously complicate an already crowded schedule at the United Nations, he felt it was a positive development to be encouraged in that it meant that Hussein had decided to move away from a possible military confrontation with Syria and work through the United Nations toward a solution to the problem. (Ibid., 320/9–1760; included in the microfiche supplement)

413. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan 413. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Jordan1

Washington, September 30, 1960—11:18 p.m.

470. Following based on uncleared Memo of Conversation, Sept 26 between Acting Secretary and Selwyn Lloyd regarding aid to Jordan.2

Dillon reviewed need for increased UK contribution. He stressed importance to US of being able to point to situations where our Free World partners were working together with us on aid programs in underdeveloped countries. Jordan was logically one such example. Dillon noted US FY 61 funds for Jordan budget support would suffice through current Jordan fiscal year ending March 1961 but UK contribution approximately double that of current year would be needed immediately thereafter. He also reiterated view that current ratio of 85% to 15% in respective US and UK contributions to Jordan budget was unfair.

While admitting possibility “marginal increase”, Lloyd did not confirm any specific amount and insisted possibility of German contribution should be explored further. As obstacles to increased UK contribution Lloyd cited UK balance of payments problems and expanded assistance requirements of Commonwealth and newly independent nations.

Dillon confirmed US hope Germans will assume greater share free world aid burden and concurred in desirability efforts along this line. In concluding meeting however he emphasized that UK representatives knew well the problem Jordan aid posed for US and accordingly he would rely on them to do all they could.

Herter

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 785.5–MSP/9–2660. Confidential. Drafted in NEA by E. S. Duncan and cleared by Meyer and with BNA. Also sent to London and repeated to Bonn.

2 Not printed. (Ibid.; included in the microfiche supplement) Selwyn Lloyd was in Washington to participate, along with Dillon, in the annual meetings of the Boards of Governors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the International Monetary Fund, held in Washington September 26–30.

414. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, October 7, 1960 414. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House, Washington, October 7, 19601

October 7, 1960

SUBJECT

King Hussein’s Call on the President

PARTICIPANTS

The United States The President

The Acting Secretary (Mr. Dillon)

Brig. Gen. A. J. Goodpaster, White House Staff Secretary

Mr. Parker T. Hart, Deputy Assistant

Secretary, NEA

Jordan King Hussein of Jordan

Mr. Bahjat Talhouni, Prime Minister

Mr. Musa Nasir, Foreign Minister

Dr. Yusuf Haikal, Ambassador of Jordan

The President opened by expressing his pleasure at seeing His Majesty again and voiced particular appreciation for the support given to the Free World principles by His Majesty in the latter’s address before the General Assembly. King Hussein replied that this was “from the heart” and “how we really feel.” The President referred to the maneuverings of Khrushchev in the General Assembly and his impression that the Soviet leader had succeeded in antagonizing a large part of the African representation, in addition to much of the rest of the Assembly. Now that the Five-Power Resolution gambit was over the Assembly still had all of its work ahead of it—nothing had really been done. The King concurred. The President asked whether the King had been ill recently as he had heard. The King replied in the negative (subsequently the President again averted to this matter and the King said that perhaps the President was referring to a brief illness which he had suffered following his return to Jordan after visiting the United States in 1959).

The President expressed his satisfaction that the King had escaped the incident which caused the death of the Prime Minister of Jordan. The King responded that this incident had greatly shocked the people of Jordan at a time when they were united behind the government, were making progress and were willing and able to defend the country’s independence. He had discussed the question with Secretary General Hammarskjold in New York and entertained some hope that the Secretary General might be able to take measures which would enhance the prospect of peace in “our part of the world.” He was not sure how much Hammarskjold could do, but perhaps something could be accomplished in the direction of handling political refugees who conspired to promote disorder.

The President remarked that the problem of refugees (referring to the Arab refugees from Israel) was giving the American Congress a good deal of trouble. Some $23 or $24 million a year was being spent by the United States to help support them and while this yearly sum was not great in itself, it had been accumulating now for so many years that the taxpayers were restive over a situation which seemed to have no end.

The President wished King Hussein to know about his conversation with President Nasser. He had taken up with Nasser the matter of Jordan and Nasser of course had flatly denied that he had anything to do with the assassination of Jordan’s Prime Minister. The King smiled faintly. The President went on to state that he and Nasser had had a very pleasant meeting; that Nasser was very personable, but that he had noted that subsequently when Nasser spoke before the General Assembly, he had to some extent taken the Khrushchev line. During the course of their conversation they had discussed the question of free passage through the Suez Canal, particularly the Israeli cargoes. Nasser had said that this depended on the refugee question and had insisted that all the refugees wanted was to return to what is now Israel. This, of course, presented a rather impossible requirement and was not, according to our information, really demanded by all refugees. The King did not comment. The President continued that Nasser had stated emphatically that he was not one of those who insisted that Israel be eliminated and the Israelis pushed into the sea. At this point, the King’s face brightened into a broad grin and he, his Prime Minister, Foreign Minister and Ambassador, all exchanged amused smiles for some moments. The President continued that Nasser had indicated that if the refugee problem could be taken care of this would make a considerable difference in the atmosphere of the Near East and promote the possibilities of stability and peace. The President had mentioned the Johnston Plan2 but Nasser showed no interest in it. The President remarked that technicians of countries involved had all agreed to the Plan. The King confirmed this and commented it was a “good Plan”.

The President indicated that he had had a talk with only one other Middle East leader, the Prime Minister of Lebanon, but this had been a courtesy call without special substantive content.

The President expressed his appreciation of this opportunity to see the King again. He had decided that he could not make a third trip to New York as this was very fatiguing, particularly in view of the crowds that delayed his journeys from Idlewild into the city. He had, therefore, indicated his desire to see leaders in Washington in order to have an exchange of views with them, and he was particularly happy that the King was free to come down. He again expressed his appreciation for the King’s General Assembly remarks and commented further that while countries had a right to be neutral if they wished, it was a satisfaction to see small countries speak up for principle. He was irritated at times with the manner in which some leaders of small countries (he referred to Nkrumah as illustrative) professed neutralism without stating what they were neutral about. Were they really neutral between freedom at home and Communist slavery? Or did they just want to fish into the pockets of one side or the other of the two main power blocs. The King felt the issue was between slavery and freedom regardless of the size of states.

The President asked how long the King would remain in this country. The King replied that he planned to leave tomorrow evening (Saturday, October 8). The President expressed his satisfaction over the report he had received that the relations between Jordan and Iraq were improved. The King confirmed that conversations had led to the re-establishment of relations. He had taken the view that the Hashemites were a people ready to die for Arab causes and demanded nothing for themselves, no expansion or control over others. This opened the way to talks which would be resumed in New York the morning of October 8, covering details of the re-establishment of relations.

At this point, General Goodpaster indicated to the President that photographers were waiting whenever he wished and the President asked whether the King had objections to the taking of a group picture. The King assented, and the photographers entered, closing the meeting at approximately 11:00 a.m.

The King received the press in the White House lobby and outside the northwest entrance.

1 Source: Eisenhower Library, Whitman File, Eisenhower Diaries. Secret. Drafted by Hart on October 10. Hussein, who was head of the Jordanian Delegation to the General Assembly, exchanged courtesy visits with Herter in New York on October 3 and October 6 before coming to Washington to meet with Eisenhower. (Memoranda of conversation, October 3 and 6; Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 64 D 199; both included in the microfiche supplement)

2 Reference is to a plan developed by Ambassador Eric Johnston in 1955, as President Eisenhower’s Special Representative, for an equitable regional division of the waters of the Jordan River. Extensive documentation concerning the plan and negotiations among the several concerned states is printed in Foreign Relations, 1955–1957, volume XIV.

415. Letter From the Ambassador in Jordan (Mills) to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Meyer) 415. Letter From the Ambassador in Jordan (Mills) to the Director of the Office of Near Eastern Affairs (Meyer)1

Amman, December 6, 1960.

Dear Armin: On November 30, 1960, last Wednesday, I saw Prime Minister Talhouni primarily to push along the proposal to use refugees on afforestation or reforestation projects, a subject about which I have written separately to Lewis.

I took this occasion, however, to bring up what I thought our attitude would be if the Government of Jordan decided to try to play the East against the West. The Chief of Staff, General Izzat Hassan Gandour, gave our Army Attaché, Col. Thomas, a working over on this subject (“Why should Jordan not do as other countries, namely UAR and Iraq, and accept military assistance from both sides?”) in late August after the General had returned from the United States; at that time I gave Colonel Thomas the line I had taken with the late Prime Minister Majali a year ago at the time of visit to Jordan of the Soviet Ambassador to Lebanon. I find that by reference to Embtel 733 of October 24, 1959,2 that in a conversation with the late Hazza Al-Majali on that date: “I then said there was an expression in English that you cannot hunt with the hounds and run with the hares. I think if Jordan accepted assistance from USSR, US would continue help on East Ghor and with roads and perhaps agriculture, health and education. On the other hand I thought it was certain we would not continue budgetary support. I repeated I did not doubt he and the King fully realized dangers from relationship with USSR. But perhaps there are, frankly speaking, opportunists among other politicians, or even among some Army officers, who would urge Jordan take assistance from both East and West pointing to UAR. If he wished he could point out that US did not provide UAR with budget support.”

Without doubt Moulay Hassan’s acceptance of jets for Morocco from the USSR is stirring up this whole question again, and the way we react to this is being watched closely by both civilian and military leaders of Jordan. Our telegram 707 of November 21, 1960, stated that this Moroccan development had been mentioned to the British Ambassador by Prime Minister Talhouni.

Since the late Hazza Al-Majali undoubtedly did not tell Talhouni about his October 1959 conversation with me on this subject, since he and Talhouni (then Rais ad-Diwan) were very much competitors and political rivals at that time, I considered it wise to tell Prime Minister Talhouni of what I had told Majali just about a year earlier. I did so on November 30, 1960.

This touched off a long speech on the part of Talhouni in which he made, as reported in item “2” of our Weeka 168 of December 1, 1960, a statement which, if true, is to me at least a new revelation about an important historical incident. He stated that the offers of Egypt and Syria, in 1957, to make up (with Saudi Arabia) the subsidy which the British had withdrawn following the dismissal of Glubb Pasha and the denunciation of the treaty of alliance with the UK by Jordan, had been made with Egypt and Syria merely acting as agents for the USSR which had promised to make up the part of the withdrawn British subsidy not provided by Saudi Arabia for a period of 10 years. As reported in our last Weeka, Talhouni stated that the refusal of Jordan, although in dire straits, to accept Russian budgetary support, with Egypt and Syria acting as a cover, marked the beginning of the deterioration in the relations between Nasser and King Hussein. Talhouni said that for propaganda purposes Jordan for some time continued to ask, publicly, for Egypt and Syria to live up to their promises, but this was merely to embarrass them for they secretly repeatedly offered such aid to Jordan if it was supplied by the Soviets. Obviously, according to Talhouni, neither Nasser nor the Syrians could publicly reveal this.

Talhouni then went into a long discourse on the importance of the Jordan Arab Army to stability in the Middle East in which he made the statement that our budgetary aid went to the Army. I thought this was an appropriate time once again to make it plain that we did not provide budgetary aid for the Jordan Arab Army but for the Government of Jordan. I said I understood how the idea persisted that it was otherwise, because it was my understanding that the British used to pay all the costs of the old Arab Legion and the Government of Jordan was run on whatever it was possible to collect in taxes within the country. Some Jordanians, and Army officers in particular, might assume that the United States had largely taken over the British relationship, but we did not see it that way at all. For one thing the Arab Legion was officered by the British, at least in the senior levels, and was for a considerable period considered by the British much as they considered the Indian Army, that is an army they could direct in time of crisis.

I then said to the Prime Minister that the United States did not consider the Jordan Arab Army as in any sense a satellite army of the United States and as far as I knew it did not figure in any of our strategic planning. In other words, as I saw it, the Jordan Arab Army had two essential roles, one maintaining order in Jordan and the other protecting the frontiers of the country.

I continued by saying I fully understood the distress of the Generals in the Jordan Arab Army at their inability to expand it since they saw an exceedingly strong Army across their border in Israel, and an increasingly effective Army being built up in the UAR. As I saw the situation, the financial resources simply did not exist in Jordan, and there was no possibility of their coming from the United States, to permit the Jordan Arab Army to expand, and in fact I thought it would have to contract since there is no possibility, as I see it, of its being able to have a budget of more than the current JD 16 million.

Talhouni then made a long statement about the importance of the Jordan Arab Army to the stability of the Middle East as a whole. I replied I had the highest regard for the Jordanian soldier; he made a fine appearance and I had no doubt that man for man, properly equipped, he would be the equal of any soldier in the world. I also realized that with the development of highways the occupation of Bedouins in the carrying trade was being rapidly undermined, and, since inter-tribal raiding, and raiding villagers, had been stopped by the Arab Legion itself in 1925, there was very little remaining open to the Bedouins in the way of occupation except military service. But financial resources simply ruled out any expansion of the Jordan Arab Army, as I see the situation, and in fact to live within a JD 16 million budget I thought, although I am not an expert on military finance, that the numbers in the Army simply will have to be reduced. I said it had occurred to me that the Army itself might help those who may have to be released before they are ready for it by, for example, training some of them for employment in the hotel business, which over the coming years surely will expand. Also if the Corps of Engineers of the Army undertook to perform public works on a larger scale, it might be possible for the Ministry of Public Works to use some of the soldiers and officers who are surplus for military needs but whose dismissal would cause great difficulty. I said I fully realized the problem responsible political leaders face in telling the Army what it can or cannot do, since the Army is so important to the maintenance of order and security in Jordan. I also referred to the difficulty for His Majesty the King to see the Army curtailed, since he loves his Army as it loves him.

The Prime Minister then spoke with considerable feeling about the great importance of the Army in keeping the lid on in Jordan because of the third of the population who are refugees and another third who are Palestinians in full sympathy with the refugees. I replied I fully appreciated this factor, but I could not believe that the maintenance of order, even in these most unusual circumstances, required anything like 38, 000 which I understood was the current strength of the Armed Forces.

As you know from other reports, the UK Military Advisor, Brigadier Street, has told the King that to live within a JD 16 million budget the Jordan Armed Forces must be reduced, and we learn from Street that the King for the first time has accepted this as inevitable and plans to take steps to carry out this recommendation. There will be strong opposition, naturally, by the senior JAA officers.

I fully expected that this conversation would be reported to the King and that it would depress him. This apparently occurred. When I took Jack Bennett and Norman Burns to meet the King the afternoon of December 3, after Jack had made his balance of payments spiel, the King, looking very grave, said that he realized the United States had problems. Jordan has extremely complicated problems, he continued, and he often wondered whether it was all worthwhile. He turned to Talhouni, who also was present, and said he had never talked in this manner before in front of his Prime Minister, who was also his friend of many years. Although the King had his usual charm, he apparently was in a mood of depression. Our Army Attaché, Colonel Thomas, took Colonel Snoddy and Lt. Colonel Hunnicutt, visitors from the American Army in Europe, to see the King the next day, and apparently he had bounced back. The British Ambassador told me on December 3 that while he was ill a British visitor had been received by the King and found him very depressed. For this reason John Henniker-Major had called on the King the day after he was able to leave his bed, but found His Majesty “full of beans”.

Sincerely,

Shelly

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, 885.2391/12–660. Secret; Official–Informal.

2 Not printed. (Ibid., 033.6185/10–2459)

Index Index

Abdullah (Crown Prince of Iraq), 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Abdullah, Col. Radi, 297n [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171]

Abed, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 227]

Adams, Maj. Gen. Paul D., 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 292], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 342], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 345]

Adib, Mamdouh, 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 400]

Admams, Gen., 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Afghanistan, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 210]

Akkari, Nazim, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Alami, Musa, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 400]

Albert, Carl, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]

Algerian conflict, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 373], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 373], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 379]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 379]

Ali, Mohammed, 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129]

Allen, George V., 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226]

Allen, Leo, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127]

Alphand, Hervé, 170n [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 104], 390n [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 228]

Amin, Mustapha, 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 260]

Ammoun, Fuad (see also Lebanese opposition), 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Amory, Robert, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Anderson, Robert B., 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124]

Arab development fund proposal, 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 269], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 270]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 270], 524 [Pg. 524 is part of Doc. 295], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 373], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 375]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 375]

Arab Federation. See Arab Union.

Arab-Israeli dispute (see also Israel; Israeli subheadings under other subjects; Palestinian refugees), 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220], 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 221], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 373]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 373], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 385], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 404]-724 [Pg. 724 is part of Doc. 404]

Arab League (see also individual countries), 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321] Arab resolution, 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 290], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 305], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 314]

Lebanon, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 106], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 106]

Arab Union (see also Iraq; Jordan), 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 167]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168] formation of, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 159]-279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168]

Iraqi revolution and, 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 180]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

U.S.-British economic aid, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 160], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 161]-282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 163]-286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]-291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 166], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

U.S. policy, 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168]-296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 168]

Ardalan, Ali Gholi, 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 129]

Armour, Norman, 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

Arneson, R. Gordon, 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Aziz, Hussein, 67n [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Azkoul, Karim, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Baghdad Pact (see also Iran; Iraq; Pakistan; Turkey), 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 158], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 159]-275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 160], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 163], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 204], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 236], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 283]

Barco, James W., 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Barrows, Leland, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396]

Bayar, Celal, 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Bazzi, Ali, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274]

Beeley, Harold, 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

Bell, John O., 289n [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396]

Ben Gurion, David, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 214]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 214], 426n [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

Bennsky, George M., 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 374], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396]

Berding, Andrew H., 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Bergus, Donald C., 25n [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 273n [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 159], 400n [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Bernau, Phyllis D., 44n [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 52n [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 109n [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 217n [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126], 251n [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 256n [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 148], 314n [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 332n [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 340n [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 215], 474n [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271], 476n [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 519n [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 291]

Berns, E.G., 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 403]

Berry, J. Lampton, 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 297n [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 315n [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220], 419n [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 566n [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 585n [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336] Lebanon, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 480n [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 275]

Bey, Saeb, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]-660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Bey, Sami, 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 54], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255]

Bishop, Frederick, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65]

Bliss, Don C., 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 260]

Boggs, Marion W., 382n [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

Boster, David E., 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 228], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]-395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 556n [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 313]

Boulos, Jawad, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 119], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227]

Boulos, Simon, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 374]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

Boustani, Emile, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 55]

Brewer, W.D., 622n [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Bridges, Styles, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127]

Brook, Norman, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]

Brown, Vice Adm. Charles R., 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 199]-338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 199], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 209]

Brown, Elizabeth A., 236n [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]

Bruce, David K. E., 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205]

Bull, Maj. Gen. Odd, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Bunche, Ralph, 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 103], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 117], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316]-562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 316]

Burdett, William C., 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Burke, Adm. Arleigh A., 49n [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 31], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 40], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 42], 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 147], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Cabell, Lt. Gen. Charles P., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

Caccia, Sir Harold, 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 334], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]-623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 362] Lebanon, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 94], 155n [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Canada, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 132], 357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 208], 488n [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]

Cannon, Clarence, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127]

Caraway, Maj. Gen., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Carde, Capt., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Cargo, William I., 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382]

Carnahan, A.S.J., 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127]

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105]

Ceylon, 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]

Chamoun, Camille (see also Lebanon), 33n [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 112], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 154]-263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 154], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206], 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264] Chehab government, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 342]-595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 377]

Chehab Presidency proposals, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 119]-206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 120], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 242]

civil war, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 85], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]-143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 88], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98]

election timing, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 199], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

opposition and, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61]-100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 70], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

UAR interference, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 192], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 235]

U.S. intervention, 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32]-52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 85]-139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 85], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 198] military action against insurgents,373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229]-392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229], 396 [Pg. 396 is part of Doc. 232], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 235]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

public statement, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 88], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91]-148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

requests for, 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 78], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86]-144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]-208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 121], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 125]

UAR interference and, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 235]

U.S. military aid, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 11]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244]-418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264]

Chechetkin, 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Chehab, Col. Abdel Kader, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 86], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152]

Chehab, Gen. Fuad (see also under Lebanon), 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 375]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 375] censure and dismissal proposals, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 85]-139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 85], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 94], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 240]

Chamoun re-election proposal, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 12], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25], 55n [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 56n [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 37], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54]

civil war, 20n [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 12], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 15], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 54], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 75]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 80], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96]

coup attempt rumors, 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 142]

military staff purge proposals, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 86], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

U.N. Observation Group, 416n [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

U.N. presence, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 192], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274]

United Arab Republic, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 192], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 370]-638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 377]

U.S. economic aid, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 365]-629 [Pg. 629 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

U.S. intervention, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 42], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 77], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207] liaison with Lebanese army, 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 80]-126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 80], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 141]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 142], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 146]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 147], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 192], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259]

military action against insurgents, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 235], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 294]-523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

U.S. military aid, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 376]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]-654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 278], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 313], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 319], 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 348] token withdrawal plan, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 259]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274]

Chemaiet, Youssef, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152]

China, Republic of, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105]

Chiperfield, Robert, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127]

Colombia, 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Congress, U.S.: acts of: Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act (P.L. 480), 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 374]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 375], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 393], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 396], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 406]

Mutual Security Act, 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Lebanon, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 30]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 30], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105]-175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124]-215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

Cordier, Andrew W., 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84]

Corea, Sir George Claude Stanley, 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]

Costello, Capt., 419n [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 228]

Creel, Robert C, 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]-654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Cumming, Hugh S., Jr., 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 315n [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Cutler, Robert, 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

Dale, William N., 104n [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]

Daoud, Sam’an, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Daouk, Achmed, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]

Dayal, Rajeshwar, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66]

de Gaulle, Charles, 390n [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 228], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 373], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 379]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 379]

Dean, Patrick, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Decker, Col. D.J., 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Defense, U.S. Department of (see also Joint Chiefs of Staff), 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 155], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 155], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Delaney, Col. Robert J., 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 400]

Denmark, 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Dennison, Vice Adm. Robert L., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Denny, Adm. Michael M., 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187]

Development Loan Fund (DLF), 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 369], 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]-639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 396], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 406]-733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Di, Shukri el-Muhta, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Dickson, Air Chief Marshal William F.,261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Dillon, C. Douglas, 25n [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 155], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 419n [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267], 532n [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 687n [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393] Jordan, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 403]-718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]-742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

Lebanon, 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 13], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 351], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]-639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

Dimechkié, Nadim, 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 13], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 113], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 373], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 374], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380]-660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Dirksen, Everett S., 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127]

Dixon, Sir Pierson, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 318n [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 186], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Dorman, John, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 104], 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Dudley, Rear Adm., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Dulger, Cevdet, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227]

Dulles, Allen W., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284] Jordan: British intervention, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

political situation, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Lebanon, 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 42], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

civil war, 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

political situation, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84]-137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

U.S. intervention, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84], 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153]

Dulles, John Foster, 378n [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 222], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 481n [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276] Arab Union, 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 159], 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 165]-291 [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 166]

Eisenhower Doctrine, 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127]

Iraq, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 203]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205]

Jordan, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 341], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354] British intervention, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 134], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 318n [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 186], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 237], 406n [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 420n [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247] Israeli overflight permission, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251]-427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 272]

U.S. support, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187]-322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 189], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 221], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 250], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 272]

British troop withdrawal, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 280]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 280], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 280]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

Israeli invasion threats, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 268], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 270], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 362]

United Arab Republic, relations with,505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 283], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 341], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]-612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

U.S.-British intervention, proposals for, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 221]

U.S. military aid, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 155], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 159]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 272], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 283], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 291], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 315], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

Lebanon, 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 480n [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 275] Chamoun re-election proposal, 13 [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 118]-204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

Chamoun successor deliberations, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105]-175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 108], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 112]

political situation, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]-55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 112], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373] UAR proposals, 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 70]

UAR interference, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 82], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 83], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 105], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 116]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280]

U.N. Observation Group, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 105], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127] U.S. intervention and, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 82], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111]-188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111]

U.S. troop withdrawal and, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 234], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 268], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 280]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 280], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 280]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280]

U.N. presence, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 117], 351n [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 215], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 280]

U.N. Security Council appeals, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 82], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279] U.S. intervention and, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 31], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 133]

United States, relations with, 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340]

U.S. economic aid, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

U.S. intervention (see also U.S. troop withdrawal, below), 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-49 [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 31], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 65], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84]-137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 169n [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 103], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128] alternatives to, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 113]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 113], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116]

Arab political situations and, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 105]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 127]

Arab responses, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 30], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84]-135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92]

British participation, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 81], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 114], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 134]-239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

British position, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Eisenhower Doctrine and, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30]

French participation, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 81], 170n [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 104], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

further Middle East intervention and, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202]

Hammarskjöld consultation, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]

information to Chamoun, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 94], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Iraqi revolution and, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 127]

Lebanese requests, 144n [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

liaison with Lebanese army, 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 75]-119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 82], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 143]-251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

military action against insurgents, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 234]

military planning, 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]-117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 74], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 93], 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 93], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Murphy mission, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 148], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175]

NSC discussions, 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226]

political situation and, 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202]-342

Soviet responses, 48n [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 30], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124],219

UAR interference and, 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

UAR responses, 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 151]

U.N. Observation Group and, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 82], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111]-188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111]

U.N. Security Council appeals and, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 31], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 133]

world opinion, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

U.S. military aid, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 155], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 351n [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 234], 441n [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 260], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 268]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 268], 556n [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 313], 571n [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 322] Arab resolution, 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287]

British troop withdrawal and, 549n [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 550n [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 310], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

UAR interference and, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280]

U.N. General Assembly discussion, 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 276]-483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 276], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 278]

Lloyd, correspondence with, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Macmillan, correspondence with, 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Malik, correspondence with, 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Soviet summit proposal, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 202], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 208], 360n [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 210], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]-390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 228], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]-395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 82], 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 254], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 276], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 319]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320] Arab resolution, 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287]

Eisenhower speech, 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 267], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 269]-469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

U.S.-British discussion, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

U.S.-Soviet discussions, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280]

U.S.-UAR discussions, 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 270], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]-495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285]

United Arab Republic, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105]-174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 270], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285]

Duncan, E.S., 741n [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

Eagleton, William L., Jr., 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Eban, Abba, 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251]-427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

Eddé, Pierre (see also Lebanese opposition), 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 109], 204n [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Eddé, Raymond (see also Lebanese opposition), 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 12], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 14], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 204n [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 227], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 356], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

presidency proposals, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65]

U.S. economic aid, 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 358]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 363]-626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 365], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]-633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 367]

Eddy, Col. William, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 227]

Eilts, Herman F., 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 289n [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 166], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 739n [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 411] Algerian conflict, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 373], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 373], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 379]-656 [Pg. 656 is part of Doc. 379]

Arab development fund proposal, 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 269], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 270]

Iraqi revolution, 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 308n [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Jordan, 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 221], 739n [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 411] British intervention, 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 193]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 214], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

United States, relations with, 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 397]-704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]-745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Khrushchev, correspondence with, 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 200], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 254]

Lebanon, 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 106n [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 65], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 415n [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244] United States, relations with, 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 373], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]-657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 379]

U.S. economic aid, 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

U.S. intervention, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 30], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 81], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 213] further Middle East intervention and, 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

military planning, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205]

publicity, 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 138], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287], 549n [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Macmillan, correspondence with, 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 193]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 214]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 214], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 222]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

propaganda, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243]

Soviet summit proposal, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 208], 357n [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 208], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 210], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 254]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 254], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 267], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]-469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287]

Eisenhower, Col. John S.D., 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 397]

Eisenhower Doctrine, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 13], 25n [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 178], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 283]-506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284] Lebanese acceptance, 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]-27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 358]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]

U.S. intervention in Lebanon and, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127]

Ekstrom, Adm. Clarence E., 602n [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 348]

Elbrick, C. Burke, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 186], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 362]

Engen, Hans, 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 117], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279]

Faisal II (King of Iraq), 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 276n [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 161], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205]

Farley, Philip, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Fawzi, Mahmoud, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 106], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 270], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 278]-496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 280], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 291]

el-Fayiz, Akef, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Finn, Richard B., 58n [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

FitzGerald, Dennis A., 532n [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Fox, Lt. Gen. Alonzo P., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

France (see also French, France, and tripartite subheadings under other subjects), 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Frangie, Hamid, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3]

Freers, Edward L., 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

Fritzlan, A. David, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Fujiyama, Aiichiro, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267]

Fulbright, J. William, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127]

Funseth, Robert L., 254n [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 147]

Gailani, 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Gallman, Waldemar J., 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 249]

Galo Plaza, Lasso, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 106]

Gamon, David L., 236n [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 525n [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Gandour, Izzat Hassan, 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Gemayel, Maurice, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 381]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 381]

Gemayel, Pierre, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 333], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 345], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 350]-606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 350], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 356]

Genadry, Capt., 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152]

Gerhart, Lt. Gen., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Germany, Federal Republic of, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 404], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 406]

Ghaleb, Abdelhamid, 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

Ghana, 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Gleason, S. Everett, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-591

Glubb, Lt. Gen. John Bagot, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 163]

Godley, G. McMurtrie, 419n [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 575n [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Goldmann, E.B., 638n [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Goodpaster, Gen. Andrew J., 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 210], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414] U.S. intervention in Lebanon, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 48n [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 30], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 226n [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]

Grantham, Adm. E.B., 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Gray, Gordon, 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226]

Greece, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18]

Green, Theodore F., 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Greene, Joseph N., Jr., 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 209n [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123], 231n [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 234n [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 238n [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 134], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 237], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Greene, Lt. Gen. Wallace M., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Grewe, Wilhelm, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205]

Gromyko, Andrei A., 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]-467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 270], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 270], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 279], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280]

Gruenther, Gen. Alfred M., 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Haddad, Fuad, 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Hadow, Michael, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Hagerty, James C., 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 200], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220], 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 682n [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 392]

Haikal, Mohammed Hussanein, 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 55], 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 63]

Haikal, Yusuf, 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 405], 736n [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

Hakim, Adnan, 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380]

Hall, Carlos C., 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

el-Hamadeh, Rashida, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52]

Hamadi, Sabri (see also Lebanese opposition), 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 262], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]

Hamilton, William L., 549n [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 622n [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 369]

Hammarskjöld, Dag (see also U.N. headings and subheadings), 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205] Jordan, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 304]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 314], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 316]

Lebanon, 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 106]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 117], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316]-562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 316] Nasser meeting, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 103], 175n [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 106], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 116]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116]

U.N. Observation Group, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111]-188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 215]

U.S. intervention, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127], 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 133], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Middle East trip, 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 314], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316]-562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 316], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]-588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]-588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Hanania, Anastas, 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Hanes, John W., 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84], 479n [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 525n [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Harding, Col. Stanley, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 383]

Hare, Raymond A., 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 55]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55], 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 63]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 104n [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 112n [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 70], 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 151], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]

Harlow, Bryce, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127]

Hart, Parker T., 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 405], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

Hayter, William, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267]

Heath, Donald B., 2n [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1]

Heathcoat-Amory, 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

Helou, Charles, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 342]

Henderson, Loy W., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123]-211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

Herter, Christian A., 66n [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 150n [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 93], 274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]-275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 160], 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]-287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 164], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 739n [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 411] Jordan, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 293], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336] British intervention, 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318]

United Arab Republic, relations with, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 405]-731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]-736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

United States, relations with, 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 397], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 398]

U.S. economic aid, 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 301], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]-742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

U.S. military aid, 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 155], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 236], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 291], 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 301], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Lebanon, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 42], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 51]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 113], 266n [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 155], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 369], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379] U.S. intervention, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84], 144n [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 113], 256n [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 148], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 322], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 254], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]

Herzog, Yaacov, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251]

Hickenlooper, Bourke B., 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Higgs, L. Randolph, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Hillyard, Col., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Hitti, Joseph, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227]

Holloway, Adm. James L., Jr.: Lebanon, 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311]-553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312] U.S. intervention, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 147]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 147], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 154], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 192], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207] military action against insurgents, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 209]-359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 292], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 294]-523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

military planning, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 40], 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 259]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 439n [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 292], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 602n [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 348], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]

Holmes, Julius C., 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175]

Hood, Viscount Samuel, 329n [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 193], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 254], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261] Jordan, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 293], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 298], 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 362] British intervention, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 366n [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 214], 379n [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 250], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261], 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]-550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 310]

Lebanon, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 115], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202] political situation, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 108], 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 112], 203n [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 118]

U.S. intervention, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 134]-239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153]

Soviet summit proposal, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 208], 369n [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 380n [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Houghton, Amory, 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

Hoyer Millar, Frederick, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 265]

Humphrey, George M., 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 213]

Hungary, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 278]

Hussein (King of Jordan), 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233] abdication, possible, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 266], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 285], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 293], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302]

Arab Union, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 159], 276n [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 161], 287 [Pg. 287 is part of Doc. 164], 288n [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 165], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 166], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 167], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 168], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 180]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

British intervention, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 290]

Iraq, 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 180]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 211], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 402]-716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 402]

political situation, 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 170], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]-504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 401], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]-735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409] Iraqi revolution and, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

U.N. presence, 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

United Arab Republic, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 266]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

United Kingdom, relations with, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 155], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 163], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 290]-518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 290], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 389]-676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 389]

U.S.-British intervention proposals, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171]-301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 181]

U.S. economic aid, 536 [Pg. 536 includes portions of Doc. 302 and Doc. 303]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 303], 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 379]-676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 389], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-672 [Pg. 672 is part of Doc. 387], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

U.S. intervention, requests for, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 211], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 212]

U.S. military aid, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233], 400n [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 277]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 290], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 308], 573n [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

U.S. visits, 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 392], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]-709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 399], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]-745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

vacation plans, 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 362]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 362]

Ilah, Abdul, 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

India, 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 132], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 208], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267]

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267]

International Cooperation Administration (ICA), 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 155], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 630n [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 366]

International Development Association, 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Iran (see also Baghdad Pact), 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Iraq (see also Arab Union; Baghdad Pact; further Middle East intervention under Lebanon: U.S. intervention; Iraq and Iraqi subheadings under other subjects), 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 163], 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 167], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191] British intervention, proposals for, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Jordan, relations with, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 203]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 211]-363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309]-549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359]

post-revolution union proposals, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 270]-474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 279], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285]

Lebanon, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

revolution, 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 133], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 138], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 178], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 180]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

United Arab Republic, relations with, 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 397]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 397], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 402]-716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 402], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 405]-731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

United States, relations with, 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 162]-282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205]-349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 256]

Irwin, John N., II, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 30], 53n [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 42], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 419n [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 399]

Israel (see also Arab-Israeli dispute; Israeland Israeli subheadings under other subjects), 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 170n [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 104], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 155], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 160], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 404]

Italy, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 404], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 406]

Jackling, Roger, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Jackson, C.D., 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 269]-469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Jamali, Fadhil, 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Jandrey, Frederick W., 184n [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 325n [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220], 419n [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Japan, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198]

Jarring, Gunnar V., 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66]

Johnson, Maj. Gen. Douglas V., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Johnston, Charles H., 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 166], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 277], 526n [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 308], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 389]-676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 389], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 737n [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 410],740

Joint Chiefs of Staff, In, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 40], 239n [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]-565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 317], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

State–JCS meetings, 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]-565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 317]

Jones, G. Lewis, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 374], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 735n [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 736n [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

Jordan (see also Arab Union; further Middle East intervention under Lebanon: U.S. intervention; Jordan and Jordanian subheadings under other subjects): Arab-Israeli dispute, 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 404]-722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 404]

Arab economic aid, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 158]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 158], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 290]-517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 290]

British economic aid, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 298], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 389]-676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 389], 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 403]-719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 404], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 404], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]-742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

British intervention (see also British troop withdrawal below and U.N. General Assembly meeting), 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 134], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243] French position, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Israeli overflight permission, 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 202], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 214]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 214], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 250]-427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 272], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 277], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330]

Israeli position, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226]

Jordanian public opinion, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 190]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 190], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233]

Palestinian refugees and, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226]

Soviet responses (see also Soviet summit proposal), 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251]-427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

UAR position, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 270]-472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 270]

U.N. Security Council appeals (see also Soviet summit proposal), 318n [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 186], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

U.S.-British joint planning, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 237]-406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 420n [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

U.S. policy, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179]-310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179]

U.S. support (see also Israeli overflight permission above), 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-322 [Pg. 322 is part of Doc. 189], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 272]

British troop withdrawal, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 254], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 270]-472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 270], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279]-495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362] British position, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 265]-453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 276], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 278]-491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 334]

Jordanian position, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281]-503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 289]-516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 290], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318]

political situation and, 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]-619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359]

Soviet position, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 268]-463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 268], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 280]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

U.S. military aid and, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 236], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 308], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 310]

U.S. troop withdrawal and, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 275], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 549n [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 550n [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 310], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

coup attempt rumors, 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226]-384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297]-527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

defense organization proposal, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 236]

Hussein abdication, possible, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 266], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 285], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 293], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302]

Hussein vacation plans, 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 362]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 362]

Iraq, relations with, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 203]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 211]-363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309]-549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359] post-revolution union proposals, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 270]-474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 279], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285]

Israel, relations with, 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Israeli invasion threats, 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 270], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 404]-720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 404] British position, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 265], 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 362]

Soviet position, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 268]

UAR position, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 270], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 362]

Majali assassination, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]-736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 412], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 414]

Majali government, 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 400]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 401]

Murphy mission, 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]-415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Palestinian refugees in, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 392], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 404]-721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 404]

political situation (see also UAR interference below), 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]-687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393] British troop withdrawal and, 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]-619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359]

Hammarskjöld position, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 304]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]

Iraqi revolution and, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172]

Lebanese political situation and, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 167]-293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 167]

Palestinian refugees and, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 267]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 268], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 392], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 414]

UAR position, 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 260]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 260]

U.S.-Jordanian discussion, 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]

U.S. economic aid and, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 170]-299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 279], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 389]-677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

Rifai replacement proposals, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]-577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 329], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 349]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 349], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359]

Rifai resignation threats, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281]-504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 289], 526n [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302]

Saudi economic aid, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 158]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 158], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

Soviet summit proposal, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233]

Soviet Union, relations with, 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 392]-685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 392], 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]-748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 415]

UAR interference, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 167]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168], 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 170], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 180], 363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 288]-513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 392] British troop withdrawal and, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279]-497

Hammarskjöld–Nasser meeting,557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 314]-559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 314]

Lebanese position, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380]

Majali assassination, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 414]

U.N. General Assembly meeting and,484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 278], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 283]

U.N. presence and, 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 341], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

U.N. presence, 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 280]-499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 280], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 288]-513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 309], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332] British position, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261]-445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 265], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267]-459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 474n [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271]

Hammarskjöld visit, 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 314], 562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 316], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

UAR interference and, 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340]-592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 341], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

UAR position, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 279]

United Arab Republic, relations with (see also UAR interference above), 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 266]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 404]-720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 404], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413] Syria union proposals, 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

UAR blockade, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]-612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

U.N. appeal, 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]-737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 410], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 412]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

United Kingdom, relations with (see also British intervention and British troop withdrawal above and U.S.-British intervention proposals below), 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 155], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 158], 272n [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 158], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 163], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 289], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 290]-518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 290], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 392], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]-719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 404]

United States, relations with (see also U.S.-British intervention proposals, U.S. economic aid, and U.S. military aid below), 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168]-296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 168], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 400]-711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 400], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]-745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415] Hussein U.S. visit, 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 392], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]-709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 399]

mutual defense treaty, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 236], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 283]-506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 289], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 290], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302]

U.S.-British intervention proposals (see also British intervention above; further Middle East intervention under Lebanon: U.S. intervention), 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171]-301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 211]-363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220]

U.S. economic aid (see also U.S. military aid below), 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 158]-274 [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 290], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 301]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 303], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 400], 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 404]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 404], 731n [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406] Arab Union and, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163] British economic aid and, 717 [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 403]-719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 404], 733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]-734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]-742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

British position, 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

budget crisis, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 385]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 390]

DLF loans, 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 396], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 406]-733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

Hussein U.S. visit and, 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 392], 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 393]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396]-699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 396]

labor corps, 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 404]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 404]

National Intelligence Estimates, 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 392]-683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 392]

oil supplies, 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

P.L. 480, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 393], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 396], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 406]

political situation and, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 170]-299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 279], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 389]-677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]

U.S. intervention, requests for (see also U.S.-British intervention proposals and British intervention above), 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 190]-325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 203]-345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 211]-364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 212], 365n [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 213], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220]-376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226] British position, 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 212], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 214]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S. military aid (see also U.S. economic aid above), 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 277]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 291], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 399], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 400], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 404]-727 [Pg. 727 is part of Doc. 404], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406] aircraft, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 155]-268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 159], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 256], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 308], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

British troop withdrawal and, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 236], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 308], 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 310]

MAAG establishment, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 236], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 283], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302]

military survey, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 290], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 317], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 383]-666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

Murphy mission reports, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243]

new brigades, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233]-400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 236], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243]-415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 429n [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254] British position, 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 272], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 298], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 312], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 315], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]-581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

Jordanian position, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 289]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 289], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 290], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 309], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

U.S. position, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 283], 532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]-533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 301], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 308], 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 312]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 312], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 317], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Soviet military aid and, 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]-748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 415]

Soviet summit proposal and, 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 429n [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

U.S.-Israeli relations and, 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 155]

U.S. policy toward, 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 404]

U.S.-Soviet discussion, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 268]-467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Western European economic aid, 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 404], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 406]

Juma, Midhat, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 397]

Jumblatt, Kamal (see also Lebanese opposition), 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 402n [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 235], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 235]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241] Chehab government, 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

civil war, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229]

Karami, Rachid (see also Lebanese opposition), 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 227], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 373], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 377] Chehab government, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 262], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 311]-552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 333], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 377] political support for cabinet, 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 342], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 345], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 346 and Doc. 347], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 350]-606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 350], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 366]

civil war, 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 112], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 333], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 356]

U.S. economic aid, 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373] 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 374]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

U.S.-Lebanese relations, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 373]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 319], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 322], 602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 348]

Kennedy, Donald D., 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

al-Khairy, Khulusy, 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309]-549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 400]

Khater, Joseph Abou, 606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 350], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

al-Khoury, Bechara, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227], 605n [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 350]

Khoury, Victor, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3]

Khrushchev, Nikita S. (see also Soviet summit proposal), 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 200]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 208], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 365] Eisenhower, correspondence with, 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 200], 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 254]

Knowland, William F., 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 30], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]

Kocher, Eric, 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

Kohler, Foy D., 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Krebs, Max V., 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Kretzmann, Edwin M., 638n [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Kuwait, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Kuznetsov, V.V., 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 149]

Labouisse, Henry R., 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 314]

Lahoud, Col. Jamil, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 305]

Lahoud, Selim, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52]

Lakeland, William C., 521n [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 293], 560n [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 315], 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 687n [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 690n [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 394]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 704n [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 403], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 405]

Laloy, Jean, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

Laskey, Denis, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 334]

Lawson, Edward B., 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]-415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 426n [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251]

Lebanese opposition (see also Lebanon; specific names), 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 44], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 60], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244] amnesty, 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 70], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308] British position, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98]

UAR position, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 59], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Chamoun position, 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61]-100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 70], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Chamoun re-election proposal, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 15], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

Chamoun successor deliberations, 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]-387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227]

Chehab government, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 294], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Chehab Prime Ministership proposals,36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

general strike, 44n [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56]

Hammarskjöld position, 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 106]

manifestos, 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

UAR influence, 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 51]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 59], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 60], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 63]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

U.S. intervention, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 227], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299]

Lebanon (see also Lebanese opposition): Arab development fund proposal, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 373], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 375]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 375]

British intervention, proposals for. See U.S. intervention below.

British military aid, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 155]-265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 155]

Chamoun re-election proposal, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 55n [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94] Chamoun position, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 9], 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 14], 67n [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 50], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54], 113n [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 112]

civil war and, 20n [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 12], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23]-37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 37], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 60], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71]

opposition responses, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 15], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

rejection of, 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 51], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 59], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65]

tripartite position, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 15]-25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 38]-58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 112]

U.S. intervention and, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 31], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 42], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 106]

U.S. position, 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 9]-17 [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 12]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]-53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 71]

Chamoun resignation demands, 41n [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Chamoun successor deliberations (see also Chehab Presidency proposals below), 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105]-175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111], 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 113], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 115], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 118]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]-387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227] tripartite approaches, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 71], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 108], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 112]

Chehab government, 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 309] cabinet, 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299]-531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 305], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 311]-552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 590n [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]-614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 356] Chamoun position, 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 342]-595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

political support for, 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 333]-583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 342]-595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]-601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 350]-606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 350], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 356]

U.S. position, 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 262]

Chamoun role, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 377]

Chehab inauguration, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

Christian strike, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 590n [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 594 [Pg. 594 is part of Doc. 342], 599n [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

civil war under, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]-542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311]-553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 313]-557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]-582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 333], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

full powers bill, 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]-628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 365]

Hammarskjöld position, 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320]

interim government proposals, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 262]

McClintock good offices, 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

parliamentary elections, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]-655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 379]

Special National Intelligence Estimates, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]-653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

UAR interference, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 311], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 377]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 377]

U.N. Observation Group, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 249]

Chehab Presidency proposals (see also Chamoun successor deliberations @@above), In, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7]-12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 15], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243] Chamoun position, 14 [Pg. 14 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 119]-206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 120], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 242]

Chehab acceptance, 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

Chehab position, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

coup attempt rumors, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 88], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

military action against insurgents and, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

tripartite position, 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 15], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 120]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

UAR position, 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 63]

Chehab Prime Ministership proposals, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 67n [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 54] tripartite position, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 54]

UAR position, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 63], 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 70]

civil war (see also political situation, UAR interference, and U.S. intervention below), 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 105] cease-fire proposals, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98]

Chamoun position, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 85]

Chamoun re-election proposal and,20n [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 12], 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23]-37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 37], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 60], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71]

Chehab dismissal proposals, 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 85]-139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 85], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 94], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 240]

Chehab government and, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]-542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311]-553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 313]-557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]-582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 333], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

Chehab position, 20n [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 12], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 15], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 54], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 80]

Chehab resignation demands, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53],82

Chehab role (see also Chehab dismissal proposals above), 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61], 118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 75]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Hammarskjöld position, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 106]

Matni assassination, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

NSC discussions, 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

Tyre clashes, Mar.-Apr. 1958, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 12]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

U.N. Observation Group and, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

U.S. military aid and, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

coup attempt rumors, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 94], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99]-164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 249n [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 142]

Eisenhower Doctrine, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 13], 25n [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 368]

election timing, 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 199], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 240]-410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

France, relations with, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 377]

Haddad kidnapping, 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 588n [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Hammarskjöld visit, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316]-562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 316]

international guarantee proposal, 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 268], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 275] British position, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 204], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 265], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267]

Iraqi intervention proposals, 204n [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]

military situation. See civil war above.

military staff purge proposals, 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 86], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 240]

Murphy mission reports, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 154]-263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 154], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 192], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 197]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 199]-338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 199], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]-389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

opposition amnesty, 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 70], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308] British position, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98]

UAR position, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 92 [Pg. 92 is part of Doc. 59], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

opposition compromise proposals, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

opposition manifestos, 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

Palestinian refugees, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 379]

political situation (see also Chamoun and Chehab subheadings, Murphy mission reports and civil war above) British position, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 115], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Eisenhower Doctrine and, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56]

French position, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Jordanian political situation and, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 167]-293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 167]

Soviet interference, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127]

Special National Intelligence Estimates, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 60]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 60], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359]

UAR position, 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 7], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 44], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 63]

UAR proposals, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 44]-70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 63]-104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]-112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 70]

U.S.-British discussion, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 65]

U.S. economic aid and, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 366]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 366], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

U.S. intervention and, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 197]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202]

U.S. troop withdrawal and, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274]

Saudi Arabia, relations with, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 377]

Solh assassination attempt, 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

tripartite political settlement approaches, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 71], 134n [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]-183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 109], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 112], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]

Turkish intervention, proposals for, 204n [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124]

UAR interference (see also U.N. Security Council appeals and U.N. Observation Group below), 3n [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 44n [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 42], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56]-89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202] Arab League appeals, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 106], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 106]

British position, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 115]

Chamoun re-election proposal and,23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 14], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20]

Chehab government, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 311], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 377]-652

Chehab position, 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 192], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244]

Hammarskjöld position, 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 106]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 117]

Hammarskjöld–Nasser meeting, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 106], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 116]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116]

Jordanian position, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168]-296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 168]

Lebanese position, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 11], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 14], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 83], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111],402

Soviet position, 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 268]

Special National Intelligence Estimates, 94 [Pg. 94 is part of Doc. 60], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 377]-652 [Pg. 652 is part of Doc. 377]

UAR position, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 44]-70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 63]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]

U.N. General Assembly meeting and, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 278], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279]

U.N. Observation Group and, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 105], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 115], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]

U.N. presence and, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 280]

U.N. Security Council appeals and,62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41]-63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 106]

U.S. contact with Nasser, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36]-55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 76 [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 51]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

U.S. intervention and, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 82], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 85], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124]-213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 125], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127]-222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

U.S. troop withdrawal and, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280]

U.N. General Assembly meeting representation, 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267]

U.N. Observation Group (UNOGIL) (see also U.N. Security Council appeals below), 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 99], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 106]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 106] British position, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 115]

Chamoun position, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 109], 193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 112]

Chehab position, 416n [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Japanese resolution and, 368n [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 215], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226]

Murphy mission reports, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 249]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 249]

Soviet General Assembly resolution, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276]

Soviet position, 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 268], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 268], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 280]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 280]

UAR interference and, 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 105], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 115], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]

UAR position, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 70], 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 279]

U.N. Security Council appeals and, 190

U.S.-British discussion, 106n [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 65]

U.S. intervention and, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 77], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 82], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97]

U.S. troop withdrawal and, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 234], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 268]-466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 268], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

U.N. presence (see also U.N. Observation Group (UNOGIL) above; U.S. intervention below), 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 106], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116]-202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 117], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 192], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 249], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274] British position, 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

Japanese resolution, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 215]

Soviet responses, 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145]

UAR interference and, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 280]

U.N. Security Council discussion,243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 138], 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

U.S. troop withdrawal and, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206]

U.N. Security Council appeals (see also Soviet summit proposal; U.N. Observation Group above; U.N. presence above), 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 65], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 106], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112] Arab League appeals and, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53]

British position, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 42]

U.S. intervention and, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 129], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 131], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 133], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 138] British position, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84]

congressional consultation, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]

Lebanese position, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97]

tripartite position, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

U.S. position, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 31], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 82], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128]

U.S. policy, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 93n [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

United Arab Republic, relations with,478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 377]

United Kingdom, relations with, 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 377]

United States, relations with, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 368], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]-643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 373], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]-657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 379]

U.S. citizen evacuation, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 77], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

U.S. economic aid, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 13], 25n [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 365]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 381] British position, 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

DLF loans, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 369], 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]-639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380]

Lebanese position, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 13], 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 374]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 375]

P.L. 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 275], 27 [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 374]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 375], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380]

political situation and, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 366]-631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 366], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Soviet aid and, 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 363]-626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

technical assistance, 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 365]-630 [Pg. 630 is part of Doc. 366], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 375]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 375], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 381]

U.S. intervention (see also Murphy mission; U.N. General Assembly meeting; U.S. troop withdrawal below), 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 72], 148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 213] alternatives to, 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 113]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 113], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116]

Arab political situations and, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 105]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 127]

Arab responses, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 30], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 31]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 195 [Pg. 195 is part of Doc. 113]

British intervention in Iraq and, 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

British participation, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 31], 93n [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 81], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 103], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 132] military planning, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 40], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 114], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127]-221

U.S.-British discussions, 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 131], 234n [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 134]-239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

British position, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]-54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 42], 70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 93], 155n [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 131]-235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 132], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229]

Chamoun public statement, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 88], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91]-148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Chamoun re-election proposal and,46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 31], 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 42], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]-74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 106]

Chehab dismissal proposals and, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 85]-139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 85], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

Chehab position, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 80]-126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 80]

civil war and, 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 199], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

congressional consultations, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 30]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 30], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124]-215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

consequences of refusal, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 77]-122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 172 [Pg. 172 is part of Doc. 105]-173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124]-215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 127]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]

Eisenhower Doctrine and, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127]

Eisenhower press conference (June 18), 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97]

French participation, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 31]-51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 81], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 103]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

French position, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229]

further Middle East intervention and, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 129], 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 260] British position, 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144]

Lebanese position, 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206]

Hammarskjöld consultation, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127]

humanitarian relief proposals, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 234]

Indian position, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]

information to Chamoun, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41], 75n [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 50], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 94], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 112], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 239 [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Iranian responses, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127]

Iraqi political situation and, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116]

Iraqi responses, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 30], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116]

Iraqi revolution and, 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]-211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 127], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 133], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 138]

Israeli responses, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226]

Jordanian political situation and, 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97]-160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102]

Jordanian responses, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 30], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102]

Lebanese opposition responses, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32]

Lebanese requests, 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 78], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 109]-184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111], 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 121], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 125]

liaison with Lebanese army, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 74]-119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 82], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 143]-251 [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 226], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259]-439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260] Chehab position, 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 80]-126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 80], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 141]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 142], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 146]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 147], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 192], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259]

Murphy mission reports, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 192], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 209]-359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

military action against insurgents, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 209]-359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229]-392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229], 393n [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 234], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 292] Chehab position, 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 294]-523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

military planning, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 42], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]-117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 74], 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 93]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 93], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128]-228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136] British participation, 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39]-60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 40]

congressional consultations, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]

Lebanese position, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 85]-139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 85]

NSC discussion, 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 226]

progress reports, 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 140], 248n [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

NATO responses, 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205]

naval demonstration proposal, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

NSC discussions, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226]

oil supplies and, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 127], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 131]-235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 132]

opposition amnesty and, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86]

opposition responses, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 227]

Osseiran statements, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 192], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 199]-338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 199]

Pakistani responses, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102]

political situation and, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 197]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]-627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

publicity, 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 93], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 131]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 131], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]-245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Saudi position, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124]

Soviet responses (see also Soviet summit proposal), 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 48n [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 30], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 127]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127], 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 133], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 149], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 260], 470n [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 270]

Special National Intelligence Estimates, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 60]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

Turkish responses, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227]

UAR interference and, 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25]-40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 82], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 85], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124]-213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 125], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127]-222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

UAR responses, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 60]-97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 258 [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 151], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 260]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 260]

U.N. Charter and, 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 30], 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 93], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 93], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 106], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 268]-465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 268], 470n [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 270]

U.N. Observation Group and, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 77], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 82], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97]

U.N. Security Council appeals and, 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 129], 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 131], 236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 133], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 138] British position, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84]

Congressional consultation, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]

Lebanese position, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83], 158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]-159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 97]

Tripartite position, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]

U.S. position, 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 31], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 82], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102]-167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128]

U.S.-British joint planning, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 237]-406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 265]

U.S. citizen evacuation and, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 77], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

world opinion, 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111]-189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127]

U.S. military aid (see also U.S. intervention above), 2n [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 265 [Pg. 265 is part of Doc. 155], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-621 [Pg. 621 is part of Doc. 360], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 365], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 376]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]-654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379] aircraft, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 155]-267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 351], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

British position, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98], civil war and, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

Lebanese requests, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 9], 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 11]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244]

U.S. policy toward, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

U.S.-Soviet discussion, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 268]-467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

U.S. troop withdrawal (see also U.S. intervention above), 256n [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 148], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 292], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-571 [Pg. 571 is part of Doc. 322], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358] Arab resolution and, 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287]

British position, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

British troop withdrawal and, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 275], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 549n [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]-550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 310], 550n [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 310], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318], 575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

Chamoun position, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244]-418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Chehab position, 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 259]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 278], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 313], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 319], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

communiqué, 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]-586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 599 [Pg. 599 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]-602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 348]

election timing and, 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Japanese resolution, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206]

JCS position, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]-565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 317], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Jordanian position, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 309]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318]-567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 319]

Lebanese public opinion, 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]-602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 348]

opposition positions, 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299]

political situation and, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274]

Soviet position, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 268]-467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 470n [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 270], 484n [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 280]-497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 280], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 280]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Special National Intelligence Estimates, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

token withdrawal plan, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 259]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 268], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274]

UAR interference and, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280]

UAR position, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 270], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 278]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 278], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279]

U.N. General Assembly meeting and,449n [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 276]-484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 278]

U.N. Observation Group and, 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 234], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 268]-466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 268], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

U.N. presence and, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 208]

U.N. Security Council discussion,331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198]

U.S.-British discussions, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153]

Legan, Donald, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153]

Liberia, 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Libya, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 42], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]

Lippincott, Richard E., 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367]

Lloyd, Selwyn: Dulles, correspondence with, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302]

Iraq, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202]

Jordan, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]-742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414] British intervention, 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 202], 366n [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 214], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 272]

British troop withdrawal, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 265]-453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 278]-491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 334]

Lebanon, 30 [Pg. 30 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-31 [Pg. 31 includes portions of Doc. 19 and Doc. 20], 34n [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 108], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 115], 741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]-742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414] international guarantee proposal,341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 265], 474n [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271]

U.S. intervention, 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]-46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 155n [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 239n [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267]

Soviet summit proposal, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 202], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 204], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225], 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

visits to U.S., 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 202]

Lodge, Henry Cabot, 318n [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 186], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 215]-369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267] Lebanon, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106]-180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 116], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 215] U.S. intervention, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 103], 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 133], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 138], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 254]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 254], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320]

U.S.-Lebanese discussion, 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 276], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]-492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279]

Logan, Donald, 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

Loud, Adm. Wayne R., 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Loutfi, Omar, 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106]

Lucet, Charles, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 104]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Macmillan, Harold, 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65]-106 [Pg. 106 is part of Doc. 65], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 290 [Pg. 290 is part of Doc. 166], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 208], 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]-395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232] Eisenhower, correspondence with, 234 [Pg. 234 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-236 [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 193]-331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 214]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 214], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 222]-379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Jordan, 301 [Pg. 301 includes portions of Doc. 171 and Doc. 172], 314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 193]-330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 194], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 214]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 214], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 237]-406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 419 [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330]

Macomber, William B., Jr., 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84], 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123]-211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 250]

Majali, Gen. Habis, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 170], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 180], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

el-Majali, Hazza, 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 394]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 400]-713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 718n [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]-746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 415] assassination, 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]-736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 412], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 414]

Majdalani, Nassim, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380]

Malik, Charles, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 7], 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71] political situation, 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 14], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54]-82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 54], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

UAR interference, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 14], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 82], 130 [Pg. 130 is part of Doc. 83], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 276]

U.N. Security Council appeals, 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 42], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84]

U.S. economic aid, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 13], 27n [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 367]

U.S. intervention, 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 72], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 82], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 113]-196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 113], 256n [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 148], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]-336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255] Arab responses, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83]-132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84]-135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 113]

requests for, 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 78], 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111]-187 [Pg. 187 is part of Doc. 111]

U.N. Security Council appeals and, 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 83], 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 198], 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206]

Mansfield, Mike, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]

Marcy, Carl, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Martin, Joseph, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127]

Mason, R.H., 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Mathews, Elbert G., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123]

Matni, Nasib, 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Matsudaira, 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

McBride, Robert H., 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

McClelland, D., 572n [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

McClintock, Robert A.: Arab development fund, 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 375]-647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 375]

Lebanese opposition, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61]-100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Lebanon, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 204n [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274] Chamoun re-election proposal, 6 [Pg. 6 is part of Doc. 3], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11]-16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 9], 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 12]-21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 14]-25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25], 44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 71] Chamoun position, 67n [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44], 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 50]

Chamoun successor deliberations,204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]

Chehab government, 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 262], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]-544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]-628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 365] cabinet, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 420 [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 262], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299]-531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 305], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 311]-552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311], 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 333]-583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 342]-595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]-601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 350]-606 [Pg. 606 is part of Doc. 350], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]-614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 356]

Chamoun role, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 417n [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

civil war under, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]-542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311]-553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 313]-557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]-582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 333]

Chehab Presidency proposals, 204 [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119]-207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229]-393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 242]

Chehab Prime Ministership proposals, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]-72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 73n [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54]-83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 54]

civil war, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23]-37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 37], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56]-88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]-99 [Pg. 99 is part of Doc. 61], 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 124 [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 80], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305]-542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311]-553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 313]-557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 581 [Pg. 581 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]-582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 333]

Hammarskjöld visit, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316]-562 [Pg. 562 is part of Doc. 316]

international guarantee proposal, 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

military staff purge proposals, 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

political situation, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 41n [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 104n [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 110 [Pg. 110 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]-111 [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70] tripartite political settlement approach, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 109], 190 [Pg. 190 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 112]

U.S. intervention and, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]-627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

UAR interference, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 23 [Pg. 23 is part of Doc. 14], 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 44n [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 52 [Pg. 52 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56]-88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 125], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 192], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 311] U.S. intervention and, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

U.N. Observation Group, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274], 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316]

U.N. Security Council appeals, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 71]

United States, relations with, 586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 368]

U.S. economic aid, 2 [Pg. 2 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 2], 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]-22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 13], 27n [Pg. 27 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 33n [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 351], 615 [Pg. 615 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359], 625 [Pg. 625 is part of Doc. 363]-626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 628 [Pg. 628 is part of Doc. 365]-634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]-646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 375], 660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]-662 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 381]

U.S. intervention, 41 [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28]-44 [Pg. 44 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96]-158 [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 207 [Pg. 207 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]-208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 121], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152] Chamoun public statement, 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91]-148 [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

civil war and, 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Lebanese opposition responses, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32]

Lebanese requests, 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86]-144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 96], 160 [Pg. 160 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 109]-184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-216 [Pg. 216 is part of Doc. 125]

liaison with Lebanese army, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 80]-126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 80], 240 [Pg. 240 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 141]-249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 142], 251n [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 146]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 147], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

military action against insurgents, 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229]-392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 294]-523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

military planning, 119 [Pg. 119 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 85]-139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 85]

political situation and, 141 [Pg. 141 is part of Doc. 86], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]-627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

UAR interference and, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 207]-353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

U.S. military aid, 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98], 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 351], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 376]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 653n [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378] Lebanese requests, 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 16 [Pg. 16 is part of Doc. 9], 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 11]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 11], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 20], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 25], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 376]-649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 206], 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]-451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274]-477 [Pg. 477 is part of Doc. 274], 520 [Pg. 520 is part of Doc. 292], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-570 [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]-586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]-602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 348] Chamoun position, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 244]-418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

Chehab position, 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 259]-438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 319], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

United Arab Republic, 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 370]-638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

McCormack, John, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]

McElroy, Neil H., 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]-349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]-575 [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327]

McKinnon, R.A., 374n [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220]

McSweeney, John M., 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Meir, Golda, 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267]

Menshikov, Mikhail, 372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Meouchi, Boulos Boutros, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54], 83 [Pg. 83 is part of Doc. 54], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

Meyer, Armin H., 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 369], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]-660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 707n [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 399], 735n [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 741n [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413], 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Middle East: neutralization proposals, 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 275]-481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

regional defense organization, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 236]

Soviet policy toward, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 368]

U.S.-British joint planning proposals,405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 237]-406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 420n [Pg. 420 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

U.S. policy toward, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276] propaganda, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 365 [Pg. 365 is part of Doc. 213], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 275]

Middle East Doctrine. See Eisenhower Doctrine.

Middleton, George, 15n [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 9], 24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 15]-25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 27 and Doc. 28], 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]-56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 37], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 98], 183n [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 109], 203n [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 118], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 120]

Mikkawi, Jemil, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 54]

Mills, Sheldon T., 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 394]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 402]-716 [Pg. 716 is part of Doc. 402], 718 [Pg. 718 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 404], 731 [Pg. 731 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]-733 [Pg. 733 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 735n [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 736n [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410], 739n [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 411], 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]-748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 415]

Minnich, L. Arthur, Jr., 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84]

Mirza, Wasfi, 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 400]

Moffett, James D., 735n [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

Mokhaiber, 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 316]

Moore, Lt. Gen., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Moore, Anthony, 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 334]

Morgan, Thomas, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127]

Morocco, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 746 [Pg. 746 is part of Doc. 415]

Morris, Brewster, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Morris, Jane, 116n [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Morris, Willie, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187]

Munim, Abd-Al, 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 168]

Murphy mission, 251n [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 148], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 234], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]-481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276] Jordan, 413 [Pg. 413 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]-415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244]

Lebanon: elections, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 197]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 199], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

liaison with Lebanese army, 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 192], 358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 209]-359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

military action against insurgents,337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 199], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 229]-392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229], 395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 235]-403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

political situation, 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 154]-263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 154], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 192], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 197]-334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 199], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202]-342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]-389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

U.N. Observation Group, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 249]-424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 249]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255]

United Arab Republic, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 260], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

United Kingdom, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267]

Murphy, Robert D. (see also Murphy mission), 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 687n [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393] Jordan, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]-706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 398]

Lebanon, 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 374]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 374 and Doc. 375]

Nabaa, Archbishop, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227]

Naccache, Alfred, 7n [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 219]

Naja, Rafik, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

Najjar, Fuad, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 342]

Nashashibi, Anwar, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 400]

Nasir, Musa, 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

Nasser, Gamal Abdel (see also UAR and United Arab Republic subheadings under other subjects; United Arab Republic), 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105]-174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 260], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 392] Jordan, 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 260]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 260], 557n [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 314]-559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 314], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Lebanon: political situation, 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55], 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 63]-102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 63]

UAR interference, 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]-70 [Pg. 70 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 102 [Pg. 102 is part of Doc. 63]-103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 117] Hammarskjöld meeting, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 103], 175n [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 105 and Doc. 106], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 106]-178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 106], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]-186 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 111], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 116]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116]

U.S. intervention, 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 151], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 260]-442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 260]

Soviet-UAR relations, 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 44], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127]

U.S.-UAR relations, 68n [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 44], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 55]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]

Nasser, Musa, 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 405]

National Intelligence Estimates: NIE 36.3-59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]-687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]

National Security Council: actions: No. 1951 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

documents: NSC 5801/1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Jordan, 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]-671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Lebanon: Chehab government, 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

civil war, 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57], 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

political situation, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

U.S. intervention, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53], 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 226]

meetings: 365th, May 8 1958, 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

366th, May 22 1958, 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

367th, May 29 1958, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 53]

368th, June 3 1958, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 56 and Doc. 57]-90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]

369th, June 19 1958, 155 [Pg. 155 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-156 [Pg. 156 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

370th, June 26 1958, 181 [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108]

373d, July 24 1958, 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]-386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

374th, July 31 1958, 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

375th, Aug. 5 1958, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

377th, Aug. 22 1958, 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]

379th, Sept. 18 1958, 572 [Pg. 572 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

380th, Sept. 25 1958, 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

381st, Oct. 2 1958, 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340]

383d, Oct. 16 1958, 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]-613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

390th, Dec. 11 1958 670-671

Nehru, Jawaharlal, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]

Newsom, David D., 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 282n [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 325n [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Nixon, Richard M., 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124]-215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 139]-245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 251n [Pg. 251 includes portions of Doc. 143 and Doc. 144], 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]-349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205]

Nofal, Gen., 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization(NATO), 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205]

Norway, 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279]

Ormsby-Gore, David, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Osseiran, Adel, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 32], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 63], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 192], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 199]-338 [Pg. 338 is part of Doc. 199], 410 [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 627 [Pg. 627 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Oueini, Hussein (see also Lebanese opposition), 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 227], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 366 and Doc. 367], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 368], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 375] Chehab government, 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 311]-552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 311], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 613 [Pg. 613 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]-614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 356]

Pahlavi, Shah Mohammed Reza, 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Pakistan (see also Baghdad Pact), 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-308

Palestinian refugees, 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 163], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226], 445 [Pg. 445 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 392], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 404]-721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 404] British intervention in Jordan and, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226]

Jordanian political situation and, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 226], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 267]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 268], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 392], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 392], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 414]

Lebanese position, 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 373]-642 [Pg. 642 is part of Doc. 373], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 379]

Palmer, Stephen, 735n [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

Parker, Richard B., 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 264n [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 155], 279n [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 288n [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 165], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 585n [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 383]

Pate, Gen. Randolph McC. 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Paul, Norman, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220]

Pella proposals, 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 270]

Perry, H, 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 369]

Persian Gulf, 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205]

Persons, Maj. Gen. Wilton B., 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

Pharaon, Henri (see also Lebanese opposition), 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 98], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 227], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Picher, Maj. Gen. O.S., 58n [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 74], 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 419n [Pg. 419 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Porter, Dwight, 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Proctor, Carolyn J., 127n [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 81]

Qawugji, Fawzi, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 82 [Pg. 82 is part of Doc. 54]

Quarles, Donald A., 116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]-117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 74], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84], 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102]-168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123]-211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220]-376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

Rafi, 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 112]

Rayburn, Sam, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

Reinhardt, G. Frederick, 104n [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 166n [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 197n [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 114], 239n [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 315n [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 321n [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 359n [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 444n [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261] Jordan, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187]-320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 202], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 250]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Lebanon, 10n [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123]-211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 256n [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 148], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 210], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 317]

Soviet summit proposal, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 210], 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287]

Reyes, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 119]

Richards, James P., 26n [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 16]

Rifa’i, Abdul Monem, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 394]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 400] U.N. General Assembly meeting, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267]-460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 288]

al-Rifai, Samir, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 290]-517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 290], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307] Arab Union, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 288n [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 165], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 166], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 167], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168]-296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 168], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 180]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

British intervention, 313 [Pg. 313 is part of Doc. 181], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 190]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 190], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]-487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 277], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281]-503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 566 [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318]

Iraq, 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 211]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 211], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 243], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309]-549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320]

Lebanon, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309] political situation, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 170], 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 266], 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 392]

replacement proposals, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]-577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 329], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 349]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 349], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 359]

resignation threats, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281]-504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 289], 521 [Pg. 521 is part of Doc. 293], 526n [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

U.N. presence, 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 288]-513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 309], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 314]

United Arab Republic, 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 288]-513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

U.S. economic aid, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 303], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 385]-674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 388], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 389 and Doc. 390]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 390], 679n [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396]-699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 396], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 403]

U.S. intervention, requests for, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 190]-324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 190], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 211]-364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 212]

U.S.-Jordanian relations, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168]-296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 168], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]-706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 398]

U.S. military aid, 555n [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 312], 573n [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353] aircraft, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 256], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 308], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352]

new brigades, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233], 415 [Pg. 415 includes portions of Doc. 243 and Doc. 244], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 309], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]-554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 312]

Risden, Brig. Gen. Richard A., 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 383]-666

Roche, Amb., 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 54], 206 [Pg. 206 is part of Doc. 120], 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Rockwell, Stuart W., 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 25n [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 54n [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 34, Doc. 35, and Doc. 36], 58n [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 66n [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 73n [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 51], 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 103n [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 111n [Pg. 111 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 184n [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 197n [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 114], 203n [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 118], 239n [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 289n [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 297n [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170], 321n [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 325n [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 344n [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 203], 400n [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 403n [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257], 510n [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287], 525n [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296], 556n [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 313], 560n [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 315], 566n [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 575n [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 585n [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 592n [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 341], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382], 679n [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 687n [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 403] Arab Union, 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]-286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Jordan, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 317], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 349], 609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 383] British intervention, 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 250]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251]

Hussein U.S. visit, 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 394]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 399]-709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 399]

Lebanon, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 164 [Pg. 164 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 189 [Pg. 189 is part of Doc. 111] U.S. intervention, 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 74], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 81], 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 113], 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123]-211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 215n [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]-564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 317]

Rose, Michael, 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Rountree, William M., 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 25n [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16], 45n [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 49n [Pg. 49 is part of Doc. 31], 66n [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 73n [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 51], 91n [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 103n [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 104n [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 64 and Doc. 65], 108n [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67], 128n [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 82], 158n [Pg. 158 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97], 166n [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 181n [Pg. 181 includes portions of Doc. 107 and Doc. 108], 184n [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 203n [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 118], 239n [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 288n [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 165], 289n [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 321n [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 330n [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 194], 344n [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 203], 400n [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 427n [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285], 575n [Pg. 575 includes portions of Doc. 326 and Doc. 327], 583n [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 592n [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 341], 620n [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 622n [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382], 679n [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391] Arab Union, 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 286n [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

Iraq, 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205]

Jordan, 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]-309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220]-375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220], 623 [Pg. 623 is part of Doc. 362]-624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 362], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-673 [Pg. 673 includes portions of Doc. 387 and Doc. 388], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396]-699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 396] British intervention, 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 250]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 334]

Hussein U.S. visit, 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 392 and Doc. 393]-690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 395]-700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 397], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 398]

U.S. economic aid, 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-532 [Pg. 532 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

U.S. military aid, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 155]-267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 298], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 315], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 317], 580 [Pg. 580 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 383]-666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

Lebanon, 22n [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 13], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 65], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 72]-116 [Pg. 116 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]-199 [Pg. 199 is part of Doc. 115], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 117], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 368] political situation, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94]-154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 94], 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 112], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 115]

U.S. intervention, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 30], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 41]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 42], 115 [Pg. 115 is part of Doc. 72], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 74], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]-123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 78], 124n [Pg. 124 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84]-134 [Pg. 134 is part of Doc. 84], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 93], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103] British participation, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 81], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 114]

French participation, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 104]-171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

U.N. Security Council appeals and, 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 129]

U.S. troop withdrawal, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]-550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 310]

Soviet summit proposal, 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 276]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 276], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 287], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320]

United Arab Republic, 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

Russell, Richard, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 127]-222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]

Saab, Maj., 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152]

Saadi, Brig. Muhammad, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

Sabri, Ali, 259n [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 151], 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 260]

Saccio, Leonard J., 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 396]-698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 396], 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]

Safieddine, Mohammed, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

al-Said, Nuri, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]-212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 288n [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 165], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 166]

Salaam, Saeb (see also Lebanese opposition), 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 23], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 71], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 234], 410n [Pg. 410 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]-660 [Pg. 660 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381] Chehab government, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 255], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 259], 446 [Pg. 446 is part of Doc. 262], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299], 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 605 [Pg. 605 is part of Doc. 350]

Saleeby, Archbishop, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Salem, Col. Toufic, 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 86], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 91], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 152], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229]

Saltonstall, Leverett, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127]

Sandys, Duncan, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 237]

Sanger, Richard H., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123]

Sarraj, Col. Abd-al-Hamid, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 359], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]

Saud ibn Abd al-Aziz (King of Saudi Arabia), 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]-271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 158], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 377]

Sauda, Joseph, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

Saudi Arabia, 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 267 [Pg. 267 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 158], 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 160], 282 [Pg. 282 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 277] Lebanon, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 94], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124]-213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 377]

Serra, Col., 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 170]

Shara, Maj. Gen. Sadiq, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 170], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 383], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 396], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 396]

Shaw, J.F., 531 [Pg. 531 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 636n [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 369]

Shuckburgh, Evelyn, 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Simon, Col., 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Sims, Harold, 638n [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Sisco, Joseph J., 63n [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42], 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 113], 236n [Pg. 236 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 400n [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 592n [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 341]

Skaff, Joseph, 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Slim, Field Marshal, 40 [Pg. 40 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

Smith, Gerard C., 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Smith, H. Alexander, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127]

Smith, James H., Jr., 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 289n [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

Smith, Sidney E., 28n [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]

Sobolev, Arkady, 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 254], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

Solh, Sami, 41n [Pg. 41 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 42 [Pg. 42 is part of Doc. 27], 76n [Pg. 76 is part of Doc. 51], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 106], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 192], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274] assassination attempt, 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 418 [Pg. 418 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

Chehab government, 411 [Pg. 411 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 244], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 247], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 255]

Chehab Presidency proposals, 204n [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 408 [Pg. 408 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 240], 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 242]

Solh, Takieddine, 543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Soviet summit proposal, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233], 427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253] British position, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 202], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 204], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 210], 369 [Pg. 369 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

French position, 357n [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 208], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 210], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]-395 [Pg. 395 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]

Soviet letters, 339 [Pg. 339 is part of Doc. 200], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238]-407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 254]

U.S.-British discussion, 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 202], 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-346 [Pg. 346 is part of Doc. 204], 353 [Pg. 353 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-357 [Pg. 357 is part of Doc. 208]

U.S. position, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 202], 349 [Pg. 349 is part of Doc. 205]-350 [Pg. 350 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 208]-356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 208], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 276]

Western letters to Khrushchev, 371 [Pg. 371 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-372 [Pg. 372 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 393 [Pg. 393 includes portions of Doc. 229 and Doc. 230]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Soviet Union (see also Soviet and Soviet Union subheadings under other subjects; Soviet summit proposal), 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 251]-427 [Pg. 427 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 270], 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 392]-685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 392]

Sparkman, John J., 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

Special National Intelligence Estimates: SNIE 30–6–58, 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 358 and Doc. 359]-620 [Pg. 620 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

SNIE 36.4–1– 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]-122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

SNIE 36.4–58, 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]-98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 60 and Doc. 61]

SNIE 36.4–60, 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]-653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

Spinelli, Pier P., 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 341], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 737n [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 410], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 412]

Sprague, Mansfield D., 210 [Pg. 210 is part of Doc. 123]-211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 374 [Pg. 374 is part of Doc. 220], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 317]

Stines, Col., 653 [Pg. 653 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]-654 [Pg. 654 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Sudan, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226]

Suez crisis, 47 [Pg. 47 is part of Doc. 30], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 103], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 111], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 112], 211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]

Suwaidi, Tawfiq, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168]

Sweden, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 66], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Symmes, Harrison M., 150n [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 93], 197n [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 114], 239n [Pg. 239 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 250n [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 143], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Syria. See UAR and United Arab Republic subheadings under other subjects; United Arab Republic (UAR).

Taber, John, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127]

Takla, Philip, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]-586 [Pg. 586 is part of Doc. 336], 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340], 593 [Pg. 593 is part of Doc. 342], 595 [Pg. 595 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 347 and Doc. 348]-602 [Pg. 602 is part of Doc. 348], 646 [Pg. 646 is part of Doc. 375]

al-Talhuni, Rais Diwan Bahjat, 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 394]-692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 411], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]-748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 415]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]-565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 317]

Terrill, Maj. Gen., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Thailand, 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105]

Thomas, Col., 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Thompson, Llewelyn E., Jr., 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 149]

Tian, Emile, 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 119]

Toffin, Guy, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 104]

Trad, Farid, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]

Triebel, Rear Adm., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Tripartite Declaration (1950), 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 84], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]

Tunisia, 196 [Pg. 196 is part of Doc. 113], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124]

Turkey (see also Baghdad Pact), 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225] Lebanon, 29 [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 18], 204n [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 213 [Pg. 213 is part of Doc. 124] U.S. intervention, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 60], 122 [Pg. 122 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 83], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 84], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 116], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 227]

Tweini, Ghassan, 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Twining, Gen. Nathan F., 197n [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 114], 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 124] Jordan, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179]-310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 205]-348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 376 [Pg. 376 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

Lebanon, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39] U.S. intervention, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 133 [Pg. 133 is part of Doc. 84], 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 209 [Pg. 209 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]-211 [Pg. 211 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 127]-226 [Pg. 226 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 459n [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 267], 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317] military planning, 60 [Pg. 60 is part of Doc. 40], 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 117n [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 74], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 84], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 124], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 128], 245 [Pg. 245 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 140], 348 [Pg. 348 is part of Doc. 205], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 220], 385 [Pg. 385 is part of Doc. 226]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 109 [Pg. 109 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 82], 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 252n [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 145], 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 254], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 256], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277] Arab resolution, 506 [Pg. 506 includes portions of Doc. 283 and Doc. 284]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285], 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]-513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 290], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 295 and Doc. 296]-526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297], 526n [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 305], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 314], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]-588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

British position, 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 254]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 254], 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]

Eisenhower speech, 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 267], 467 [Pg. 467 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 270]

Jordanian representation, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264]

Lebanese representation, 450n [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264], 451n [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267]

Norwegian draft resolution, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268], 474 [Pg. 474 is part of Doc. 271], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 276], 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]-496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 280], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 280]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281]

second session, 566n [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318], 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 319]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Soviet troop withdrawal resolution, 460 [Pg. 460 is part of Doc. 267], 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276]

UAR interference in Lebanon and Jordan and, 484 [Pg. 484 is part of Doc. 276], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 278], 494 [Pg. 494 is part of Doc. 279], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 283]

U.S.-British discussions, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 261], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

U.S.-Lebanese discussions, 481 [Pg. 481 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 276], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]-492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 279]

U.S.-Soviet discussions, 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280]-501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 280]

U.S.-UAR discussions, 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 270], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 278 and Doc. 279]-495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 279 and Doc. 280], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285]

U.S. troop withdrawal and, 449n [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 450 [Pg. 450 is part of Doc. 264]

U.N. Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 392], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 404]

U.N. Technical Assistance Board, 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 404]-729 [Pg. 729 is part of Doc. 404]

U.N. Truce Supervision Organization

(UNTSO), 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267], 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 314]

United Arab Republic (UAR) (see also UAR and United Arab Republic subheadings under other subjects), 8n [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 105]-174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 105], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 158], 472 [Pg. 472 is part of Doc. 270]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 270], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 397]-701 [Pg. 701 is part of Doc. 397] Jordan, relations with, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157], 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 158], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 266]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 277], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 285]-509 [Pg. 509 is part of Doc. 285], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 290], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320]-569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 385], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 404]-720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 404], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413] Syria union proposals, 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

UAR blockade, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 340], 611 [Pg. 611 includes portions of Doc. 353 and Doc. 354]-612 [Pg. 612 includes portions of Doc. 354 and Doc. 355]

U.N. appeal, 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]-737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 410], 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 412]-741 [Pg. 741 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

Lebanon, relations with, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 56], 478 [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 274], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 299], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 370]-638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 651 [Pg. 651 is part of Doc. 377], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380]

Murphy mission, 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 257]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 439 [Pg. 439 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]-443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 260]

Saudi Arabia, relations with, 270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158]-271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 158], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 277]

Soviet Union, relations with, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 39], 68 [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 44], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 55 and Doc. 56], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127], 516 [Pg. 516 is part of Doc. 290]

United States, relations with, 68n [Pg. 68 is part of Doc. 44], 84 [Pg. 84 is part of Doc. 55]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 55], 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129], 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 179], 469 [Pg. 469 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 270], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 370]-638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 380], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 385]-669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 385]

United Kingdom (see also British, U.S.-British, tripartite, and United Kingdom subheadings under other subjects), 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 158], 304 [Pg. 304 is part of Doc. 175]-306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186]-321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 202]

United Nations (see also U.N. headings and subheadings under other subjects), 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 267] Charter, 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 30], 152n [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 93], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 93], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 106], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 186], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 216], 464 [Pg. 464 is part of Doc. 268], 470n [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 270]

Essentials of Peace resolution, 167 [Pg. 167 is part of Doc. 102], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 276]

Uniting for Peace resolution, 149n [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 92], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Urguplu, Ali S.H., 228 [Pg. 228 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 129]

U.S. Information Agency (USIA), 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 226]

Villard, Henry S., 607 [Pg. 607 is part of Doc. 351]

Vinson, Carl, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127]

Voice of America, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 179]

Von Horn, Maj. Gen. Carl Carlsson, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 314]

Vorys, John, 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 127]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 127]

Wade, Brig. Gen. Sidney S., 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 146]-254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 147], 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 192]

Waggoner, Edward L., 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-7 [Pg. 7 is part of Doc. 3], 13n [Pg. 13 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 286n [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164], 288n [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 165]

Walmsley, Walter N., 400n [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 566n [Pg. 566 is part of Doc. 318], 570n [Pg. 570 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

Walstrom, Milton C., 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Walters, Lt. Col. Vernon A., 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]

Weir, M.S., 165 [Pg. 165 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

White, Gen. Thomas D., 563 [Pg. 563 is part of Doc. 317]

Whitney, John Hay, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 237]-406 [Pg. 406 includes portions of Doc. 237 and Doc. 238], 451 [Pg. 451 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]-453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 330]-579

Wilcox, Francis O., 142n [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 166n [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 102], 258n [Pg. 258 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 254], 455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 320] Jordan, 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187], 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 267]

Lebanon, 148n [Pg. 148 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 168 [Pg. 168 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 217n [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 126], 334 [Pg. 334 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

Wiley, Alexander, 171 [Pg. 171 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105], 218n [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 127], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127]

Wisenand, Gen. W., 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 153], 317 [Pg. 317 includes portions of Doc. 185 and Doc. 186], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 187]

Wright, Michael, 61 [Pg. 61 is part of Doc. 41]

Wright, Thomas K., 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-543 [Pg. 543 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307] Arab Union, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157]-270 [Pg. 270 includes portions of Doc. 157 and Doc. 158], 274n [Pg. 274 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 161]-279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 289n [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 291n [Pg. 291 is part of Doc. 166], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168]-296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 168], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 180]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]

Iraq, 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 180]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181], 344n [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 203], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 211]-363 [Pg. 363 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309]-549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310]

Jordan, 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 170 and Doc. 171]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 180 and Doc. 181]-314 [Pg. 314 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 289], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309]-549 [Pg. 549 includes portions of Doc. 309 and Doc. 310] British intervention, 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 190]-325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281]-503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297], 542 [Pg. 542 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

coup attempt rumors, 297 [Pg. 297 includes portions of Doc. 169 and Doc. 170]-300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 171], 526 [Pg. 526 is part of Doc. 297]-527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 297 and Doc. 298]

political situation, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 167]-294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 281]-504 [Pg. 504 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 289], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 304]-539 [Pg. 539 includes portions of Doc. 304 and Doc. 305], 666 [Pg. 666 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 400]-714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 401]

Rifai replacement proposals, 576 [Pg. 576 includes portions of Doc. 328 and Doc. 329]-577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 329], 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 349]-604 [Pg. 604 is part of Doc. 349]

U.N. presence, 453 [Pg. 453 includes portions of Doc. 265 and Doc. 266]-455 [Pg. 455 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 288]-513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 309], 557 [Pg. 557 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 314], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

United Arab Republic, relations with,268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157]-272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 158], 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 168], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 263], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 288], 558 [Pg. 558 is part of Doc. 314]-559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 314], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 663n [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 382], 667 [Pg. 667 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

United States, relations with, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233]-399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 233], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 289], 518 [Pg. 518 is part of Doc. 290], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302], 707 [Pg. 707 is part of Doc. 399], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 400]-711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 400]

U.S. economic aid, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 303], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 671 [Pg. 671 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 390], 681n [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 400], 717n [Pg. 717 is part of Doc. 403]

U.S. intervention, requests for, 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 190]-325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 211]-364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 212], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]-382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 225 and Doc. 226]

U.S. military aid, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 157], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 256], 487 [Pg. 487 is part of Doc. 277]-488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 308], 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309], 573n [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 352]-609 [Pg. 609 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353] new brigades, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 233]-400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 514 [Pg. 514 is part of Doc. 289]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 289], 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 290], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 302], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]-547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 309], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 312]

Lebanon, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 309]-548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 309]

U.N. General Assembly meeting, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 263 and Doc. 264], 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 288]-513 [Pg. 513 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Yafi, Abdullah (see also Lebanese opposition), 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 20], 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 52], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 56], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 227], 392n [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 229], 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 529 [Pg. 529 is part of Doc. 299], 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 380]

Yeager, Rear Adm. Howard A., 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 325 and Doc. 326]

Yugoslavia, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 127]

Zahir (King of Afghanistan), 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 210]

Zorin, Valerian, 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

Zouein, Col., 204n [Pg. 204 includes portions of Doc. 118 and Doc. 119], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 119]

Zwein, Maurice, 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]
